 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Winds of War 
 
 
By Herman Wouk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COPYRIGHT 1971 
 
With love to my sons Nathaniel and Joseph 
 
Foreword 
 
The Winds of War is fiction, and all the characters and adventures involving the Henry family   
are imaginary.    But the history of the war in this romance is offered as accurate; the tics, as   
reliable; the ivards and    acts of the great personages, as either historical, or derived from   
accounts of their words and deeds in similar situations. No work of this scope can be free of   
error, but readers will discern, it is hoped, an arduous effort to give a true and full picture of a   
great world battle. 
 
World Empire Lost, the military treatise by "Ar?run von Roon," is of course an invention from   
start to finish.    Still, General von Roon's book is offered as a professional German view of the   
 1 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
other side of the hill, reliable within the limits peculiar to that self-justifying military literature. 
 
Industrialized armed force, the curse that now presses so heavily and so ominously on us all,   
came to full power in the Second World War. 
 
The effort to free ourselves of it begins with the effort to understand how it came to haunt us,   
and how it was that men of good will gave-and still give-their lives to it.    The theme and aim of   
The Winds of War can be found in a few words by the French Jew, Julien B: Peace, if it ever   
exists, will not be based on the fear of war, but on the love of peace. It will not be the   
abstaining from an act, but the coming of a state of mind.    In this sense the most insignificant   
writer can serve peace, where the most powerful tribunals can do nothing. 
 
PART ONE 
 
Natalie OMMER Victor Henry rode a taxicab home from the Navy Building on Constitution   
Avenue, in a gusty gray March rainstorm that matched his mood.    In his War Plans cubbyhole   
that afternoon, he had received an unexpected word from on high which, to his seasoned   
appraisal, had probably blown a well-planned career to rags.    Now he had to consult his wife   
about an urgent decision; yet he did not altogether trust her opinions. 
 
At forty-five, Rhoda Henry remained a singularly attractive woman, but she was rather a crab.   
This colored her judgment, and it was a fault he found hard to forgive her.    She had married   
him with her eyes open. 
 
During an incandescent    courtship, they had talked frankly about the military life. Rhoda   
Grover had declared that all the drawbacks-the separations, the lack of a real place to live and   
of a normal family existence, the long slow climb through a system, the need to be humble to   
other men's wives when the men were a notch higher-that none of these things would trouble   
her, because she loved him, and because the Navy was a career of honor.    So she had said in   
1915, when the World War was on, and uniforms had a glow.    This was 1939, and she had long   
since forgotten those words. 
 
He had warned her that the climb would be hard.    Victor Henry was not of a Navy family.    On   
every rung of the slippery career ladder, the sons and grandsons of admirals had been jostling   
him.    Yet everyone in the Navy who knew Pug Henry called him a corner.    Until now his rise   
had been steady. 
 
The letter that first got him into the Naval Academy, written to his congressman while in high   
school, can be adduced here to characterize the man.    He showed his form early. 
 
May 5th, 1910 Dear Sir: You have sent me three kind answers to three letters I have sent you,   
from my freshman year onward, reporting my progress in Sonoma County igh School.    So I   
hope that you will remember my name, and my ambition to obtain appointment to the Naval   
Academy. 
 
plete my senior year.    It may seem conceited to Now I am about to co list my achievements,   
but I am sure you will understand why I do so. 
 2 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
I am year, playing fullback, and I am also on captain of the football team this the boxing tea-.   
e Arista SocietY- In mathematics, historyp I have been elected to th and the sciences, I am a   
candidate for prizes. My English and foreign language (German) marks are not on that level.   
However, I am secretary of the small Russian-speaking club of our school.    Its nine members   
come from local families whose ancestors wre settled in Fort Ross long ago by the best chum   
was in the club, so I joined and learned some PusCzar.    My ility is not deficient. 
 
Russian.    I mention this to show that my language ah officer ill the United States Navy.    I can't   
My life aim is to serve as an my family has no seafaring background.    MY actually explain   
this, since lumbering business.      I have never liked father is an engineer in the redwood   
lumbering business. 
 
I have lumbering, but have always been interestd in ships and bit, gun ri vi the naval ships gone   
to San Fran,isco and San Diego often just to sit diere.    Out of my savings I have bought and   
studied about two dozen books on marine engineering and sea warfare. 
 
I realize you have orly one appointment to make, and there must be many applicants in our   
district.    if one is found more deserving than I am, I will enlist in the, Navy and work up from   
the ranks.    However I have seriously tried for your nsideration, and trust that I have earned it.  
 
. co Respectfully yours, Victor Henry With much the same directness, Henry had won his wife   
five years later, though she was a couple of inches taller than he , and though her prosperous   
parents had looked for a better match than a squat Navy fullback from California, of no means   
or fIY- courting Rhoda, he had come out of this single-minded shell of ambition to show much   
tenderness, humor, considerateness, and dash. After a month or two Rhoda had lost any   
inclination to say no. Mundane details like height differences had faded from sigbtstill, over   
the long pull it may not be too good for a pretty woman to look down at her husband.    Tall men   
tend to make plays    for her regarding the couple as slightly comic. Though a very proper   
woman, Rhoda had a weakness for this sort of thing-up to a point short of trouble-and even   
coyly provoked it.    Henry's reputation as a bleak hard-fibered individual discouraged the men   
from ever getting out of hand.    He was very much Rhoda's master.    Still, this physical detail   
was a continuing nagThe real shadow on this couple was that Commander Henry thought   
Rhoda had welshed on their courtship understanding.    She did what had to be done as a Navy   
wife, but she was free, loud, and frequent in her complaints. She could crab for months on end   
in a place she disvers, liked, such as Manila.    Wherever she was, sheortended to fret about the   
servants, or taxi tin rdressers.    To hear Rhoda Henry's heat, or the cold, or the rain, or the dry   
spell, or shop clerks, or seamstresses, or hal daily chatter, her life passed in combat with an   
incompetent world and a malignant climate. It was only female talk, and not in the least   
uncommon. 
 
But talk, not sex, constitutes most of the intercourse between a man and his wife. Henry   
detested idle whining. More and more, silence was the response he had Come to use. It   
dampened the noise. 
 
On the other hand, Rhoda was two things he thought a wife should be: a seductive woman, and   
an adroit homemaker.    In all their married years, there had been few times when he had not   
 3 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
desired her; and in all those years, for all their moving about, wherever they landed, Rhoda had   
provided a house or an apartment where the coffee was hot, the food appetizing, the rooms   
well furnished and always clean, the beds propen, made, and fresh flowers in sight.    She had   
fetching little ways, and when her spirits were good she could be very sweet and agreeable.   
Most women, from the little Victor Henry knew of the sex, were vain clacking slatterns, with   
less to redeem them than Rhoda had. 
 
His longstanding opinion was that, for all her drawbacks, he had a good wife, as wives went.   
That was a closed question. 
 
But heading home after a day's work, he never knew ahead of time whether he would   
encounter Rhoda the charmer or Rhoda the crab.    At a crucial moment like this, it could make a   
great difference.    In her down moods, her judgments were snappish and often silly. 
 
Coming into the house, he heard her singing in the glassed-in heated porch off the living room   
where they usually had drinks before dinner. 
 
He found her arranging tall stalks of orange gladiolus in an oxblood vase from Manila.    She   
was wearing a beige silky dress cinched in by a black patent-leather belt with a large silver   
buckle-.    Her dark hair fell in waves behind her ears; this was a fashion in 1939 
 
even for mature swo ommaedne. 
 
Her welcoming glance was affectionate and gay.    just to see her him feel better, and this had   
been going on all his life. 
 
"Oh, m there.    Why on EARTH didn't you warn me Kip Tollever was coming? He sent these,   
and Luckily he called too.    I was skipping around this house like a scrubwoman."    Rhoda in   
casual talk used the swooping high notes of smart Washington women. She had a dulcet,   
rather busk), voice, and these zoomed words of hers gave what she said enormous emphasis   
and some illusion of sparkle.    "He said he might be slightly late. 
 
Let's have a short one, Pug, okay?    The fixings are all there. 
 
I'M PARCIIED." 
 
Henry walked to the wheeled bar and began to mix martinis.    "I asked Kip to stop by so I could   
talk to him.    It's not a social visit." 
 
"Oh?    Am I supposed to make myself scarce?"    She gave him a sweet smile. 
 
"No, no." 
 
"Good.    I like Kip.    Why, I was flabbergasted to hear his voice. 
 
I thought he was still stuck in Berlin." 
 
"He's been detached." 
 4 
 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"So he told me.    Who relieved him, do you know?" 
 
"Nobody has.    The assistant attache for air took over temporarily." 
 
Victor Henry handed her a cocktail.    He sank in a brown wicker annchair, put his feet up on the   
ottoman, and drank, gloom enveloping him again. 
 
Rhoda was used to her husband's silences.    She had taken in his bad humor at a glance.    Victor   
Henry held himself very straight except in moments of trial and tension.    Then he tended to fall   
into a crouch, as though he were still playing football.    He had entered the room hunched, and   
even in the armchair, with his feet up, his shoulder,-, were bent. Dark straight hair hung down   
his forehead.    At forty-nine, he had almost no gray hairs, and his charcoal slacks, brown sports   
jacket, and red bow tie were clothes for a younger man.    It was his small vanity, when not in   
uniform, to dress youthfully; an athletic body helped him carry it off.    Rhoda saw in the lines   
around his greenish brown eyes that he was tired and deeply worried.    Possibly from long years   
of peering out to sea, Henry's eyes were permanently marked with what looked like laugh   
lines.    Strangers mistook him for a genial man. 
 
"Got a dividend there?"    he said at last. 
 
She poured the watery drink for him. 
 
"Thanks.    Say, incidentally, you know that memorandum on the battleships that I wrote?" 
 
"Oh, yes.    Was there a backlash?    You were concerned, I know." 
 
"I got called down to the C.N.O's office." 
 
"My God.    To see Preble?" 
 
"Preble himself.    I hadn't seen him since the old days on the California. 
 
He's gotten fat." 
 
Henry told her about his talk with the Chief of Naval Operations. 
 
Rhoda's face took on a hard, sullen, puzzled look.    "Oh, I see. 
 
That's why you asked Kip over." 
 
"Exactly.    What do you think about my taking this attache job?" 
 
"Since when do you have any choice?" 
 
"He gave me the impression that I did.    That if I didn't want it, I'd go to a battlewagon next, as   
an exec.)) "Good lord, Pug, that's more like it!"    "You'd prefer that I go back to sea?" 
 
"I'd prefer?    What difference has that ever made?" 
 
"All the same, I'd like to hear what you'd prefer." 
 5 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rhoda hesitated, sizilg him up with a slanted glance. 
 
"Well-naturally I'd adore going to Germany.    It would be much more fun for me than sitting   
here alone while you steam around Hawaii in the Ne-w Mexico or whatever.    It's the loveliest   
country in Europe.    The people are so friendly. 
 
German was my major, you know, aeons ago. "I know," Victor Henry said, smiling, if faintly   
and wryly, for the first time since arriving home. "You were very good at German."    Some of   
the early hot moments of their honeymoon had occurred while they stumbled through Heine's   
love poetry aloud together. 
 
Rhoda returned an arch glance redolent of married sex.    "Well, all right, you.    All I mean is, if   
You must leave Washington-I suppose the Nazis are kind of ugly and ridiculous.    But Madge   
Knudsen went there for the Olympics.    She keeps saying it's still wonderful, and so cheap, with   
those tourist marks they give you." 
 
"Yes, no doubt we'd have a gay whirl. The question is, Rhoda, whether this isn't a total   
disaster.    Two shore assignments in a row, you, understand, at this stage-" 
 
"Oh, Pug, you'll get your    four stripes. I know you    Will. And you'll    get your battleship   
command too, in due course.      My God, with your gunnery pennants, your letter of   
conmendation-Pug, suppose C.N.O's right?    Maybe a war is about to Pop over there.    Then it   
would be an important job, wouldn't it?" 
 
"That's just sales talk."    Pug got up and helped himself to cheese. "He says the President wants   
top men in Berlin now as military attaches. 
 
Well, okay, I'll believe that.    He also says it won't hurt my career. That is what I can't believe.   
First thing any selection board looks for-or will ever look for-in a man's record is blue water,   
and lots of it." 
 
" Pug, are you sure Kip won't stay to dinner?    There's plenty of food. 
 
Warren's going to New York." 
 
"No, Kip's on his way to a, party at the German embassy.    And why the hell is Warren going to   
New York?    He's been home all of three days. 
 
"Ask him,- Rhoda said. 
 
The slam of the front door and the quick firm steps were unmistakable Warren sounds. He   
entered the porch greeting them with a wave of two squash rackets in a fist.    "Hi." 
 
In an old gray sweater and slacks, his tanned lean face glowing from the exercise, his hair   
tousled, a cigarette slanting from his thin mouth, he looked much like the lad who, on   
graduating from the Academy, had vanished from their lives.    Pug was still not used to the way   
Warren had filled out on shipboard food.    The boyish weediness was changing into a tall solid   
look. A sprinkle of premature gray in his dark hair had startled his parents on his return.   
 6 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Victor Henry envied Warren the deep sunburn which bespoke a destroyer bridge, tennis, green   
Oahu hills, and above all, duty at sea thousands of miles from Constitution Avenue. 
 
He said, "You're off to New York, I hear." 
 
"Yes, Dad, Is that okay? My exec just blew into town. We're going up there to see some   
shows.    He's a real Idaho farmer.    Never been to New York." 
 
Commander Henry made a grouchy sound.    It was no bad thing for Warren to be friendly with   
his    executive    officer. What bothered the father was    thoughts    of a woman    who might    be   
waiting in New York. A top student at the Academy, Warren had almost ruined his record   
with excessive trenching-out.      He had ended with a bad back attributed by himself to a   
wrestling injury; by other reports, to an escapade involking an older woman and a midnight car   
crash.    The parents had never raised the topic of the woman, partly from bashfulness-they were   
both prudish churchgoers, ill at ease with such a topic-and partly from a strong sense that they   
would get nowhere with Warren. 
 
The door chimes rang. A gray-headed houseman in a white coat passed through the living   
room. Rhoda stood up, touching her hair and Sliding slim hands over her silk-clad hips.   
"Remember Kip Tollever, Warren? That's probably Kip." 
 
"Why,    sure. That tall lieutenant commander who lived next door in Manila. Where's he   
stationed now?" 
 
"He's just finished a tour as naval attache in Berlin," Victor Henry said.    Warren made a comic   
grimace, and dropped his voice. 
 
"Jehosephat, Dad.    How did he ever get stuck with that?    Cookie pusher?" Rhoda looked at her   
husband, whose face remained impassive. "Commander Tollever, ma'am," said the houseman   
at the doorway, "Hello, Rhoda!" Tollever marched in with long arms outstretched, in a   
flawlessly cut evening uniform: blue mess jacket with medals and gold 
 
years younger than you did in the Philippines." 
 
buttons, a black tie, a stiff snowy shirt.    "My lord, woman!    You look ten 
 
"Oh, you, )) 
 
she said, eyes gleaming, as he lightly kissed her cheek. 
 
"Hi, Pug."    Smoothing o the manicured hand over heavy wavy hair just turning gray, Tollever   
stared at the son.    "Now for crying out loud, which boy is this?" 
 
Warren held out his hand.    "Hello, sir.    Guess." 
 
"Aha.    It's Warren.    Byron had a different grin.    And red hair, come to think of it." 
 
"Right you are, sir." 
 7 
 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Rusty Traynor told me You're serving on the Monaghan.    What's Byron doing?" 
 
Rhoda chirruped after a slight silence, "Oh, Byron's our romantic dreamer, Kip.    He's studying   
fine arts in Italy.    And you should see Madeline!    All grown up." 
 
Warren said, "Excuse me, sir," and went out. 
 
-blue eye, widened.    "Well, that is romanhandsome face, and his cobalt "Fine arts!    Italy!"    one   
heavy eyebrow went up in Tollever's gaunt I tic. Say, Pug, since when do you indulge?"   
Tollever inquired, accepting a martini and seeing Henry refill his own glass. 
 
"Why, hell, Kip, I was drinking in Manila.    Plenty." 
 
"Were You?    I forget.    I just remember what a roaring teetotaller you were in the Academy.   
No tobacco either. 
 
"Well, I fell from grace long ago." 
 
Victor Henry had started to drink and smoke on the death of an infant girl, and had not returned   
to the abstinences his strict Methodist father had taught him.    It was a topic he did not enjoy   
exploring. 
 
With a slight smile, Tollever said, "Do you play cards on Sunday now, too?" 
 
"No, I still hold to that bit off-lishness" 
 
"Don't call it foolishness, Pug." 
 
Commander Tollever began to talk about the pOSt of naval attache in Berlin. "You'll love   
Germany," were his first words on the topic. 
 
"And so will Rhoda.    You'd be crazy not to grab the chance." 
 
Resting his elbows on the arms of his chair, legs neatly crossed, he clipped out his words with   
all the -old articulate crispness; still out of the Academy, while officer of the deck of a   
destroyer, - Two years    the handsomest men in Pug's class, and one of the unluckiest one   
Tolliver had rammed a sub at midnight in a rainsquall, during a fleet exercise. 
 
The submarine had surfaced without warning a hundred yards in front of him, It had scarcely   
been his fault, nobody had been hurt, and the ri general court-martial had merely given him a   
letter of rep mand. 
 
But that letter had festered in his promotion jacket, sapping his career.    He drank two martinis   
in about fifteen minutes, as he talked. 
 
When Victor Henry probed a bit about the Nazis and how to deal with them, Kip Tollever sat   
up very erect, his curled fingers stiffened as he gestured, and his tone grew firm.    The National   
Socialists were in, he said, and the other German parties were out, just as in the United States   
the Democrats were in and the Republicans out. That was the one way to look at it. The   
 8 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Germans admired the United States, and desperately wanted our friendship.    pug would find   
the latch off, and the channels of information open, if he simply treated these people as human   
beings. 
 
The press coverage of the new Germany was distorted.      When Pug got to know the   
newspapermen, he would understand why- disgruntled pinkos and drunks, most of them. 
 
"Hitler's a damned remarkable man," said Tollever, poised on his elbows, one scrubbed hand to   
his chin, one negligently dangling, his face flushed bright pink. "I'm not saying that he, or   
Goering, or any of that bunch, wouldn't murder their own grandmothers to increase their power   
or to advance the interests of Germany.      But that's politics in Europe nowadays.      We   
Americans are far too naive.    The Soviet Union is the one big reality Europe lives with, Pug- 
that Slav horde, seething in the east. We can hardly picture that feeling, but for them it's   
political bedrock. The Communist International is not playing mali-jongg, you know, those   
Bolos are out to rule Europe by fraud or force or both.    Hitler isn't about to let them.    That's the   
root of the matter.    The Germans do things in politics that we wouldn't-like this stuff with the   
Jews-but that's just a passing phase, and anyway, it's not your business.    Remember that.    Your   
job is military information. 
 
You can get a hell of a lot of that from these people.      They're proud of what they're   
accomplishing, and not at all bashful about showing off, and I mean they'll give you the real   
dope."    Rhoda asked questions about the Jews, as Pug Henry mixed more martinis.    Tollever   
assured her that the newspaper stories were exaggerated. The worst thing had been the so- 
called Crystal Night when Nazi toughs had smashed department store windows and set fire to   
some synagogues. Even that the Jews had brought on themselves, by murdering a German   
embassy official in Paris. 
 
As an embassy official himself, Tollever said, he took rather a dim view of that!    He and his   
wife had gone to the theatre that very night, and on the way home had seen a lot of broken   
glass along the Kurfiirstendamm, and the glow of a couple of distant fires. 
 
The account in Time had made it seem that Germany was ablaze from end to end, and that the   
Jews were being slaughtered en masse.    There had been conflicting reports, but so far as he   
knew not one of them had really been physically harmed.    A big fine had been put on them for   
the death of the official, a billion marks or something.    Hitler did believe in strong medicine.   
'Now as to the President's recalling our ambassador, that was a superfluous gesture, utterly   
superfluous," Tollever said. "It only made things worse for the Jews, and it completely fouled   
up our embassy's workings.      There's just no common sense here in Washington about   
Germany." 
 
Drinking two more martinis, the erect warrior began dissolving into a gossipy, slouched Navy   
insider, reminiscing about parties, weekend S, hunting trips, and the like; about the potato soup   
he had drunk with Luftwaffe OiTicers in the dawn, while recovering from a drinking bout after   
a Party rally; about the famous actors and politicians who had befriended him.    Great fun and   
high living went with an attache's job, he chuckled, if one played one's cards right. 
 9 
 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Moreover, you were supposed to do those things, so as to dig up information.    It was dream   
duty.    A man was entitled to get whatever he could out of the Navy!    He had sat in a front seat,   
watching history unfold, and he had had a glorious time besides.    "I tell you, you'll love it, Pug.   
It's the most interesting post in Europe nowadays. The Nazis are a mixed crowd, actually.   
Some are brilliant, but between you and me, some are pretty crude and vulgar.      The   
professional military crowd sort of looks down on them.    But hell, how do we feel about our   
own Politicians? 
 
Hitler's in the saddle and nobodvis arguing about lat.    He is boss man, and I kid you not.    So   
lay off that , t topic and you'll do fine, because really you can't beat these people for hospitality.   
In a way they're a lot like us, you know, more so than the French or even the Limeys. 
 
they'll turn'themselves inside out for an American naval officer." 
 
A strange smile, rueful and somewhat beaten, appeared on his face as he glanced from Rhoda   
to Pug.    "Especially a man like you.    They'll know all about you long before You get there.   
Now if this is off the reservation say so, but how on earth did a gunnery redbot like you come   
up for this    job?" 'Stuck my    neck out," Pug growled. "You know    the work I did on the   
magnetic torpedo exploder, when I was at BuOrd-" 
 
"Hell, yes.    And the letter of commendation you got?    I sure do." 
 
"Well, I've watched torpedo developments since.    Part of my job in war Plans is monitoring the   
latest intelligence on armor and armaments. 
 
The japs are making some mighty healthy torpedoes, Kip.    I got out the old slide rule one night   
and ran the figures, and the way I read them our battlewagons are falling below the safety   
margin.      I wrote a report recommending that the blisters be thickened and raised on    the   
Maryland and New Mexico classes.    Today C.N.O called m, d"wr, to his office.    My report's   
turned into a hot potato.    BuSbips and BuOrd are blaming each other, memos are flying like   
fur, the blisters are going to be thickened and raised, and-" 
 
"And by God, pug, you've got yourself another letter of commendation. Well done!"    Tollever's   
brilliant blue eyes glistened, and he wet his lips. 
 
"I've got myself orders to Berlin," Victor Henry said. "Unless I can talk my way out of it.   
C.N.O says the White House has decided it's a crucial post now." 
 
"It is, Pug, it is." 
 
well, maybe so, but hell's bells, Kip, you're wonderful at that Sort of thing.e monkey.    I don't   
belong there.    I had the I'm not. 
 
I'm a grease myself, that's all, when the boss man was misfortune to call attention to my   
german. Now I'm in a looking for someone. And I happen to know some Ge crack." tch.   
"Well, don't pass this up. 
 
That's my Tollever glanced at his watch rtant, and sorneadvice to you as an old friend.    Hitler is   
 10 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
very, very impo thing's going to blow in Europe. 
 
I'm overdue at the embassy." 
 
Victor Henry walked him outside to his shiny gray Mercedes. 
 
Tollever's gait was shaky, but he spoke with calm clarity.    "Pug, if you do go, call me.    I'll give   
you a book fun of phone numbers of the right men to talk to.    In fact-"- A twisted grin came   
and went on his face. "No, the numbers of the little frauleins would be wasted on you, wouldn't   
they? 
 
Well, I've always admired the hell out of you." He clapped Henry's shoulder. "God , I'm   
looking forward to this party!    I haven't drunk a decent glass of Moselle since I left Berlin." 
 
Reentering the house, Victor Henry almost stumbled over a suitcase and a hatbox.      His   
daughter stood at the foyer mirror in a green wool suit, putting on a close-fitting hat.    Rhoda   
was watching her, and Warren oat slung on his shoulder, holding his old pigskin valise. 
 
waited, trench c oing?" 
 
"What's this, Madeline?    Where are you g She smiled at him, opening wide dark eyes.    "Oh,   
didn't Mom tell 
 
you?    Warren's taking me to New York." 
 
Pug looked dourly at Rhoda, who said, "Anything wrong with that, tickets for the shows.    She   
loves the theatre dear?    Warren's lined up extra and there's precious little in Washington." 
 
"But has college closed down?    is this the Easter vacation?" 
 
The daughter said, "I'm caught up in my work.    it's only for two days, and I don't have any   
tests." 
 
"And where would you stay?" 
 
Warren put in, "There's this Hotel Barbizon for women. 
 
"I don't like this," Victor Henry said. 
 
Madeline glanced at him with meltin appeal.    Nineteen and slight, with Rhoda's skin and a pert   
figure, she oddly resembled her father, in the deep-set brown eyes and the determined air.    She   
tried wrinkling h" small nose at him.    Often that made him laugh, and won her point. 
 
This time his face did not change.    Madeline glanced at her mother for support, but it was not   
forthcoming.    A little smile curved Warren for sup 1 th Madeline's mow That's that.    Warren, I   
th, more ominous perhaps than a rebellious tantrum; a smile hope you can get rid of those extra   
tickets.    When's dinner?" 
 
of indulgence.    She took off her hat.    "Well, okay! 
 11 
 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Any time," Rhoda said. 
 
Warren donned his trench coat and picked up the suitcase. "Say, incidentally,    Dad, did I   
mention that a couple of months ago my exec put in for flight training?    I sent in one of the   
forms too, just for the hell of it. 
 
Well, Chet was snooping around BuNav today.    It seems we both have a chance." 
 
"Flight training?"    Rhoda looked unhappy.    "You mean you're becoming a carrier pilot?    just   
like that?    Without consulting your father?" 
 
"Why, Mom, it's just something else to qualify in.    I think it makes 
 
sense.    Doesn't it, sir?"    C 
 
Commander Henry said, "Yes, inde d. The future of this here Navy might just belong to the   
brown shoes." 
 
"I don't know about that, but Pensacola ought to be interesting, if I don't bilge o'ut the first   
week.    Back Friday.    Sorry, Madeline," She said, "Nice try.    Have fun."    He kissed his mother,   
and left. 
 
Pug Henry consumed vichyssoise, London broil, and strawberry tart in grim abstracted silence.   
Kip Tollever's enthusiasm for the mocre spying job had only deepened Henry's distaste.   
Madeline)s itch to avoid schoolwork was a steady annoyance.    But topping all was Warren's   
casually dropped news; Pug was both proud and alarmed. Carrier aviation was the riskiest   
duty in the Navy, though officers even his own age were now applying for Pensacola, so as to   
get into the flattops.    A devoted batLleship man, Henry wondered all through the meal whether   
Warren hadn't hit on something, whether a request for flight training might not be a respectable   
if desperate way to dodge Berlin. 
 
Madeline kept a cheerful face, making talk with her mother about the student radio station at   
George Washington University, her main interest there.    The houseman, an old Irishman who   
also did the gardening in warm weather, walked softly in the candlelit dining room, furnished   
with Rhoda's family antiques.    Rhoda contributed money to the household costs so that they   
could live in this style in Washington, among her old friends.    While Victor Henry did not like   
it, he had not argued.    A commander's salary was modest, and Rhoda was used to this better   
life. 
 
Madeline excused herself early, kissing her father on the forehead. 
 
The somber quiet during dessert was unbroken except by the hushed footfalls of the   
manservant.    Rhoda said nothing, waiting out her husband's mood.    When he cleared his throat   
and said it might be nice to have brandy and coffee on the porch, she smiled pleasantly.    "Yes,   
let's, Pug." The housema light in the artificial fireplace. She waited and set the silver tray   
there, turning up the red flickering until her husband was settled in his favorite chair, drinking   
coffee and sipping brandy.    Then she said, "By the bye, there's a letter from Byron." 
 12 
 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"What?    He actually remembered we're alive?    Is he all right?" 
 
They had not heard from him in months.    Henry had had many a nightmare of his son dead in   
an Italian ditch in a smoking automobile, or otherwise killed or injured.    But since the last letter   
he had not mentioned Byron. 
 
"He's all right.    He's in Siena.    He's given up his studies in Florence. 
 
Says he got bored with fine arts." 
 
?l "I couldn't be less surprised.    Siena.    That's still Italy, isn't it "Yes, near Florence.    In the   
Tuscan hills.    He goes on and on about the Tuscan hills.    He seems to be interested in a girl." 
 
"A girl, eh?    What kind of girl?    Eyetalian?" 
 
"No, no.    A New York girl.    Natalie Jastrow.    He says she has a famous uncle." 
 
"I see.    And who's her uncle?" 
 
"He's an author.    He lives in Siena.    Dr. Aaron Jastrow.    He once 
 
taught history at Yale, Briny says." 
 
"Where's the letter?"    "On the telephone table." 
 
He returned in a few minutes with the letter, and with a thick book in a black dust jacket,   
marked with a white crucifix and a blue Star of David.    "That's who the uncle is." 
 
"Oh, yes.    A few's Jesus.    That thing.    Some club sent it.    Did you ever read it?" 
 
"I read it twice. It's excellent." Henry scanned his son's letter in yellow lamplight. "Well.   
This business is kind of far along." 
 
"She does sound attractive," Rhoda said.    "But he's had other nine-day wonders." 
 
Commander Henry tossed the letter on the coffee table and poured more brandy for himself.   
"I'll read it through later.    Longest letter he's ever written.    Is there anything important in it?" 
 
"He wants to stay on in Italy." 
 
"Indeed?    How does he propose to live?" 
 
"He has some kind of research job with Dr.    Jastrow.    The girl works there, too.    He thinks he   
can get by on what he earns, Plus the few dollars from my mother)s trust.") "Really?"    Henry   
peered at her. 
 
"If Byron Henry is talking about He drank his coffee and brandy, and stood up, retrieving the   
letter with supporting himself, that's the biggest news about him since you had him. 
 
a swipe of his hand. 
 13 
 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Now don't take on, Pug.    Byron's a strange fish, but there's a lot of brains underneath.PP  
 
"I have some work to do." 
 
Henry went to his den and smoked a cigar, reading Byron's letter twice through with care.    The   
den was a converted maid's room.    On the ground lloor a large handsome study looked out on   
the garden through French windows.    That room in theory was his.    It was so attractive that   
Rhoda sometimes liked to at her hu ]rn receive visitors there, and was given to nagging shand   
when he left Papers and books around.    After a few months of this Henry had put bookshelves,   
a cot, and a tiny secondhand desk in the narrow maid's room, had moved into it, and was   
content enough with this small space- He had done with less in a destroyer cabin. writer.    With   
his hands on the keys he paused ta When the cigar was burned out, Henry went to his old por   
able type in a leather frame on , Contemplating three pictures the desk: Warren, in uniform and   
bristle-beaded, a stern boyish candidate for Rag rank; Madeline, at seventeen much, much   
younger than she seemed now; Byron, in the center, with the defiant 
 
what sloping 
 
large mouth, the half-closed analytic eyes, the thick ful hair, the somber face peculiarly   
mingling softness and obstinate Byron owed his looks to neither parent.    He was his strange   
self. 
 
Dear Briny: 
 
Your mother and I have your long letter.    I intend to take it seriously. 
 
Your    mother prefers to    pooh it, but I    don't think You've written such a letter before, or   
described a girl in quite such terms. I'm glad You're well, and gainfully employed. 'That's   
good news.    I never could take that fine arts business seriously. 
 
Now about Natalie Jastrow.    In this miserable day and age, especially with what is going on in   
Germany, I have to start by protesting that I have nothing against Jewish people.      I've   
encountered them very little since few of them enter the Navy.    In my Academy class there   
were four, which was very unusual back in 1911. One of them has stayed the course, Han   
Goldfarb, and he is a damned good officer. 
 
Here in Washington there is quite a bit of prejudice against Jews. 
 
They've made themselves felt in business lately, doing somewhat too well. 
 
The other day one of your mother's friends told me a joke.    I wasn't amused, possibly because   
of my own Glasgow great-grandfather. 
 
The three shortest books in the Library of Congress are A History of Scotch Charities,   
Virginity in France, and A Study of jewish Business Ethics.    Ha ha ha. 
 
This may be a far cry from Hitler's propaganda, but the person who told me this joke is a fine   
lawyer and a good Christian. 
 14 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
You'd better give some hard thought to the long pull that a marriage is. I know I'm jumping the   
gun, but now is the time to reflect, before you're too involved.    Never, never forget one thing.  
 
The girl you marry, and the woman you must make a life 'with, are two different pe,people. 
 
Women have a way of living in the present.    Before marriage she's out to win you.    Afterward   
you're just one of the many factors in her life. In a way you're secondary, because she has you,   
whereas everything else is in flux-children, household, new clothes, social ties. 
 
If these other factors are disagreeable to her, she will make you unhappy. 
 
In a marriage with a girl like Natalie Jastrow, the other factors would all tend to bother her   
perpetually, from the mixed-breed children to the tiny social slights.    Then might get to be like   
the Chinese water-drop torture.    If so, you'd both gradually grow bitter and miserable, and by   
then you'd be tied together by children.    This could end up as hell on earth. 
 
Now I'm just telling you what I think.    Maybe I'm old-fashioned, or stupid, and out of touch.    It   
doesn't matter to me that this girl is Jewish, though there would be grave questions about the   
children's faith, since I feel you're a pretty good Christian, somewhat more so than Warren at   
the moment.    I'm impressed by what you say about her brains, which her being the niece of   
Aaron Jastrow sure bears out. A Jew's Jesus is a remarkable work. If I thought she could   
make you happy and give you some direction in life I'd welcome her, and take pleasure in   
personally punching in the nose anybody who upset her.    But I think might become a second   
career for me. 
 
Now, I'm reconciled to letting you go your own way.    You know that. 
 
It's hard for me to write a letter like this.    I feel like a fool, elaborating the obvious, expressing   
truths that I find distasteful, and above all intruding on your personal feelings.    But that's okay.   
You sent us your letter.    I take it to mean that you wanted an answer. 
 
This is the best I can do, If you want to write me off as a bigot, that's all right with me. 
 
I'll show this letter to your mother, who will no doubt disapprove of it, so I'll be forwarding it   
without her endorsement.    Maybe she'll add something of her own. 
 
Warren is home.    He has put in for flight training and may get it. 
 
Love, Dad Rhoda liked to sleep late, but her husband woke her the following morning at eight   
o'clock, handing her his letter to Byron and a cup of hot coffee. She sat up with grouchy   
abrupt gestures, read the letter through as she sipped, and passed it back to him without a word.  
 
"Do you want to add anything?" 
 
"No."    Her face was set.    She had worked her eyebrows a bit over Pug's passage on women and   
marriage. 
 
"Don't you approve of it , "Letters like that don't ?    change things," Rhoda said with deep su"   
female contempt. 
 15 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Shouldn't I seti it?" 
 
"I don't care." 
 
He put the envelo in h s hr Pe east pocket.    "I see Admiral Preble at ten O'clock this morning.   
Have you had any second thoughts?" 
 
"Pug, will You please do xactly as you choose?"    Rhoda said, in a pained bored tone.    She sank   
down into the bedclothes as he left. 
 
The Chief of Naval Operations did not appear surprised when Pug said he would take the post.   
At dawn Henry had awakened with a, overmastering sense that he could not duck the   
assignment, and with this, he had stopped thinking about it.    Preble told him to get ready in a   
hurry. 
 
His orders to Berlin were already cut. 
 
Byron Henry's encounter with Natalie Jastrow two months earlier Bhad been much in   
character.    He had drifted into it. 
 
Unlike his father, Byron had always been directionless.    Growing up, he had dodged the Sea   
Scouts, Sevem Academy, and anything else pointing to a naval career.    Yet he had no ideas for   
any other career. 
 
His marks were usually poor, and he developed early a remarkable capacity for doing   
absolutely nothing. In fits of resolve he had shown himself able to win a few A's, or put   
together a radio set that worked, or rescue an old car from a junkyard and make it run, or repair   
a collapsed oil heater. In this knack for machinery he took after his father and grandfather.   
But he became bored with such tinkering. He did too poorly in mathematics    to think of   
engineering. 
 
He might have been an athlete.    He was agile, and sturdier than he looked, but he disliked the   
regimens and    teamwork of    school athletics, and he loved cigarettes and beer, though the   
gallons of beer he drank did not add a millimeter to his waistline.    At Columbia College (where   
he was admitted because he charmed an interviewer, scored well on the intelligence test, and   
wasn't a New Yorker) he barely avoided expulsion for bad grades. What he enjoyed was   
taking his ease at his fraternity house, or playing cards and pool, or reading old novels over and   
over, or talking about girls and fooling with them.    He did find in fencing a sport suited to his   
independent temper and his wiry body.      Had he trained more he might have been an   
intercollegiate finalist at the epec. But it was a bore to train, and it interfered with his idleness.  
 
In his junior year he elected a course in fine arts, which athletes took because, so the report ran,   
nobody ever failed it. 
 
However, at midsemester, Byron Henry managed to fail.    He had done no work and cut half the   
classes.    Still, the F startled him.    He went to see the professor and told him so.    The professor,   
a mild bald little lover of the Italian Renaissance, with green spectacles and hairy ears, took a   
 16 
 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
liking to him.    A couple of remarks Byron made on Leonardo and BotticeHi showed that, in the   
few sessions he had attended, he had learned something, unlike the rest of the hulking   
somnolent class. 
 
They became friends.    It was the first intellectual friendship in Byron Henry's life.    He became   
an enthusiast for the Renaissance, slavishly echoing    the professor's ideas, and he finished   
college in a blaze of B pluses, cured of beer guzzling and afire to teach fine arts. 
 
One year of graduate work at the University of Florence for a Master of Arts degree; that had   
been the plan. 
 
But a few months in Florence cooled Byron.    One rainy November night, in his squalid rented   
room overlooking the muddy Amo, sick of the smells of garlic and bad plumbing, and of living   
alone among foreigners, he wrote his friend that Italian painting was garish, saccharine, and   
boring with its everlasting madonnas, babes, saints, halos, crucifixions, resurrections, green   
dead Saviors, flying beared jehovahs, and the rest; that he much preferred moderns like Mire   
and Klee; and that anyway, painting was just interior decoration, which didn't really interest   
him. He scrawled several pages in this cornered-rat vein, mailed them off, and then went   
vagabonding around Europe, forsaking his classes and his hope of a graduate degree. 
 
When he got back to Florence, he unda cheering letter from the professor. 
 
... I don't know what will become of you.    Obviously art was a false lead.    I think it did you   
good to get hot or, some subject.    If you can only shake off your lethargy and find something   
that truly engages you, You may yet go far.    I am an old traffic cop, and standing here on my   
corner I have seen many Chevrolets and Fords go by. It's not hard for me to recognize the   
occasional Cadillac.    Only this one seems badly stalled. 
 
I've written about you to Dr.    Aaron Jastrow, who lives outside Siena, You know of him.    He   
wrote A Jew's Jesusp made a pot of money, and got off the miserable academic treadmill.    We   
used to be friends at Yale, and he was very good indeed at bringing out the best in young men.   
Go Ind talk to him, and give him my regards. 
 
'That was how Byron happened to call on Dr.    Jastrow.    He took a bus to Siena, a three-hour   
run up a rutted scary mountain road.    Tmice before he had vi ted the bizarre S' little town, all   
red towers and battlements and narrow crooked streets, set around a gaudy zebra-striped   
cathedral, ona hilltop amid rolling green and brown Tuscan vineyards.    Its main claim to fame,   
aside from the quasi-Byzantine church art he had studied there, was a peculiar annual horse   
race called the Palio, which he had heard about but never seen. 
 
At first glance, the girl at the wheel of the old blue convertible made no strong impression on   
him: an oval face, dark enough so that he first Italian, dark hair, enormous sunglasses, a pink   
sweater took her for an over an open white Shirt.    Beside her sat a blond man covering a yawn   
with a long white hand. 
 
"Hi!    Byron Henry?" 
 17 
 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Yes." 
 
"Hop in the back.    I'm Natalie Jastrow.    This is Les bassy in Paris, and He's visiting my uncle." 
 
i works in our em girl either. X"at Natalie Jastrow saw I Byron did not much impress the   
American, through the dark glasses was a slender lounger, obviously with red glints in his   
heavy brovm hair; he was propped against the wall of the Hotel Continental in the sun,   
smoking a cigarette, his legs loosely crossed.    The light gray jacket, dark slacks, and maroon   
tie were faintly dandyish.    The forehead under the hair was de, the long slanting jaws narrow,   
the face pallid.    He looked like what he was-a collegiate drone, a rather handsome one. 
 
Natalie had brushed these off by the dozen in earlier years. 
 
As they wound through narrow canyons of crooked ancient redbrown houses and drove out   
into the countryside, Byron idly asked Slote was s d about his embassy work. The Foreign   
Service man told him he pote a section and was studying Russian and Polish, hoping in the   
political sc w or Warsaw.    Sitting in the car, Sic)te appeared for an assignment to Mo 0 very   
tall; later Byron saw that he himself was taller than Slote; the Foreign Service officer had a   
long trunk but medium-sized legs. 
 
Slote's thick blond hair grew to a peak over a high forehead and narrow pinkish face; the light   
blue eyes behind rimless glasses were alert and penetrating, and his thin lips were compressed   
as though with habitual resolve.    All the time they drove, he held a large black pipe in his hand   
or in his mouth, not smoking it. It occurred to Byron that the Foreign Service might be a   
pleasant career, offering travel, adventure? 
 
and encounters with important people. 
 
But when Slote mentioned that he was a Rhodes Scholar, Byron decided not to pursue the   
topic. 
 
Jastrow lived in a yellow stucco villa on a steep hillside, with a tile roofs.    It was a fine view of   
the cathedral and Siena's red towers and after the girl drive of about twenty minutes from town.  
 
Byron hurried and Slote through a    terraced flowering garden full of black-stained plaster   
statues. 
 
"Well, there you are!"    The voice was high, authoritative, and impatient, with a faint foreign   
note in the pronouncing of the r's. 
 
Two sights struck Byron as they entered a long beamed living room. 
 
a painting of a red-robed Saint Francis with arms outstretched, on a background of gold, taking   
up a good part of one wall, and far down the long sitting room on a red silk couch, a bearded   
little man in a light gray suit, who looked at his watch, stood, and came toward them coughing. 
 
"This is Byron Henry, Aaron," the girl said. 
 
Jastrow took Byron's hand in two dry little paws and peered up at him with prominent   
 18 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
wavering eyes.    jastrov/s head was large, his shoulders slight; he had aging freckled skin, light   
straight hair, and a heavy nose e beard was all gray. "Columbia 'reddened by a cold. The   
neatly trimm d 38, is it?" 
 
"Yes, sir." 
 
"Well, well, come along." He went off down the room,\buttoning the flapping folds of his   
double-breasted suit.    "Come here, Byron." 
 
Plucking the stopper out of a heavy crystal decanter, he carefully poured amber wine into four   
glasses. "Come Leslie, Natalie. We don't take wine during the day, Byron, but this is an   
occasion."    He held up his glass.    "To Mr. 
 
Byron Henry, eminent hater of the Italian Renaissance." 
 
Byron laughed.    "Is that what Dr.    Milano wrote?    I'll drink to that." 
 
Jastrow t k one sip, Put d tossed off the sherry 
 
like a shot of roo Own his glass, and ked at his w tch. 
 
ye.    Jastrow exclaimed with a delighted smile, "Ah!    One, two, akeyryour glass to the table." 
 
Seeing the Professor wanted to get at hilselsulinec,lit, Byron 100 a three. good lad. Come   
along, Natalie. 
 
It was a spare lunch: nothing but vegetables with white rice, then cheese and fruit.    The service   
was on fine old china, maroon and gold. 
 
A small, gray-headed Italian woman passed the food. The tall dining room %endows stood   
open to the garden, the view of Siena, and a flood of pale sunshine.    Gusts of cool air came in   
as they ate. When they first sat, the girl said, "What have you got against the Italian   
Renaissance, Byron?)f 
 
that's a long story.)) 
 
"Tell us," said Jastrow in a classroom voice, laving a thumb across his smiling mouth. 
 
Byron hesitated.    Jastrow and the Rhodes Scholar made him uneasy. 
 
The girl disconcerted him more."Removing her sunglasses, she had disvi closed big slanted   
dark eyes, gleaming with bold intelligence. 
 
She had a Soft large mouth, painted a bit too orange, in a bony face. 
 
Natalie was regarding him with a satiric look, as though she had already concluded that he , a   
fool; and Byron was not fool enough to miss that. 
 
"Maybe I've had too much of it," he said.    "I started out fascinated. 
 19 
 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
join ending up snowed under and bored.    I realize much of the art is brilliant, but there's a lot   
Of overrated garbage amid the works of genius. 
 
My main objection is that I can't take the mixture Of Paganism and Christianity.    I don't believe   
David looked like Apo o    or Mos ke    Jupiter, ores ll Mary    like every Renaissance artist's   
mistress with a borrowed baby on her lap.    Maybe they couldn't help showing Bible Jews as   
local Italians or pseudo-Greeks, but-" Byron dried up for a moment, seeing his listeners'   
amused looks.    "Look, I'm not saying any of this is important criticism.    I guess it just shows I   
got into the wrong field. 
 
But what has any of it to do with Christianity? That's what sticks in my craw. Supposing   
Christ came back to earth and visited the Uffizi, or Saint Peter's?    The Christ of your book, Dr.   
Jastrow, the poor idealistic Jewish preacher from the back hills?    that's the Lord I grew up with.   
My father's a religious man; we had to read a chapter of the Bible every morning at home.   
Why, Christ ings."    Nata wouldn't even suspect the stuff related to himself and his teachings   
Jastrow was regarding him with an almost motherly smile.    He said brusquely to her, "Okay.   
You asked me what I had against the Italian Renaissance.    I've told you." 
 
"Well, it's a point of view," she said. 
 
Eyes twinkling behind his glasses, Slote lit his pipe, and said between puffs, "Don't fold up,   
Byron, there are others who have taken your polition.    A good name for it is Protestantism."   
"Byron's main point is accurate."      Dr.      Jastrow sounded kindly, danctal oc rred when   
paganining his the fingers together.    "The I ian Renaissance was a great blossoming,of art and   
ideas, Byron, that cu sin and the Hebrew spirit-in its Christian expression-briefly fertilized   
instead of fighting each other.    It was a hybrid growth, true, but some hybrids are stronger than   
either parent, you know.    Witness the mule." 
 
"Yes, sir," said Byron, "and mules are sterile." 
 
Amused surprise Hashed on Natalie Jastrow's face, and her enormous dark eyes flickered to   
Leslie Slote, and back to Byron"Well said.    just so." Jastrow nodded in a pleased way.    "The   
Renaissance indeed couldn't reproduce itself, and it died off, while the pagan and Hebrew   
spirits went their separate immortal ways. But that mules bones are now one of mankiners   
richest deposits of cultural achievement, Byron, whatever your momentary disgust from   
overexposure." 
 
Byron shrugged.    Leslie Slote said, "Is your father a clergyman?" 
 
"His father's a naval officer," said Jastrow. 
 
"Really?    What branLh?" 
 
Byron said, "Well, right now he's in War Plans." 
 
"My goodness!    War plans?"    Dr.    Jastrow pretended a comic flutter. 
 
"I didn't know that.    Is it as ominous as it sounds?" 
 
805 
 20 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Sir, every country draws up theoretical war plans in peacetime." 
 
fl your father think a war is imminent?" 
 
"I got my last letter from him in November. He said nothing about a war. The other three   
exchanged odd glances.    Slote said, "Would he, in casual correspondence?" 
 
"He might have asked me to come home.    He didn't." 
 
"Interesting," said Dr.    Jastrow, with a little complacent grin at Slote, rubbing his tiny hands. 
 
"As a matter of fact, I think there's going to be a war," Byron said. 
 
This caused a silence of a second or two, and more glances. 
 
Jastrow said, "Really?    Why?"    "Well, I just toured Germany. 
 
You see nothing but uniforms, rades, drills, brass bands. 
 
Anywhere you drive, you end up passing army trucks full of troops, and railroad cars loaded   
with artillery and tanks. 
 
Trains sometimes a couple of miles long." 
 
"But, Byron, it was with just such displays that Hitler won Austria and the Sudetenland," said   
Jastrow, "and he never fired a shot." Natalie said to Byron, 'Leslie thinks my uncle should go   
home. 
 
We've had a running argument for three days." 
 
"I see." 
 
Jastrow was peeling a pear with elderly deliberate gestures, using an The use of the word   
'Being a hybrid of sorts myivory-handled knife. 
 
"Yes, Byron, I'm being mulish." 
 
was accidental, for he grinned and added, self, I guess.    This is a comfortable house, it's the   
only home I have now, and my work, is going well.    Moving would cost me half a year.    If I   
tried to sell the house, I couldn't find an Italian to offer me five cents on the dollar. 
 
They've been dealing for many centuries with foreigners who've had to cut and run.    They'd   
skin me alive.    I was aware of all this when I bought the villa.    I expect to end my days here." 
 
"Not this fall at the hands of the Nazis, I trust," Slote said. 
 
"Oh, hell, Slote," Natalie broke in, slicing a flat hand downward through the air.    "Since when   
does the Foreign Service have such a distinguished record for foresight?    Since Munich?    Since   
Austria? 
 
Since the Rhineland?    Weren't you surprised every time?" 
 21 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Byron listened with interest to this exchange.    The others seemed to have forgotten he was at   
the table. 
 
-Hitler has been making irrational moves With catastrophic possibilities," Slote retorted.   
"Anybody can pull a gun in the street and shoot four people down before the cops come and   
stop him.    Until now that's been Hitler's so-called foreign policy brilliance in a nutshell. The   
surPrise of an outlaw running wild. That game's played out. The others are aroused now.   
They'll stop him over Poland." 
 
JastTow ate a piece of pear, and began to talk in a rhythmic, mellifud and lecturing in a   
classluous way, something between meditating alo harles the Twelfth, room.    "Leslie, if Hitler   
were the Kaiser, or a man like you think I'd admit I'd be worried.    But He's far more competent   
than Fortunately the old ruling class is destroyed. 
 
They unleashed the World War tted incompetence, those preening, posturing, sleek royalwith   
their dry-rod sodomites ties and politicians of 19'4t those bemedalled womanizers an out of   
Proust- They never dreamed that the old manners, the old paperwork, the old protocol, were   
done for, and that industrialized warfare booked through a dollhouse. 
 
So would shatter the old system like at kic they went to the trash heap, and new leadership   
came up out of the sewers, where realism runs and change often starts.    The early Christians   
haunted the sewers and catacombs of Rome, you know," Jastrow said to Byron Henry, clearly   
relishing a fresh audience. 
 
"Yes, sir, I learned about that." 
 
"Of course you did.    Well, Hitler's a vagabond, Mussolini's a vagabond, and Stalin's a jailbird.   
These are new, tough, able, and clever men, straight up from the sewers. Lenin, another   
jailbird, was the great originator. He made it all up, Leslie, you realize-the jesuitical secret   
party, the coarse slogans for the masses and the contempt for their intelligence and memory,   
the fanatic language, the strident dogmas, the Moslem religiosity in politics, the crude   
pageantry the total cynicism of tactics y it's all Leninism.    Hitler is a Leninist, Mussolini is a   
Leninist.    The talk of anti-communism and pro-communism is for fools and children." 
 
"Oh, for Pete's sake, Aaron-2 
 
"Just a moment, now!    Lenin was all prudence and caution in foreign affairs, and that is my   
whole point. Glory, and honor, and all those tinselly illusions of the old system that led to   
wars, were to Lenin the merest eyewash. So it is to Hitler. He has never moved when he   
couldn't get away with it.    The outlaw running wild with a gun is the exact effect he wishes to   
create. I'm surprised that you're taken in. He is really a very, very prudent man. If he can   
make it in Poland without war, he'll do iL Otherwise he'll not move.    Not now. 
 
Perhaps in ten years, when he's built Germany up enough. I shall be very content to live   
another ten years."    Slote pulled at his mustache with lean nervous fingers.    'You really lose   
me, Aaron.    Can you be serious?    Hitler a Leninist! That's a coffeehouse paradox, and you   
know iL The Russian Revolution is a radical change in history.    The abolition of private   
 22 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
property has created a new world.    You may like it or detest it, but it's new.    Hitler's socialism   
was a sham to get a mob of gangsters into power.    He's frozen the German economy just as it   
was, smashed the labor unions, lengthened the working hours, cut the pay, and kept all the old   
rich crowd on top, the Krupps and Thyssens, the men who gave him the money to run for   
office. The big Nazis live like sultans. The concentration camps are for anybody who still   
wants the socialist part of National Socialism. Don't you know that? The 1934 purge was   
nothing but a showdown between the socialist element of the Nazi Party, and the army generals   
and richconservatives.    Hitler shot his old Party friends like partridges. 
 
That you rely on this man's prudence for your safety, and for Natalie's, strikes me as   
grotesque."    'Does it?"    Jastrow glanced at his watch and sighed.    "I'm sorry.    I'm impressed   
with    Hitler's    ability to    use    socialist    prattle    when necessary,    and then discard    it.    He uses   
doctrines as he uses money, to get things done. 
 
Theyre    expendable. He uses racism because that's the pure distillate of German romantic   
egotism, just as Lenin used utopian Masen because it appealed to Russia's messianic streak.   
Hitler means to hammer out a united Europe.    If a nonsense jumble of racist bunkum, socialist   
promises, brass bands, parades, uniforms, and weepy songs is what welds Germans into a blunt   
instrument, he gives them that. The Germans are stolid, clever, brutal, and docile, and they   
will vigorously execute any command barked at them with a loud enough voice. 
 
He understands them, and he may just succeed.    A united europe must come.    The medieval   
jigsaw of nations is obsolete.    The balance of power is dangerous foolishness in the industrial   
age.    It must all be thrown Out.    Somebody has to be ruthless enough to do it since the peoples   
with their ancient hatreds will never do it themselves.    It's only Napoleon's original vision, but   
he was a century ahead of his time-The old crowd was still strong enough to catch him and put   
him in a cage to die.    But there's nobody to cage Hitler." 
 
Byron blurted, "Dr.    Jastrow, when I was in Germany I saw the signs on park benches and in   
trolley cars about the Jews.    I saw burnt-out synagogues." 
 
"Yes?" 
 
They all looked at him.    He went On, "I'm surprised you talk as calmly about Hitler as you do.   
Being Jewish, I mean." 
 
Dr.    Jastrow smiled a slow, acid smile, showing little yellowish teeth with one gold crown.    He   
stroked his beard and spoke deliberately, the classroom note strong. "Well! Your surprise   
doesn't surprise me. Young people-Young Americans especially-aren't aware that the tolerance   
for Jews in Europe is only fifty to a hundred years old and that it's never gone deep.    It didn't   
touch Poland, where I was born.    Even in the West-what about the Dreyfus case?    No, no.    In   
that respect Hitler represents only a ret"m to 'CY for Europe, after the b el ow of her sen. The   
the anti-Sematic parties behostility simply moved from the Church to s to a political cause the   
French Revolution changed Europe from a religious ndcontinent.    If Hitler does win out, the   
Jews will fall back to the second class status they always had under the kings and the popes. 
 23 
 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Well, we survived seventeen centuries of that. We have a lot of wisdom and doctrine for   
coping with it." 
 
Slote shook his head.    "You love to spin such talk, I know, but I wish you would do it on the   
next boat home." "But I'm quite serious, Leslie," Jastrow said with a faintly puckish smile.   
"you rang wild alarms when Mussolini passed the anti-Jewish laws. 
 
They proved a joke."    If the Germans ever press him to use them -neyre on the books, i 'qbe   
Italians loathe and fear the Germans to a man. Even if by some mischance there is a war, Italy   
won't fight. Siena may well be as safe a 
 
place as any." 
 
"I doubt that Natalie's parents think so." she finds Siena slightly more 'She can go home   
tomorrow.    Perhaps attractive than NUami Beach. use I'm afraid Of "I'M thinking of going,"   
the girl said.    'But not beca 
 
war or of Hitler- There are things that bother me more." 
 
"I daresay," Jastrow said. 
 
Slote's face turned astonishingly red.    His pipe lay smoking on an trash ay, and he was playing   
with a yellow pencil he had taken from a vest pocket.    The pencil stopped turning. 
 
turning it in one ri Jastrow stood.    "Byron, come along." man at the table, glowering They left   
the girl and the scarlet-faced 
 
at each other. 
 
Books filled the shelves of a small wood-panelled library, and stood Over a white marble   
fireplace a stiff in Piles on the desk and on the floor ai Sienese madonna and child hung, blue   
and pink on gold; a ny p n ng in a large ornate gilded frame.    "Berenson says it's a Duccio,"   
Jastrow observed, th tti the painting, "and that's good enough for me. 
 
will the wave at e It's not authenticated.    Now then.    You sit there, in the light, so that I can see   
you.    Just Put those magazines on the floor.    Good.    Is that a comfortable chair?    Fine." 
 
He sighed and laid a thumb against his lower lip. 
 
"Now, Byron, why didn't You go to the Naval Academy?    Aren't you proud of your father?"   
Byron sat up in his chair. "I think my father may be Chief of Naval Operations one day."   
"Isn't he worth emulating?" 
 
"My brother Warren's doing that.    I'm just not interested." 
 
a commission."    "Dr.    Milano wrote that you took a naval reserve course and obtained "It made   
my father feel good." 
 
"And you've had no second thoughts about the Navy?    It's not too late yet." 
 24 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Byron shook his head, smiling.    Jastrow lit a cigarette, studying Byron's face.    The young man   
said, "Do you really like living in Italy, sir?" 
 
"well, I was ordered to a warm climate.    I did first visit Florida, Arizona, southern California,   
and the French Riviera."    The professor spoke these place-names with an irony that wrote them   
off, one by one, as ridiculous or disagreeable.    "Italy is beautiful, quiet, and cheap." 
 
"You don't mind making your home in a Fascist country?" 
 
Jastrow's smile was indulgent.    "There are good and bad things in all political systems." 
 
"How did you ever come to write A Jew's Jesus, sir?    Did you write it here?" 
 
"Oh, no, but it got me here."    Jastrow spoke somewhat smugly.    "I was using the Bible in a   
course on ancient history, you see.    And as a boy in Poland I'd been a Talmud scholar, so in   
teaching the New Testament I tended to stress the rabbinic sources that Jesus and Paul used.   
This novelty seemed to fascinate Yale juniors. I cobbled up a book, with the working tide   
Talmudic Themes in Early Christianity, and then at the last minute I'thought of A jew's Jesus.   
The Book-of-the-Month Club selected it." Jastrow made a soft gesture with both hands all   
around the room, smiling.    "And here I am.    The club payment bought this place.    Now, then,   
Byron, what are your plans?    Are you going to return to the United States?" 
 
'I don't know.    I couldn't be more up in the air." 
 
"Do you want a job?"    Byron was taken aback.    "Well, I guess maybe I do, sir." 
 
Jastrow ambled to his desk and searched through a pile of books, taking off his glasses and   
holding the titles very close to his face. 
 
"I had a fine researcher, a boy from Yale, but his parents called him home, afraid of a war-ah,   
here we are.    Can I interest you, for twenty dollars a week, in the Emperor Constantine?    This   
is a good general biography to start with." 
 
"Sir, I've flunked more history courses-" 
 
"I see.    You don't want the job." 
 
The young man took the thick book and turned it dubiously in his hands. "No.    I'h try iL Thank   
you." 
 
"Oh, you will, will you?    When you say you have no aptitude? 
 
Why?" 
 
"Well, for the money, and to be around you."    This was true enough, though it omitted a third   
good reason: Natalie Jastrow. 
 
Jastrow looked stern, and then burst out laughing.    "We'll give it a try." 
 
The letter his parents received from him some time later about the girl-which elicited Victor   
 25 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Henry's strong answer-was unintentionally misleading.    There was a love affair going on, but   
Natalie's lover was Leslie Slote.    His letters came two or three times a week: long fat white   
Foreign Service envelopes, addressed in an elongated stiff hand, in brown ink, with stamps   
stuck over the government frank.    Byron hated the sight of them. 
 
He was spending hours every day with her in the huge second-floor room that was Jastrow's   
main library. Her desk was there. She answered letters, typed manuscripts, and with the   
Italian woman managed the household.    Byron worked at the long library table, reading up on   
Constantine, checking facts, and drawing maps of the emperor's military campaigns.  
 
Whenever he raised his eyes he saw the smooth face bent over the desk, the shapely bones   
highlighted by sunshine, or on dark days by a lamp. 
 
There was also the ever-present view of her long pretty legs in a sheen of silk.    Natalie dressed   
in dun wool, and was all business with him; she used almost no paint once Slote left, combed   
her hair back in a heavy bun, and talked to Byron with offhand dryness.    Still, his infatuation   
took quick root and grew rankly. 
 
She was the first American girl he had spoken to in months; and they were thrown together for   
many hours every day, just the two of them in the book-lined room.    This was reason enough   
for him to feel attracted to her. But she impressed him, too. Natalie Jastrow talked to her   
famous uncle as to a mental equal.    Her range of knowledge and ideas humiliated Byron, and   
yet there was nothing bookish about her. 
 
Girls in his experience were lightweights, fools for a smile and a bit of flattery. They had   
doted on him at college, and in Florence too. 
 
Byron was something of an Adonis, indolent and not hotly interested; and unlike Warren, he   
had absorbed some of his father's straitlaced ideas. He thought Natalie was a dark jewel of   
intellect and loveliness, blazing away all unnoticed here in the Italian back hills. 
 
As for her indifference to him, it seemed in order. 
 
He had no thought of trying to break it down. 
 
He did things he had never done before.    He stole a little pale blue handkerchief of hers and sat   
at night in his hotel room in town, sniffing it.    Once he ate half a cake she had left on her desk,   
because it bore the mark of her teeth. when she missed the cake, he calmly lied about it.   
Altogether he was in a bad way.    Natalie Jastrow seemed to sense nothing of this.    Byron had a   
hard shell of inscrutability, grown in boyhood to protect his laziness and school failures from   
his exacting father. 
 
They chatted a lot, of course, and sometimes drove out in the hills for a picnic lunch, when she   
would slightly warm to him over a bottle of wine, treating him more like a younger brother.   
He soon got at the main facts of her romance.    She had gone to the Sorbonne for graduate work   
in sociology.    Jastrow had written about her to Slote, a former pupil.    A fulminating love affair   
had ensued, and Natalie had stormily quit Paris, and lived for a while with her parents in   
 26 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Florida. 
 
Then she had come back to Europe to work for her uncle; also, Byron surmised, to be near   
Slote for another try.    The Rhodes Scholar had now received orders to Warsaw, and Natalie   
was planning to visit him there in July while Jastrow took his summer holiday in the Greek   
islands. 
 
On one of their picnics, as he poured the last of the wine into her glass, Byron ventured a direct   
probe.    'Natalie, do you like your job?" 
 
She sat on a blanket, hugging her legs in a heavy checked skirt, looking out over a valley of   
brown wintry vineyards.    With an arch questioning look, cocking her head, she said, 'Oh, it's a   
job.    Why?" 
 
"It seems to me you're wasting away here."    "Well, I'll tell you, Byron. You do peculiar things   
when you're in love."    His response to this was a dull unfocussed expression.    She went on:   
'That's one thing. 
 
Besides, frankly, I think Aaron's rather wonderful. 
 
Don't you?    Horribly crotchety and self-preoccupied and all that, but this Constantine book is   
good.    My father is a warm, clever, good-hearted man, but he's the president of his temple and   
he manufactures sweaters.    Aaron's a famous author, and he's my uncle.    I suppose I bask in his   
glory. 
 
What's wrong with that?    And I certainly enjoy typing the new pages, just watching the way his   
mind works.    It's an excellent mind, and his style is admirable."      She    gave him another   
quizzical look. 
 
"Now why you're doing this, I'm far less sure." 
 
"Me?"    Byron said.    "I'm broke." 
 
Early in March Jastrow accepted an offer from an American magazine for an article about the   
upcoming Palio races.    It meant he would have to put off his trip to Greece, for the race was   
run in July and again in August; but the fee was too absurdly fat, he said, to decline.    If Natalie   
would watch the races and do the research, he told her, he would give her half the money.   
Natalie jumped at this, not perceiving-so Byron thought-that her uncle was trying to stop, or at   
least delay, her trip to Warsaw.    Jastrow had once flatly said that Natalie's pursuit of Slote was   
unladylike conduct and bad tactics. 
 
Byron had gathered that Slote did not want to marry Natalie, and he could see why. For a   
Foreign Service man, a Jewish wife at this time would be disastrous; though Byron thought   
that in Slote's place he would cheerfully give up the Foreign Service for her. 
 
Natalie wrote to Slote that same day, postponing her visit until after the August Palio.   
Watching her bang out the letter, Byron tried to keep joy off his face.    She might go, he was   
thinking, and then again she might not!    Maybe a war would come along meantime and stop   
 27 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
her.    Byron hoped that Hitler, if he was going to invade Poland, would do it soon. 
 
When she finished, he went to the same typewriter and rattled off the famous letter to his   
parents. He intended to write one sheet, and wrote seven. It was his first letter to them in   
months.    He had no idea that he was picturing himself as an infatuated young man.    He was, he   
thought, just describing his job, his employer, and the charming girl he worked with.    And so   
Pug Henry got needlessly worked up, and wrote the solemn reply, which startled and amused   
Byron when it came; for he was no more thinking of marrying Natalie Jastrow than of turning   
Mohammedan. 
 
He was just head over ears in love, with a young woman as near as his hand and as remote as a   
star; and for the moment it was enough to be where she was.    He wrote again to set his father   
straight, but this letter arrived in Washington after the Henrys had left for Germany. 
 
N all her years as a Navy wife, Rhoda had never become reconciled to packing and moving.   
She could do it well enough, compiling long lists, remembering tiny details, waking in the   
middle of the night to scrawl notes, but she became a termagant.    The angry voice rang in the   
house from dawn to midnight.    Pug spent the days in the office of Naval Intelligence, boning   
up on Germany, and ate most of his meals at the Army and Navy Club. Still, on the short   
notice given her, Rhoda accomplished everything: stored the furniture, closed the house and   
put it up for rent, paid the bills, packed her clothes and Pug's heavy double wardrobe of civilian   
dress and uniforms, and moved Madeline to the home of her sister. 
 
The gold letters B R B M E N stretched across the curved black stern of the steamship, high   
over the cobbled waterfront street.    Above the letters, an immense red flag rippled in the cool   
fishy breeze off the Hudson, showing at its center a big black swastika circled in white. 
 
"Glory be, it all really exists," Madeline said to Warren as she got out of the taxicab. 
 
"What really exists?"    Warren said. 
 
"Oh, this whole Hitler business.    The Nazis, the Sieg Hells, the bookburnings-when you read   
about it in the papers, it all seems too ridiculous and crazy to be real.    But there's the swastika." 
 
Victor Henry glanced up at the Nazi flag, wrinkling his whole face. 
 
Rhoda was briskly giving the porter orders about the luggage.    "I had to get special permission   
to ride this bucket. Let's hope the German language practice proves to be worth it. Come   
aboard With us and have a look at the ship." 
 
In a first-class stateroom panelled in gloomy carved wood, they sat making melancholy small   
talk amid piled suitcases and trunks, until Rhoda restlessly jumped up and took Warren with   
her for a walk around the Bremen- Madeline chose the moment to jolt her father with the news   
that she wanted to drop out of college.    The prospect of living with her dull aunt and duller   
uncle and twin cousins for two years was unbearable, she said. 
 
"But what can you do? Two years of college, and you keep failing courses," Victor Henry   
 28 
 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
said.    "You can't just lie around and read Vogue till you get married."    "I'd find a job, Dad.    I   
can work. I'm just bored at school. I hate studying. I always have. I'm not like you, or   
Warren.    I'm more like Byron, I guess.    I can't help it."    "I never liked studying," Commander   
Henry returned.    "Nobody does. 
 
You do what you must, and get it done." 
 
Perched on the edge of a deep armchair, the girl said with her most winning smile, "Please!   
Let me take just one year off.    I'll prove I can do it.    There are lots of jobs for girls at the radio   
networks in New York.    If I don't make good, I promise I'll trot back to college, and-" 
 
"What!    New York?    Nineteen, and alone in New York? 
 
Are you nuts?" 
 
"Let me just try it this summer." 
 
"No. You'll go with Aunt Augusta to Newport, the way it's been planned. You've always   
enjoyed Newport." 
 
"For a week, yes.    A whole summer will be a perishing bore." 
 
"That's where you'll go. In the fall I'll expect regular letters from you, reporting unproved   
performance in college." 
 
Madeline, slumping back in the armchair, bit noisily into an apple from a heaping bon voyage   
basket of fresh fruit, sent by Kip Tollever. 
 
Staring straight ahead, except for brief mutinous glares at her father, she gnawed at the apple   
until her mother and brother returned. 
 
Pug did his best to ignore the glares, reading a book on German steel-making.    He did not like   
parting from his daughter on such terms, but her proposal seemed to him unthinkable. 
 
The Breimn sailed at noon.    As Warren and Madeline left the pier, a band thumped out a merry   
German    waltz.    They took a    taxi    uptown, saying    little    to each    other. Henry had    set the   
uncommunicative pattern of the family; the children, after romping and chattering through their   
early years, had from adolescence onward lived separate, largely undiscussed lives. Warren   
dropped Madeline at Radio City, not inquiring what she intended to do there.    They agreed to   
meet for dinner, go to a show, and take a midnight train to Washington. 
 
Madeline poked here and there in the huge lobby of the RCA bldlding, gawking at the Sert   
murals and ceiling paintings.    She found herself at the bank of elevators for NBC entertainers   
and employees. 
 
Many of these people, she noticed, showed no pass to the uniformed page, but smiled, waved,   
or just walked busily past the roped entrance. 
 
She sailed past too, trying to look twenty-five and employed. 
 29 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Squinting at her, the page held out an arresting hand.    She dived into a crowded elevator. 
 
For an hour she wandered the inner halls of the broadcasting company, relishing the thick   
maroon carpets, the immense round black pillars, the passing trucks of spotlights and broadcast   
equipment, the Hashing red lights outside of studios, the pretty girls and handsome young men   
hurrying in and out of doors.    She came on the employment office and hung outside, peering   
through the open double doors like a child at a candy counter.    Then she left, and spent the day   
shopping in department stores. 
 
As for Warren, the taxi took him a few blocks further uptown.    In Rumpelmayer's, he met a   
good-looking woman of thirty or so with large sad eyes, a cloud of ash-blonde hair, and a   
clever soulful way of talking about novels, paintings, and music, subjects which did not greatly   
interest him.    His majors had been history and the sciences. 
 
After an early lunch, he spent the day with her in a hotel bedroom. 
 
That did interest him. 
 
When he dined with his sister that evening, Madeline helped herself to a cigarette from his   
pack on the table, and lit and smoked it inexpertly. Her defiant, self-satisfied, somewhat   
pathetic air made Warren laugh. "When the cat's away, hey?"    he said. 
 
"Oh, I've,been smoking for years," Madeline said. 
 
The three blasts of the ship's horn, the pier girders moving outside the porthole, the band far   
below crashing out "The Star-Spangled Banner," touched a spring in Rhoda.    She turned to her   
husband with a smile such as he had not seen on her face for weeks, threw her arms around   
him, and gave him an aroused kiss, opening her soft familiar lips. 
 
"Well!    We made it, Pug, didn't we?    Off to Deutschland.    Second honeymoon and all THAT!   
MMM!" 
 
This    mild interlude of sex in his hitherto preoccupied and cross wife was like a birthday   
present to the monogamous Pug.    It augured well for the crossing, and possibly for the entire   
sojourn in Berlin. 
 
He pulled her close. 
 
"Well!"    Rhoda broke free, with a husky laugh and shiny eyes. 
 
"Not so fast, young fellow.    I want a drink, that's what I want, and I don't care if the sun isn't   
over the yardarm.    And I know just what I want.    Champagne cocktail, or two, or three." 
 
"Sure.    Let's have it right here.    I'll order a bottle." 
 
"Nothing doing, Pug.    This will be a nice long crossing.    We're getting out of here and going to   
the bar." The ship was clearing the dock and hooting tugs were turning it deck started to   
vibrate underfoot.    A crowd of tired-looking south, as the jocund voyagers already fiLlIed the   
bar, making a great noise. 
 30 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"i thought there was a war scare," Rhoda said.    "Nobody here seems to be worried.".    Rhoda   
said, holding up her chamThey found two stools at the bar pagne cocktail, "Well, to whom?" 
 
"The kids," Pug said.    All right, to the kids."    As she "Ah, yes. 
 
Our abandoned nestlings. ut the fine acpolished off the champagne, Rhoda talked excitedly   
abo commodation of the Bremen. She felt very adventurous, she said, sailing on a German   
ship these clays. 
 
"Pug, I wonder if there are any Nazis right here in this bar?" 
 
she prattled. 
 
shifted his glance to The fat red-faced man sitting next to Rhoda her. 
 
He wore a feathered green hat and he was drinking from a stein. 
 
"Let's take a walk on deck," Pug said.    "See the Statue of Liberty." "No, sir.    I want another   
drink.    I've seen the Statue of Liberty." Pug made a slight peremptory move of a thumb, and   
Rhoda got off the stool. When anything touched his Navy work, Pug could treat her like a   
deckhand. He held open a door for her, and in a whipping wind they walked to the stern,   
where gulls swooped and screeched, and passengers clustered at the rails, watching the   
Manhattan buildings drift 
 
past in brown haze. 
 
Pug said quietly, leaning on a patch of clear rail, "Look, unless we're assume anything we say   
on this ship will in the open air like this, you can be recorded, one way or another.    At the bar,   
at the table, or even in our stateroom.    Have you thought of that?" 
 
"Well, sort of, but-in our stateroom tool Really?" 
 
Pug nodded. 
 
Rhoda looked thoughtful, then burst out laughing.    "You you don't mean day and night?    Pug?   
Always?" 
 
"That's what this job is.    If they didn't do it, they'd be sloppy. 
 
The Germans aren't a sloppy people." 
 
Her mouth curled in female amusement.    "Well, then, mister, keep your DISTANCE on this   
boat, that's all I can say. 
 
"lell be no different in Berlin." 
 
'Won't we have our own house?" 
 
He shrugged.    "Kip says you get used to it and don't think about it. I mean the loss of privacy.   
You're just a fish in a glass bowl and that's that. 
 31 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
You can never stop thinking about what you say or do, however." 
 
"Honestly!"    A peculiar look, half-vexed, half-titillated, was on her face.    "I can't imagine why   
I didn't think of that.    Well!    They say love will find a way, but-oh hell.    It really couldn't be   
this important, could it?    Can I have my other drink?" 
 
An engraved card, slid under their cabin door shortly before dinner, invited them to the   
captain's table.    They debated whether Pug should wear a uniform, and decided against it.    The   
guess turned out to be correct. 
 
A German submarine officer at the table, a man as short and as taciturn as Victor Henry, wore   
a brown business suit.    The captain, a paunchy stiff man in gold-buttoned blue, heavily joshed   
the ladies in slow English or clear German, blue eyes twinkling in his weathered fat face. Now   
and then he flicked a finger, and a steward in full dress jumped to his side. 
 
The captain would crackle a few words, and off the steward would bustle with a terrified face,   
gesturing at the waiters, long tailcoat flapping. The food was abundant and exquisite, the bowl   
of white and purple orchids spectacular.    The parade of wines worried Pug, for when Rhoda   
was excited she could drink too much.    But she ate heartily, drank normally, and delighted the   
captain by bantering with him in fluent German. 
 
The submarine man's wife sat on Henry's left, a blonde in green low-cut chiffon that lavishly   
showed big creamy breasts.    Pug surprised her into warm laughter by asking if she had ever   
worked in films.    At his right sat a small English girl in gray tweed, the daughter of Alistair   
Tudsbury. 
 
Tudsbury was the only real celebrity at the table, a British broadcaster and correspondndent,   
about six feet, with a big belly, a huge brown mustache, bulging eyes, a heavy veined nose,   
thick glasses, bearish eyebrows, booming voice, and an enormous appetite.    He had arrived at   
the table laughing, and laughed at whatever was said to him, and at almost everything he said   
himself. He was a very ugly man, and his clothes did little to mitigate the ugliness: a rust- 
brown fuzzy suit, a tattersall shirt and a copious green bow tie.    He smoked cigarettes, tiny in   
his sausage-fat fingers; one expected a pipe or a long black cigar, but the cigarette was always   
smoldering in his hand, except when he was plying a knife and fork. 
 
For all the forced badinage, it was an awkward -meal.    Nobody menhoned politics, war, or the   
Nazis.    Even books and plays were risky. 
 
In long silences, the slow-rolling ship squeaked and groaned. 
 
Victor Henry and the submariner exchanged several appraising glances, but no words. 
 
Pug tried once or twice to amuse Tudsbury's daughter at his right, eliciting only a shy smile.   
Over the dessert, turning away from the blondewho kept telling him how good his stumbling   
German was-he made one more effort.    "I suppose you're on vacation from school?" 
 
"Well, sort of permanently.    I'm twenty-eight."    "You are?    Hell! 
 32 
 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sorry.    I thought you were about in my daughter's class.    She's nineteen."    The Tudsbury girl   
said nothing, so he kept talking. 
 
"I hope you took my stupidity as a compliment.    Don't women like to be thought younger than   
they are?" 
 
"Oh, many people make that mistake, Commander.    It comes of my travelling with my father.   
His eyes aren't very good.    I help him with his work." 
 
"That must be interesting." 
 
"Depending on the subject matter. Nowadays it's a sort of a broken record. Will the little   
tramp go, or won't he?"    She took a sip of wine.    Commander Henry was brought up short. 
 
The "little tramv' was Charlie Chaplin, of course, and by ready transfer, Hitler.    She was saying   
that Tudsbury's one topic was whether Hitler would start a war.    By not dropping her voice, by   
using a phrase which a German ear would be unlikely to catch, by keeping her face placid, she   
had managed not only to touch the forbidden subject, but to express a world of contempt, at the   
captain's table on the Bremn, for the dictator of Germany. 
 
Half a dozen early-morning walkers were swinging along, looking preoccupied and virtuous,   
when Pug Henry came out on the cool sunlit deck, after a happy night of second   
honeymooning. He had calculated that five turns would make a mile, and he meant to do   
fifteen or twenty turns.    Rounding the bow to the port side he saw, far down the long deck, the   
Tudsbury girl coming toward him, pumping her arms and rolling her hips.    She wore the same   
gray suit.    "Good morning."    They passed each other with nods and smiles, then on the other   
side of the ship repeated this ritual.    At the third encounter he said, reversing his direction, "Let   
me join you." 
 
"Oh, thank you, yes.    I feel stupid, preparing to smile forty feet away." 
 
"Doesn't your father like to walk before breakfast?" "He hates all forms of exercise. He's   
strong as a bull and nothing he does makes much difference.    Anyway, right now poor Talky   
has a touch of gout. 
 
It's his curse." 'Talky?" Pamela Tudsbury laughed. "His middle name is Talcott. Since   
schoolboy days, he's been 'Talky' to his friends. 
 
Guess why!"    She was moving quite fast.    In flat shoes she was very short.    She glanced up at   
him.    "Commander, where's your wife? 
 
Also not a walker?" 
 
"Late sleeper.    Not that she'll walk to the corner drugstore if she can drive or hail a cab.    Well,   
what does your father really think? 
 
Will the little tramp go?" 
 
She laughed, a keen look brightening her eyes, evidently pleased that he remembered.    "He's   
 33 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
come out boldly to the effect that time will tell." 
 
"What do you think?" 
 
"Me?    I just type what he thinks.    On a special portable with oversize print."    She gestured at   
three deep-breathing German matrons in tailored suits marching by.    "I know that I feel queer   
sailing on a ship of theirs." 
 
"Didn't your father just publish a book?    I seem to remember reviews. 
 
"Yes.    just a paste-up of his broadcasts, really."    "I'd like to read it.    Writers awe me.    I have a   
tough time putting one word down after another." 
 
"I saw a copy in the ship's library. He sent me there to check," she said, with a grin that   
reminded him of Madeline, catching him in selfimportance or pretense. He wished Warren   
could meet this girl or one like her.    Last night he had not paid her much mind, with the busty,   
halfnaked, talkative blonde there.    But now, especially with the fresh coloring of the morning   
sea air, he thought she had an English lady's face, a heartshaped face from a Gainsborough or a   
Romney: thin lips, expressive greengray eyes set wide apart, fine straight nose, heavy brown   
hair.    The skin of her hands and face was pearl-smooth. 
 
just the girl for Warren, pretty and keen. 
 
"You're going around again?    I get off here," she said, stopping at a double door.    "If you do   
read his book, Commander Henry, carry it under your arm.    He'll fall in love with you.    It'll   
make his trip." 
 
"How can he care?    Why, he's famous." 
 
"He cares.    God, how they care."    With a clumsy little wave, she went inside. 
 
After breakfasting alone, Pug went to the library.    Nobody was there but a boyish steward.    The   
shelves held many German volumes on the World War. Pug glanced at one tided U-boats:   
l9z4-z8, and    settled into a leather armchair to scan    the discussion of    American destroyer   
tactics' Soon he heard the scratch of a pen. At a small desk almost within his reach, the   
German submarine man sat with his bristly head bent, writing. Pug had not seen him come in. 
 
Grohke smiled, and pointed his pen at the U-boat book.    "Recalling old times?" 
 
"Well, I was in destroyers." 
 
"And I was down below. Maybe this is not the first time our paths cross." Grohke spoke   
English with a slight, not unpleasant Teutonic accent. 
 
"Possibly not." 
 
When Pug put the U-boat volume on the shelf and took down the Tudsbury book, Grohke   
remarked, "Perhaps we could have a drink before dinner and compare notes on the Atlantic in   
1918?"    'I'd enjoy that." 
 34 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pug intended to read Tudsbury in a deck chair for a while and then go below to work.    He had   
brought weighty books on German industry, politics, and history, and meant to grind through   
the lot on the way to his post.    Intelligence manuals and handbooks were all right, but he was a   
digger. He liked to search out the extra detail in the extra-discouraginglooking fat volume.   
Surprising things were recorded, but patient alert eyes were in perpetual short supply. 
 
The bow wave was boiling away, a V of white foam on the blue sunlit sea, and the Bremen was   
rolling like a battleship. Wind from the northwest, Pug estimated, glancing up at the thin   
smoke from the stacks, and at the sea; wind speed fifteen knots, ship's speed eighteen, number   
four sea on the port quarter, rain and high winds far ahead under the cumulonimbus. Nostalgia   
swept over him.    Four years since he had served at sea; eleven since he had had a command!   
He    stood    by the forward rail, leaning against a    lifeboat    davit,    sniffing the    sea    air.      Four   
unmistakable Jews walked by in jolly conversation, two middle-aged couples in fine sports   
clothes.    They went out of sight around the deckhouse.    He was still looking after them when   
he heard Tudsbury blare, "Hello there, Commander. 
 
I hear you were out walking my Pam at the crack of dawn."    "Hello. 
 
Did you see those people who just went by?"    "Yes.    There's no understanding Jews.    I say, is   
that my book?    How touching.    How far have you got?" 
 
"I just drew it from the library." 
 
Tudsbury's mustache drooped sadly.    "What!    You didn't buy it? 
 
Damn all libraries.    Now you'll read it and I won't gain a penny by it." He bellowed a laugh and   
rested one green-stockinged leg on the rail.    He was wearing a baggy pepper-and-salt golfing   
outfit and a green tam o'shanter.    'It's a bad book, really a fake, but it's selling in your country,   
luckily for me.    If you didn't happen to hear my drivelling on the air in the past year or two,   
there are a couple of interesting paragraphs.    Footnotes to history.    My thing on Hitler's entry   
into Vienna is actually not too awful.    Quite a time we're living in, Commander." 
 
He talked about the German take-over of Austria, sounding much as he did on the air: positive,   
informed, full of scorn for democratic politicians, and cheerfully ominous.    Tudsbury's special   
note was that the world would very likely go up in flames, but that it might prove a good show.   
"Can you picture the bizarre and horrible triumph that we let him get away with, dear fellow?    I   
saw it all.    Something straight out of Plutarch, that was!    A zero of a man, with no schooling, of   
no known family -at twenty a dropped-out student, a drifter and a failure-five years a dirty,   
seedy tramp in a Vienna doss housed you know that, Henry? 
 
Do you know that for five years this Fuhrer was what you call a Bowery bum, sharing a vile   
room with other assorted flotsam, eating in soup kitchens, and not because there was a   
depression-Vienna was fat and prosperous then-but because he was a dreamy, lazy,   
incompetent misfit? 
 
That house painter story is hogwash.    He sold a few hand-painted postcards, but to the age of   
twenty-six he was a sidewalk-wandering vagrant, and then for four years    a soldier in the   
 35 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
German army, a lance corporal, a messenger-runner, a low job for a man of even rrainimum   
intelligence, and at thirty he was lying broke, discharged, and gassed in an army hospital.    That   
is the background of the Fuhrer. 
 
"And then-" The ship's horn blasted, drowning out Tudsbury's voice, which was beginning to   
roll in his broadcasting style.    He winced, laughed, and'went on: 'And then, what happened?   
Why, then this same ugly, sickly, uncouth, prejudiced, benighted, half-mad little wretch leaped   
out of his hospital bed, and went careering in ten years straight to the top of a German nation   
thirsting for a return match. 
 
The man was a foreigner, Henry! He was an Austrian. They had to fake up a citizenship   
proceeding for him, so he could run against Hindenburg! And I myself watched this man ride   
in triumph through the streets of Vienna, where he had sold postcards and gone hungry, the   
sole their to the combined thrones of the Hapsburgs and the Hohenzellerns." Victor Henry   
smiled, and Tudsbury's impassioned popeyed stare gave way to a loud guffaw.    "A-bawr, haws   
hawr!    I suppose it is rather funny when you think about it.    But this grotesque fantasy happens   
to be the central truth of our age." 
 
Henry was smiling because much of this tirade was in Tudsbury's book, almost word for word.   
"Well, it's the old story of the stitch in time," he said.    "Your politicos could have got the weird   
little bastard with no trouble early on, but they didn't.    Now they have problems. Incidentally,   
where are you headed?    Berlin, too?" 
 
Tudsbury nodded. "Our Berlin man's prostate chose an awkward time to act up. A-bawr- 
hawr!    Dr.    Goebbels said I could come along and fill in.    Amazement!    I've been persona non   
grata in the Third Reich since Munich.    No doubt I'll be kicked out on my big arse in a few   
weeks. For some reason the Jerries are being kind to Englishmen this month. Probably so we'fl   
hold still wire they roll over the Poles. 
 
And we will, we will. 
 
The Tories are all polite gray worms.    Aristocratic funks, Iloyd George called them.    Except for   
Churchill, who's quite out of it." 
 
The American commander and the U-boat man took to meeting in the bar each evening before   
dinner.    Henry figured that it was his job to pump Grohke, as it might well be the German's to   
work on him.    Grohke was a thorough professional, an engineering expert, and a real seafarer. 
 
He talked freely about the machinery in the present U-boats, and even confessed to problems   
with torpedoes,    a    topic    Henry was well    versed in,    though    he    discussed    it cautiously.    In   
Grohke's harassed disdain for politicians, he seemed like any American naval man.    A satiric   
look came on his face when he spoke of the Nazis, and he said things that caused his wife,   
when she was with them, to give him warning glances. 
 
Alistair Tudsbury said to Pug one evening, as they sat on a couch in the main saloon watching   
the dancing, "You've been fraternizing with Jerry." 'In the line of business.    I doubt Grohke's a   
Nazi." 
 36 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Oh, those U-boat fellows are all right, as much as any Germans are." "You don't like the   
Germans."    "Well.    Let's talk about that after you've been there a month.    Assuming I haven't   
been booted out." 
 
'Of course I don't blame you.    They gave your people hell."    "No worse than we gave them.   
We won, you know."    After a pause he said, "My eyes were spoiled at Amiens, when we broke   
through with the tanks. 
 
I commanded a tank battalion, and was gassed.    It was worth it, all in all, to see Jerry on the   
run.    It was a long time coming."    The captain of the Bremen, at the moment, was dancing with   
Rhoda. 
 
He had long capering legs, strange in a stout man.    Rhoda was radiating enjoyment.    Pug was   
glad of this.    Night after night she had been dancing with a very tall young officer, a blond- 
eagle type, all clicking bows and glittering blue eyes, who held her a bit too close. 
 
Pug had said something about it, and Rhoda had countered with a brief snarl about his   
spending the trip with his nose in books, and he had let it drop.    She was being so complaisant,   
on the whole, that he only wanted to keep things so. 
 
The captain brought her back.    Pamela Tudsbury returned from a listless effort to follow the   
Hailing prances of an American college boy. 
 
She said, "I shall get myself a cane and a white wig.    They look so shattered if I refuse, but I   
really can hardly dance, and as for the Lindy Hop-" The music struck up again, and Rhoda's tag   
young officer approached in spotless white and gold.    An irritated look crossed Pug's face.    The   
captain saw it, and under the loud music, as the officer drew near, he muttered half a dozen   
words.    The young man stopped, faded back, and darted out of the saloon.    Pug never saw him   
again. 
 
Rhoda, smiling and about to rise, was baffled by the young German's peculiar exit. 
 
'Dance, Rhoda?"    Pug got to his feet "What?"    she said crossly. 
 
'No, thanks." 
 
Pug extended a hand to the Tudsbury girl.    'Pamela?"    She hesitated. 'You don't do the Lindy   
Hop?"    Pug burst out laughing. 
 
"Well, one never knows with Americans."    She danced in a heavy, inexperienced way.    Pug   
liked her gentle manner, her helpless smile when she trod on his foot.    "You can't be enjoying   
this," she said. 
 
'I am.    Do you think you'll be going back to the United States?" 
 
'If Father gets thrown out of Germany, which seems inevitable, I suppose we. Why?" 
 
"I have a son about your age with quite a fine record, and unlike me, tall and very handsome."   
Pamela made a face.    "A Navy man?    Never. 
 37 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
A girl in every port." 
 
At the captain's table, on the last night, there were white orchids at every lades place; and   
under these, white gold compacts. 
 
Champagne went round, and the topic of international politics finally surfaced. Everybody   
agreed that in this day and age war was a silly, wasteful way of settling differences, especially   
among advanced nations like England, France, and Germany.    'We're all of the same stock, all   
north Europeans," Tudsbury said.    it's a sad thing when brothers fall out."    The captain nodded   
happily.    'Exactly what I say. 
 
If we could only stick together, there would never be another war. 
 
The Bolsheviks would never move against so much power.    And who else wants war?"    All   
through the saloon people were wearing paper hats and tossing streamers, and Pug observed   
that the four Jews, whose table was not far away, were having as gay a time as everybody else,   
under the polite ministrations of smiling German waiters.      The captain followed Henry's   
glance, and a genial superior grin relaxed his stern fat face. 
 
"You see, Commander? 
 
They are as welcome aboard the Bremen as anybody else, and get the same service. The   
exaggerations on that subject are fantastic."    He turned to Tudsbury.    'Between us, aren't you   
journalists a wee bit responsible for making matters worse?" 
 
"Well, Captain," Tudsbury said, "journalism always looks for a theme, you know.    One of the   
novel things about your government, to people " outside Germany, is its policy toward the   
Jews.    And so it keeps turning up. 
 
"Tudsbury is not entirely wrong, Captain," Grohke broke in, draining his wineglass.   
"Outsiders think of nothing but the Jews nowadays when Germany is mentioned.    That policy   
has been mishandled. 
 
I've said so many times.    That and plenty of other things."    He turned to Henry"Still, they're so   
unimportant, Victor, compared to what the Fuhrer has achieved: Germany has come back to   
life. That's God's truth. The people have work, they have food and houses, and they have   
spirit. What Hitler has done for our youth alone is just incredible." 
 
(The captain's eyes lit up and he emphatically nodded, exclaiming, "ja, ia!") "Under Weimar   
they were rioting, they were becoming communists, they were going in for sex perversions and   
drugs, it was just horrible. 
 
Now they're working, or training, or serving, all of them. 
 
They're happy!    My crews are happy.    You can't imagine what navy morale was like under the   
Republic-I tell you what."    He struck the table. 
 
"You come visit our squadron, at the sub base in Swinemonde.    You do that! 
 38 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
you're a man that can look at a navy yard or a ship's crew and see what's going on!    It'll open   
your eyes.    Will you?" 
 
Henry took a moment to reply, with everybody at the table turning expectantly to him. An   
invitation like this, if accepted, made mandatory a similar offer to the German naval attache in   
Washington. 
 
Did the navy want to trade glimpses of submarine bases with the Nazi regime?    The decision   
was beyond Pug's power.    He had to report the invitation to Washington and act on the dictated   
answer. 
 
He said, "I'd like that.    Perhaps we can work it out." 
 
"Say yes.    Forget the formalities!"    Grohke waved both arms in the air. 
 
"It's a personal invitation from me to you, from one seaman to another. 
 
The U-boat command gets damn small budgets, and we're pretty iiidependent chaps.    You can   
visit us with no strings.    I'll see to that." 
 
"His invitation wouldn't include me, would it?"    Tudsbury said. 
 
Grohke hesitated, then laughed.    "Why not?    Come along, Tudsbury. 
 
The more the British know about what we've got, the less likely anybody is to make a hasty   
mistake." 
 
"Well, here may be an important little step for peace," said the captain, "transacted at my table!   
I feel honored, and we will have more champagne on it at once." 
 
And so the diners at the captain's table on the Bremen all drank to peace a few minutes before   
midnight, as the great liner slowed, approaching the shore lights of Nazi Germany. 
 
In bright sunshine, the Bremen moved like a train between low green banks of a wide river.   
Pug was at the rail of the sun deck, taking his old pleasure in the sight of land after a voyage.   
Rhoda was below in her usual fit of the snarls and the snaps.    when they travelled together,   
Rhoda in deep martyrdom did the packing.    Pug was an old hand at packing for himself, but   
Rhoda claimed she could never find anything he put away. 
 
"Oh, yes,    the country is    charming    to look at," said Tudsbury,    who had sauntered up and   
commenced a discourse on the scenery.    "You'll see many a pretty north German town between   
Bremerhaven and Berlin. The heavy half-timbered kind of thing, that looks so much like   
English Tudor. 
 
"The fact is Germany and England have strong resemblances and links. 
 
You know of course that the Kaiser was Queen Victoria's grandson, that our royal family for a   
long time    spoke only German?    And yet    on the whole the Jerries    are stranger to us than   
Eskimos."    He boomed a laugh and went on, sweeping a fat hand toward the shore: 'Yes, here   
 39 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
the Germans sit at the hart of Europe, Henry, these people being first cousins of ours,   
simmering and grumbling away, and every now and then they spill over in all directions, with a   
hideous roar.    Out they pour from these lovely little towns, these fairy-tale landscapes, these   
clean handsome cities-wait till you see Cologne, Nuremberg, Munich, even Berlin and   
Hamburgut they bubble, I say, these polite blue-eyed music lovers, ravening for blood. 
 
It gets a bit unnerving.    And now here's Hitler, bringing them to a boil again.    You Americans   
may have to lend more of a hand than you did last time.    We're fairly worn out with them, you   
know, we and the French." 
 
it had not escaped Henry that Tudsbury's talk, one way or another, usually came back to the   
theme of the United States fighting Germany. 
 
"That might not be in the cards, Tudsbury. We've got the Japanese on our hands. They're   
carving up China, and they've got a first-class fighting navy, growing every month. If they   
make the Pacific a Japanese lake and proceed to do what they want on the Asian mainland, the   
world will be theirs in fifty years." 
 
Tudsbury said, sticking his tongue out of a corner of his smiling mouth, "The Yellow Peril."   
"It's a question of facts and numbers," Henry said. "How many people are there in all of   
Europe?    Couple of hundred million? japan is now well on the way to ruling one billion people.   
They're as industrious as the Germans or more so. They came out of paper houses and silk   
kimonos in a couple of generations to defeat Russia. They're amazing. Compared to what   
faces us in Asia, this Hitler business strikes us as just more of the same old runty cat-and-dog   
fight in the back yard." 
 
Tudsbury peered at him, with a reluctant nod.    "Possibly you underestimate the Germans." 
 
"Maybe you overestimate them. Why the devil didn't you and the French go in when they   
occupied the Rhineland?    They broke a treaty. 
 
You could have walked in there at that point and hung Hitler, with not much more trouble than   
raiding a girls' dormitory." 
 
"Ah, the wisdom of hindsight," Tudsbury said.    "Don't ask me to defend our politicians.    It's   
been a radical breakdown, a total failure of sen and nerve.    I was talking and writing in 1936   
the way you are now.    At Munich I was close to suicide.    I covered the whole thing. 
 
Czechoslovakia! 
 
A huge chain of strong fortifications, jutting deep into Germany's gut. 
 
Fifty crack divisions, spoiling for a scrap. The second biggest arms factory in the world.   
Russia and even France ready at last to stand up and fight. 
 
All this, six short months ago! And an Englishman, an Englishman, goes crawling across   
Europe to Hitler and hands him Czechoslovakia!" 
 40 
 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tudsbury laughed mechanically and puffed at a cigarette made ragged by the breeze.    'I don't   
know.    Maybe democracy isn't for the industrial age.    If it's to survive, I think the Americans   
will have to put up the show." 
 
'Why?    why do you keep saying that?    On paper you and the French still have the Germans   
badly licked.    Don't you realize that? 
 
Manpower, firepower, steel, oil, coal, industrial plant, any way you add it up.    They've got a   
small temporary lead in the air, but they've also got the Soviet Union at their backs.    It's not the   
walkover it was last year and two years ago, but you still figure to win." 
 
"Alas, they've got the leadership." 
 
A strong hand clapped Henry's shoulder, and a voice tinged with irony said, 'Hell Hitler' Ernst   
Grohke stood there in a worn, creased navy uniform; with it he had put on a severe face and an   
erect posture. 
 
"Well, gentlemen, here we are.    Victor, in case I don't see you again in the confusion, where do   
I get in touch with you?    The embassy?" 
 
'Sure.    Office of the Naval Attache." 
 
"Ah!"    said Tudsbury.    "Our little trip to Swinemilnde!    So glad you haven't forgotten."    'I'll do   
my best to include you," said Grohke coldly.    He shook hands with both of them, bowing and   
clicking his heels, and he left. 
 
"Come and say good-bye to Pamela," Tudsbury said.    "She's below, packing." 
 
"I'll do that."    Pug walked down the deck with the correspondent, who limped on a cane.    "I   
have notions of matching her up with a son of mine." 
 
"Oh, have you?"    Tudsbury gave him a waggish glance through his thick spectacles.    "I warn   
you, she's a handful." 
 
"What?    Why, I've never met a gentler or pleasanter girl." 
 
"Still waters," said Tudsbury.    "I warn you." 
 
The Henrys had only just arrived in Berlin when they were invited Tto meet Hitler- It was a   
rare piece of luck, the embassy people told them. Chancellery receptions big enough to include   
military attaches were none too common.    The Fuhrer was staying away from Berlin in order to   
damp down the war talk, but a visit of the Bulgarian prime minister had brought him back to   
the capital. 
 
WMIe Commander Henry studied the protocol of Nazi receptions in moments snatched from   
his piled-up office work, Rhoda flew into a twoday frenzy over her clothing, and over her hair,   
which she asserted had been ruined forever by the imbecile hairdresser of the Adlon Hotel (pug   
thought the hair looked more or less the same as always).    She had brought no dresses in the   
least suitable for a formal afternoon reception in the spring. Why hadn't somebody warned   
 41 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
her?    Three hours before the event Rhoda was still whirling in an embassy car from one Berlin   
dress shop to another.    She burst into their hotel room clad in a pink silk suit with gold buttons   
and a gold net blouse.    "How's this?"    she barked.    "Sally Forrest says Hitler likes pink." 
 
"Perfect!"    Her husband thought the suit was terrible, and decidedly big on Rhoda, but it was   
no time for truth-telling.    "Gad, where did you ever find it?" 
 
Outside the hotel, long vertical red banners of almost transparent cheesecloth, with the black   
swastika in a white circle at their center, were swaying all along the breezy street, alternated   
with gaudy Bulgarian flags. 
 
The way to the chancellery was lined with more flags, a river of fluttering red, interspersed   
with dozens of Nazi standards in the style of Roman legion emblems-long poles topped by   
stylized gilt eagles perching on wreathed swastikas-and underneath, in place of the Roman   
SPQR, the letterS NSDAP. 
 
"What    on earth does NSDAP    stand for?" Rhoda said, peering    out of the window of the   
embassy car at the multitudinous gilded poles. 
 
'National Socialist German Workers Party," said Pug. 
 
"Is that the name of the Nazis?    How funny.    Sounds sort of Commie when you spell it all out." 
 
Pug said, "Sure.    Hitler got in on a red-hot radical program." 
 
"Did he?    I never knew that.    I thought he was against all that stuff. 
 
Well, it couldn't be more confusing, I mean European politics, but I do think all this is terribly   
exciting.    Makes Washington seem dull and tame, doesn't it?"    When Victor Henry first came   
into Hitler's new chancellery, he was incongruously reminded of Radio City Music Hall in   
New York.    The opulent stretch of carpet, the long line of waiting people, the high ceiling, the   
great expanses of shiny marble, the inordinate length and height of the huge space, the gaudily   
uniformed men ushering the guests along, all added up to much the same theatrical, vulgar,   
strained effort to be grand; but this was the seat of a major government, not a movie house. 
 
It seemed peculiar. An officer in blue took his name, and the slow-moving line carried the   
couple toward the Fuhrer, far down the hall.    The SS guards were alike as chorus boys with   
their black-and-silver uniforms, black boots, square shoulders, blond waved hair, white teeth,   
bronzed skin, and blue eyes. Some shepherded the guests with careful smiles, others stood   
along the walls, blank-faced and stiff. 
 
Hitler was no taller than Henry himself; a small man with a prison haircut, leaning forward and   
bowing as he shook hands, his head to one side, hair falling on his forehead.    This was Henry's   
flash impression, as he caught his first full-length look at the Fuhrer beside the burly   
muchmedalled Bulgarian, but in another moment it changed.    Hitler had a remarkable smile.   
His down-curved mouth    was    rigid    and tense, his eyes    sternly self-confident, but when he   
smiled this fanatic look vanished; the whole face brightened up, showing a strong hint of   
 42 
 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
humor, and a curious, almost boyish, shyness.      Sometimes he held a guest's hand and   
conversed. 
 
When he was particularly amused he laughed and made an odd sudden Move with his right   
knee: he lifted i-t and jerked it a little inward. 
 
His greeting to the two American couples ahead of the Henrys was casual. He did not smile,   
and his restless eyes wandered away from them and back again as he shook hands. 
 
A protocol officer in a sky-blue, gold-crusted Foreign Service uniform intoned in German:   
"The naval attache to the embassy of the United States of America, Commander Victor   
Henry!"    The hand of the Fuhrer was dry, rough, and it seemed a bit swollen. 
 
The clasp was firm as he scanned Henry's face.    Seen this close the deepsunk eyes were pale   
blue, puffy, and somewhat glassy. Hitler appeared fatigued; his pasty face had streaks of   
sunburn on his forehead, nose, and cheekbones, as though he had been persuaded to leave his   
desk in Berchtesgaden and come outside for a few hours.    To be looking into this famous face   
with its hanging hair, thrusting nose, zealot's remote eyes, and small mustache was the   
strangest sensation of Henry's life. 
 
Hitler said, "Willkomnwn in Deutschland," and dropped his hand. 
 
Surprised that    Hitler    should be aware of his recent arrival,    Pug stammered,    "Danke, Herr   
Reichskanzler." 
 
"Frau Henry!"    Rhoda, her eyes gleaming, shook hands with Adolf Hitler. He said, in German,   
"I hope you are comfortable in Berlin." 
 
His voice was low, almost folksy; another surprise to Henry, who had only heard him shouting   
hoarsely on the radio or in the newsreels. 
 
"Well, Herr Reichskanzler, to tell the truth I've just begun looking for a house," Rhoda said   
breathlessly, too overcome to make a polite reply and move on. 
 
'You will have no difficulty."    Hitler's eyes softened and warmed at her clear Ge rman speech.   
Evidently he found Rhoda pretty.    He kept her hand, faintly smiling. 
 
"But there are so many charming neighborhoods in Berlin that I'm bewildered.    That's the real   
problem." 
 
This pleased or amused Hitler. He laughed, kicked his knee inward, and turning to an aide   
behind him, said a few words.    The aide bowed. 
 
Hitler held out his hand to the next guest.    The Henrys moved on to the Bulgarian. 
 
The reception did not last long.    Colonel Forrest, the military attache, a fat Army Air officer   
from Idaho who had been in Germany for two years, introduced the Henrys to foreign attaches   
and Nazi leaders, including Goebbels and Ribbentrop, who looked just like their newsreel   
pictures,    but    oddly    diminished.    These    two,    with their perfunctory    fast handshakes,    made   
 43 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Henry feel like the small fry he was; Hitler had not done that.    Pug kept trying to watch Hitler.   
The Fuhrer wore black trousers, a gray double-breasted coat with an eagle emblem on one arm,   
and a small Iron Cross on his left breast.    By American styles the clothes were cut much too   
full.      This gave the leader of Germany the appearance of wearing secondhand, ill-fitting   
garments.    Hitler from moment to moment looked restless, tired, or bored, or else he flashed   
into winning charm.    He was seldom still. 
 
He shifted his feet, turned his head here and there, clasped his hands before him, folded them,   
gestured with them, spoke absently to most people and intensely to a few, and every so often   
did the little knee kick.    Once Pug saw him eating small iced cakes from a plate, shoving them   
toward visitor.    Shortly thereafter he left, and the gathering started to disperse.    his mouth with   
snatching greedy fingers while he talked to a bemedalled It was drizzling outside; the massed   
red flags were drooping, and from the helmets of the erect guards water ran unheeded down   
their faces.    The women clustered in the entrance while Pug, Colonel Forrest, and the charge   
daffaires went out to hail the embassy cars.    The charge, a tall moustached man with a pale   
clever    face    full of    wrinkles,    and    a weary    air,    ran the    embassy.    After the    Crystal 
Night,   
President Roosevelt had recalled the ambassador, and had not yet sent him back.    Everybody in   
the embassy disliked this policy. 
 
It cut the Americans off from some official channels, and hampered their ability to conduct   
business, even the business of interceding for Jews. The staff thought the President had made a   
political gesture toward the New York Jews that, in Germany, seemed ineffectual and   
laughable. 
 
The charge said to Henry, "Well, what did you think of the Fuhrer?" 
 
"I was impressed.    He knew I'd just arrived." 
 
"Really?    Well, now you've seen German thoroughness.    Somebody checked, and briefed him." 
 
"But he remembered.    In that long line." 
 
The charge smiled.    "Politician's memory." 
 
Colonel Forrest rubbed his broad flat nose, smashed years ago in a plane crash, and said to the   
charge: "The Fuhrer had quite a chat with Mrs. Henry.    What was it about, Pug?" 
 
"Nothing.    just a word or two about house-hunting." 
 
"You have a beautiful wife," the charge said.    "Hitler likes pretty women.    And that's quite a   
striking suit she's wearing.    They say Hitler likes pink." 
 
Two days later, Henry was working at the embassy at a morning pile of mail, in an office not   
unlike his old cubicle in War Plans-small, crowded with steel files, and piled with technical   
books and reports. 
 
This one had a window, and the view of Hitler's chancellery slightly jarred him each morning   
when he got there. His yeoman buzzed from a tiny anteroom smelling of mimeograph ink,   
 
 
 
 
 
 
cigarette smoke, and overbrewed coffee, like yeomen's anterooms everywhere. 
 
"Mrs.    Henry, sir." 
 
It was early for Rhoda to be up.    She said grumpily that a man named Knetiler, a renting agent   
for furnished homes, had sent his card to their hotel room, with a note saying he had been   
advised they were looking for a house.    He was waiting in the lobby for an answer. 
 
"well, what can you lose?"    Henry said.    'Go and look at his houses." 
 
"It seems so odd.    You don't suppose Hitler sent him?" 
 
Pug laughed.    'Maybe his aide did."    Rhoda called back at three-thirty in the afternoon.    He had   
just ' returned from lunch. 
 
"Yes?"    he yawned.    "What now?"    The long heavy minebibbing meal of the diplomats was   
still too much for him. 
 
"There's this wonderful house in the Grunewald section, right on a lake. It even has a tennis   
court!    The price is ridiculously cheap, it doesn't come to a hundred dollars a month.    Can you   
come right away and look at it?" 
 
Pug went.    It was a heavily built gray stone mansion roofed in red tile, set amid tall old trees on   
a smooth lawn sloping to the water's edge. 
 
The tennis court was in back, beside a formal garden with flower beds in bloom around a   
marble fountain swarming with large goldfish. 
 
Inside the house were Oriental carpets, large gilt-framed old paintings, a walnut dining table   
with sixteen blue silk-upholstered chairs, and a long living room cluttered with elegant French   
pieces. 
 
The place had five upstairs bedrooms and three marbled baths. 
 
The agent, a plump matter-of-fact man of thirty or so, with straight brown hair and rimless   
glasses, might have been an American real estate broker.    Indeed he said that his brother was a   
realtor in Chicago and that he had once worked in his office.    Pug asked him why the price was   
so low. 
 
The agent cheerfully explained in good English that the ovmer, Herr Rosenthal, was a Jewish   
manufacturer, and that the house was vacant because of a new ruling affecting Jews.    So he   
badly needed a tenant. 
 
"What's this new ruling?"    Henry asked. 
 
'I'm not too clear on it.    Something related to their owning real estate." 
 
Knetiler spoke in an entirely offhand tone, as though he were discussing a zoning regulation in   
Chicago. 
 45 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Does this man know you're offering the house to us, and at what price?" Pug said. 
 
"Naturally."    "When can I meet him?" 
 
"Any time you say."    Next day Pug used his lunch hour for an appointment with the owner.   
After introducing them in the doorway of the house, the agent went and sat in his car.    Herr   
Rosenthal, a gray-headed, paunchy, highly dignified individual, clad in a dark suit of excellent   
English cut, invited Henry inside. 
 
'It's a beautiful house," Henry said in German. 
 
Rosenthal glanced around with wistful affection, gestured to a chair, and sat down. "Thank   
you.    We're fond of it, and have spent a lot of time and money on it." 
 
"Mrs.    Henry and I feel awkward about leasing the place." 
 
"Why?"    The Jew looked surprised.    "You're desirable tenants.    If a lower rent would help-" 
 
"Good lord, no!    It's an incredibly low rent. 
 
But will you actually receive the money?" 
 
"Of course.    Who else?    It's my house."    Rosenthal spoke firmly and proudly.    "With the agent's   
commission deducted, and certain municipal fees, I'll receive every penny." 
 
Pug pointed a thumb at the front door.    "Knetler told me that some new ruling compels you to   
rent it." 
 
"That won't affect you as tenant, I assure you.    Are you thinking of a two-year lease?    I myself   
would prefer that." 
 
"But what's this ruling?" 
 
Though they were alone in an unoccupied house, Rosenthal glanced over one shoulder and   
then the other, and dropped his voice. 
 
"Well-it's an emergency decree, you understand; I am sure it will eventually be cancelled.    In   
fact I have been assured of that by people in high places.    Meantime this property can be placed   
under a trusteeship and sold at any time without my consent.    However, if there's a tenant in   
residence with diplomatic immunity, that can't be done."      Rosenthal smiled.      "Hence the   
modest rent, Herr Commandant! 
 
You see, I'm not hiding anything." 
 
"May I ask you a question?    Why don't you sell out and leave Germany?" 
 
The Jew blinked.    His face remained debonair and imposing.    "My family has a business here   
more than one hundred years old.    We refine sugar. My children are at school in England, but   
my wife and I are comfortable enough in Berlin.    We are both native Berliners."    He sighed,   
looked around at the snug rosewood-panelled library in which they sat, and went on: "Things   
 46 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
are not as bad as they were in 1938. 
 
That was the worst.    If there is no war, they'll improve quickly. 
 
I've been told this seriously by some high officials.    Old friends of mine." 
 
Rosenthal hesitated, and added, "The Fuhrer has done remarkable things for the country. It   
would be foolish to deny that.    I have lived through other bad times.    I was shot through a lung   
in Belgium in 1914. A man goes through a lot in a lifetime."    He spread his hands in a graceful   
resigned gesture. 
 
Victor Henry said, "Well, Mrs.    Henry loves the house, but I don't want to take advantage of   
anybody's misfortune." 
 
"You'll be doing just the opposite.    You know that now.    Two years?" 
 
"How about one year, with an option to renew?" 
 
At once Rosenthal stood and held out his hand.    Henry rose and shook it. "We should have a   
drink on it perhaps," said Rosenthal, "but we emptied the liquor closet when we left.    Liquor   
doesn't last long in a vacant house." 
 
It felt odd the first night, sleeping in the Rosenthals' broad soft bed with its exquisite French   
petit-point footboard and headboard. 
 
But within a few days, the Henrys were at home in the mansion and busy with a new life.   
From an employment agency suggested by the agent came a maid, a cook, and a houseman- 
chauffeur, all first-rate servants, and-Henry assumed-all planted informers. He checked the   
electric mitring of the house for listening devices.    The German equipment and circuits were   
strange to him, and he found nothing. Still, he and Rhoda walked on the lawn to discuss   
touchy matters. 
 
A whirling couple of weeks passed.    They saw Hitler once more at an opera gala, this time at a   
distance, up in a crimson damask-lined box. His white tie and tails were again too big,   
emphasizing his Charlie Chaplin air of a dressed-up vagrant, despite his severe stiff saluting   
and the cheers and applause of beautiful women and important-looking men, all stretching their   
necks to stare worshipfully. 
 
At two receptions arranged for the Henrys, one at the home of the charge and one at Colonel   
Foffest's house, they met many foreign diplomats and prominent German industrialists, artists,   
politicians, and military men. Rhoda made a quick hit.    Notwithstanding her panic before the   
chancellery reception,    she had brought a large costly wardrobe. She sparkled in her new   
clothes.    Her German kept improving. 
 
She liked Berlin and its people.    The Germans sensed this and warmed to her, though some   
embassy people who detested the regime were taken aback by her cordiality to Nazis.    Pug was   
something of a bear at these parties, standing silent unless spoken to. But Rhoda's success   
covered for him. 
 47 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rhoda was not blind to the Nazi abuses.    After her first walk in the Tiergarten, she refused to   
go back. It was far more clean, pretty, and charming than any American public park, she   
admitted, but the signs on the benches, juDEN vERBoTEN, were nauseating.    Seeing similar   
signs in restaurant windows, she would recoil and demand to go elsewhere. Pug told her of   
his interview with Rosenthal, she had a deep attack of,the blues: she wanted to forgo the house   
and even talked of getting out of Germany.    "My, imagine!    Renting out that beautiful house   
for a song, just to keep it from being sold over his head-to some fat Nazi, no doubt, lying in   
wait to pick it off cheap.    How horrible."    But she agreed that they had better take it.    They had   
to live somewhere, and the house was divine. 
 
Day by day, she reacted less to such things, seeing how commonplace they were in Berlin, and   
how much taken for granted.    When Sally Forrest, who loathed the Nazis, took her to lunch at a   
restaurant where a window placard announced that Jews were not served, it seemed silly to   
protest. Soon she ate in such places without a second thought.    In time, the Tiergarten became   
her favorite place for a Sunday stroll. But she insisted that anti-Semitism was a blot on an   
otherwise exciting, lovely land. 
 
She would say so to prominent Nazis.    Some stiffened, others tolerantly smirked.    A few hinted   
that the problem would straighten out in time. 
 
"I'm an American to the bone, going back six generations," she would say, 'and I'll never see   
eye to eye with you on this business of the Jews. 
 
It's absolutely awful."    Most Germans seemed resigned to this independent, outspoken manner   
of American women and the way their husbands tolerated it; they regarded it as a national   
oddity. 
 
Victor Henry stayed off the Jewish topic.    Nazi Germany was a big, not readily digestible lump   
of new life.    Most foreigners were strongly for or against the Nazis.    The correspondents, as   
Kip Tollever had observed, hated them to a man.    Within the embassy views varied. 
 
According to some, Hitler was the greatest menace to America since 1776. He would stop at   
nothing less than world rule, and the day he was strong enough, he would attack the United   
States.    Others saw him as a benefactor, the only bulwark in Europe against Communism.    The   
democracies had shown themselves impotent against the spread of Bolshevist parties, they   
said.    Hitler fought totalitarian fire with hotter and stronger fire. 
 
These judgments, either way, stood on slender bases of knowledge. 
 
Pressing his new acquaintances for facts, Victor Henry got vehement opinions and gestures.   
Statistics abounded in sheaves of analyses and rePorts, but too much of this stuff    came down   
to guesses, propaganda, and questionable paid intelligence.    He tried to study German history   
late at night and found it a muddy tangle going back more than a thousand years.    In it he could   
find no pattern and no guide at all to the problems Of 1939.    just to figure out where the Nazis   
had come from, and what the secret was of Hitler's hold on the Germans, seemed a task beyond   
him and beyond anybody he talked to; even the outlandish question of German anti-Semitism   
 48 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
had a dozen different explanations, depending on which of any twelve Foreign Service men   
you asked. Commander Henry decided that he would grope uselessly if he tried to fathom these   
major matters in a hurry.    Military capacity was something he knew about; it was a narrow but   
derisive aspect of Hitler's Third Empire.    Was Nazi Germany as strong as the ever-marching   
columns in the streets, and the throngs of uniforms in cafes, suggested?    Was it all a show, no   
more substantial than the transparent red cheesecloth of the towering swastika banners?   
Deciding to take nothing for granted and to marshal facts for himself, Victor Henry dug into   
the job of penetrating this one puzzle. 
 
Meanwhile Rhoda adapted merrily to diplomatic life.    As she got used to her staff and to Berlin   
customs, her dinner parties increased in size. She invited the Grohkes to a big one that included   
the charge d'affaires, a French film actress, the conductor of the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra,   
and a dour, stout German general named Armin von Roon, with a peculiarly hooked nose and   
an exceedingly stiff carriage. Rhoda knew none of these people well.    General von Roon, for   
instance, she had met at Colonel Foffeses house; and because someone had told her that he   
stood high in the Wehrmacht and was considered brilliant, she had made up to him. 
 
She had a gift for charming in a momentary encounter.    She always looked elegant, she could   
be amusing or sexy without forcing either note, and she made one feel that it would be pleasant   
to know her better.    People tended to accept her invitations. 
 
The company was above the level of Grohke and his mle.    They were dazzled and flattered,   
and the presence of Roon all but froze them with awe.    Grohke whispered to Victor Henry at   
one point that Roon was the real brain in Supreme Headquarters.    So Pug tried to talk to Roon   
about the war, and found that he spoke astonishingly good English.    But he would utter only   
frosty generalities, which made the attache think the better of him, though it yielded nothing to   
report. 
 
Before the evening was out Grohke, full of wine and brandy, took Victor Henry aside and told   
him that the captain of the Swinemonde navy yard was making stupid difficulties, but that he   
was going to push the visit through, "and I'll get your English friend in too, God damn it. 
 
I said I would and I will.    These shore-based bastards just live to create trouble."    The Henrys   
received    one cheerless    letter    from Madeline, written when she arrived in Newport for the   
summer.    Warren, as usual, did not write at all.    Early in July the letter Byron had written his   
father at last caught up with him: Dear Dad: I received your letter and it threw me.    I guess I   
gave you the wrong impression about this girl Natalie Jastrow.    It's fun to work with her, but   
she's older than I am, and she was a junior Phi beta at Radcliffe. Her best boyfriend is a   
Rhodes Scholar.    I'm not in that league.    However, I appreciate your good advice.    She is really   
excellent company, and talking to her improves my mind.    That should please you. 
 
Dr.    Jastrow has me researching the Emperor Constantine's military campaigns.    I took the job   
for the money, but I'm enjoying it.    That whole when the world balance tips from Paganism to   
ity, is really worth knowing, Dad.    It has some parallels to our own day.    I think you'll like Dr.   
Jastrow's new book. He's just a scholar and wouldn't know a torpedo boat from a medium   
tank, yet he has a way of grasping an ancient campaign and describing it so anybody can   
 49 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
understand it and sort of picture what those times were like. 
 
Siena's going to be overrun with tourists for the Palio, a goofy horse race they put on every   
year.    The nags run around the town square, and they say all hell usually breaks loose.    Warren   
will make a great flier. 
 
Well, I guess that's about it.    Love to all. 
 
Byron 
 
iNcg the fourteenth century-so Byron    had learned-nothing much S had happened in Siena   
beside the Palios.    A rich city-state of the Middle Ages, the military rival of Florence, Siena in   
x348 had been isolated by the Black Death and frozen in its present form as by a spell.    A few   
art lovers now drifted here to admire the fourteenth-century paintings and architecture. The   
world at large flocked to Siena twice a year to watch the mad horse races, and otherwise let the   
bypassed town, a living scene out of an old tapestry, molder in the Tuscan sunshine. 
 
In nine years of living just outside Siena, Aaron Jastrow had never attended a Palio. When   
Byron asked why, Jastrow held forth on the cruel public games of Roman times, the   
forerunners    of all    these burlesque races    of the Middle Ages. The Palio had happened to   
survive in mountain-locked Siena, he said, like a dinosaur in the Lost World. 
 
"Some medieval towns raced donkeys or buffaloes," he said.    'In papal Rome, they raced Jews.   
I'm not exactly afraid I'll be pressed into service if a horse should break its leg.    I'm just not   
very interested." Moreover, his friend the archbishop had told him long ago that elderly people   
avoided the Palio, because of the risk of being jostled or trampled. 
 
But now there was the article to write. Jastrow obtained tickets for both runnings, and sent   
Byron and Natalie to do research in the town while he read books on the subject. 
 
They first learned that the race was a contest among Siena's neighborhoods or parishes.    Each   
district, called a contrada, comprised a few square blocks of old houses.    All of Siena contained   
but two and a half square miles and some thirty thousand people.    But these little wardsthere   
were seventeen, and ten competed each year-took themselves, their boundaries, their loyalties,   
their colors, their emblems, with inconceivable seriousness. They bore curious names like   
Oca,    Bruco,    Torre,    Tartuca, Nicchio    (Goose,    Caterpillar, Tower,    Tortoise, Seashell). Each   
ward had its flag, its anthems, its separate churches, and even a sort of capital hall. 
 
Byron and Natalie spent days walking through the hilly angular streets. When an occasional   
old omnibus snorted by, they had to flatten against the high red-brown walls for their lives;   
there were no sidewalks, and the somnolent, deserted streets were hardly wider than the bus.   
Maps in hand, the pair visited the tiny districts one by one, trying to pin down the background   
of    the Palio.      They    found    out    about alliances and    hatreds    going back    hundreds    of   
years.   
Panther was friendly to Giraffe, Tortoise loathed Snail, and so forth, in a tangle of emotions,   
very real and current. 
 
They came to realize too that the famous race itself was just a crooked farce, and that   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
everybody knew it. The contrade owned no horses. A few days before each race, animals   
from the nearby countryside were brought into town, and the competing districts drew lots for   
them.      The same stolid durable nags came back year after year, shuffling from one   
neighborhood to another by the luck of the draw. 
 
What then made a race of it?    Bribing the jockeys, doping the animals, conspiring to block the   
best horses or injure their riders: only such devices turned the Palio into a murky contest of a   
sort.      The largest, richest neighborhoods therefore tended to win; but the outcome was   
unpredictable, because a poor, small district might put on a desperate surge. 
 
It might squander funds in bribes, pledge future alliances, swear to future treacheries, just to   
win a banner to bear off to its hall. 
 
For that was what the 'Palio" itself was: a banner painted with a picture of the Virgin.    Like all   
medieval races, this one was run on sacred days; it was a manifestazione in honor of the   
Virgin. Hence her portrait graced the and faded Palios by the dozens hung in the contrada   
halls. 
 
After a while, even Jastrow became interested too, in an ironic way. 
 
The crookedness, he said, was obviously the soul of the thing; old European skulduggery,   
bribes and counterbribes, doublecross and triplecross, sudden reversals of old alliances, secret   
temporary patching up of ancient enmities, convoluted chicanery in the dark-all leading at last   
to the horse race, When all the shadowy corruption was put to explosive Proof in red sunset   
light. 
 
'Why, this article will write itself," he said cheerfully one day at lunch.    "These Sienese have   
evolved willy-nilly a grotesque little parody of European nationalism.    The archbishop told me   
that a woman from the Panther neighborhood who marries a Caterpillar or a Tower man Will   
go back to have her babies in a house on a Panther street to make sure they'll be Panthers.   
Patriotism!    And of course, the insane explosion every summer is the key.    All this obsolete   
mummery-Snails, Giraffes, what have you-would have died out centuries ago, except for the   
lovely colorful outbursts of excitement, treachery, and violence in the races. 
 
The Palio is war." 
 
"You ought to go over to town, sir," Byron said. "They're laying the track. Hundreds of   
truckloads of this golden-red earth, all around the Piazza tiel Campo."    i "Yes," Natalie said,   
"the way they're decorating up the streets is quite i 
 
amazing.    And wherever you look the flag-wavers are practicing-" 
 
"I'm taking off two whole workdays for the races themselves. That's 
 
plenty," Jastrow said severely. 
 
You know what?"    Bryon said.    "This whole thing is utterly idiotic." 
 51 
 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Natalie looked at him with startled, excited eyes, touching a handkerchief to her sweaty   
forehead. It was the day of the first Palio, and they stood on the balcony of the archbishos   
palace, watching the parade.    The great lade of the cathedral gave a bit of shade at one end of   
the balcony, where Jastrow in his big yellow Panama hat and white suit stood talking with the   
archbishop.    Byron and Natalie were crowded among privileged onlookers at the other end, in   
the hot sun. Even in her sleeveless light pink linen dress, the girl was perspiring, and a   
seersucker jacket and silk tie were making Byron acutely uncomfortable. 
 
Below,    the    Caterpillar marchers in    green    and    yellow costumes puffed sleeves    and    trunks,   
colored hose, feathered hats-were leaving the thronged cathedral square, waving great banners   
to cheers and applause from the crowd; and the red-and-black Owl company was COMing in,   
repeating the same flag stunts: intertwining whorls, two flags flung pole and all in the air and   
crisscrossing, flag-wavers leaping over each other's poles while keeping their banners in fluid   
motion. 
 
'Idiotic?"    Natalie said.    "I was just deciding it's rather magical." 
 
"What is?    They do the same things over and over.    We've been here for hours.    There's still the   
Porcupine, the Eagle, the Giraffe, and the Forest to come and show off with their flags.    I'm   
roasting." 
 
"Ah, Byron, it's the liquid flow of color, don't you see, and the faces of these young men.    So   
help me, these people look more natural in medieval togs than in their workaday clothes.    Don't   
they?    Look at those long straight noses, those deep-set sad big eyes!    Maybe they're really a   
remnant of the Etruscans, as they claim."      "Six months of work," Byron said.      "Special   
buildings and churches for Unicoms, Porcupines, and Giraffes. Thousands of costumes, a   
whole    week    of nothing    but    ceremonies,    general marching    hither and yon, trumpeting    and   
drumming and trial runs, and all for one crooked race of decrepit nags. 
 
In honor of the Virgin, no less." 
 
"Oh, beautiful," Natalie exclaimed, as two Owl flags flew high in the air in crossing arcs, and   
the wavers caught them and whirled red-andblack arabesques to the applause of the crowd. 
 
Byron went on, mopping his face, "I was in the coose church today. 
 
They brought the horse right inside, up to the very altar to be blessed. 
 
I didn't believe the books, but I saw it happen.    The priest laid a crucifix on its nose.    The horse   
had more sense than the people.    He didn't misbehave, but I guess that finished the Palio for   
me."    Natalie glanced at him, amused.    "Poor Briny.    Italian Christianity really troubles your   
soul, doesn't it?    Leslie was right, you're simply a Protestant." 
 
"Does a horse belong in a church?"    Byron said. 
 
The sun was low when the parade ended.    In the short walk from the cathedral to the Piazza tiel   
Campo, Jastrow grew nervous. A thick crowd jostled down the narrow street, all in good   
 52 
 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
humor, but shouting, gesturing, and hurrying between the high red-brown stone walls of the old   
palazzos.    More than once the little professor stumbled and tottered.    He clung to BYron's arm.   
"Do you mind?    I've always had a slight fear of crowds.    People mean no harm, but somehow   
they don't notice me."    They halted in a crush at a low arch and slowly squeezed through. 
 
"Good gracious," Jastrow said, as they emerged on the earth of the race track.    "The piazza's   
transformed!" 
 
"They've been working on it for weeks," Byron said.    "I told you." 
 
Siena's main piazza was one of the sights of Italy.    The forgotten town planners of the Middle   
Ages had designed a memorably beautiful open space, hemmed in by a semicircular sweep of   
reddish palazzos and the imposing, almost straight facade of the fourteenth-century town hall;   
all overarched by the blue sky of Tuscany, and pierced heavenward by the red stone bell tower   
of the town hall, more than three hundred fifty feet high.    All year round the vast shell-shaped   
space was empty except for market stalls and scattered foot traffic; and the ancient buildings   
that ringed it seemed abandoned or asleep. 
 
Today, in the golden light of a late afternoon sun, it was a sea of people, surging a nd roaring   
inside a ring of wooden barriers. 
 
Between these barriers and the palazzo walls lay a track of earth, and against the walls were   
steep banks of temporary benches.    Faces crowded at every window of every building around   
the piazza; flags and rich hangings decorated the palazzos.    The benches were jammed; all the   
roofs were jammed; the great central space looked full, and yet from half a dozen narrow   
streets more people were streaming across the track and jamming themselves in.    The parade   
was now going around the track of earth, and all the contrade at once were doing the flag   
whorls, the flings, the arabesques to continuous plaudits of the throng and the cacophonous   
blare of many brass bands. 
 
Byron led the way to their seats, still holding Jastrow's thin arm. 
 
"Well, hasn't the archbishop done us proud!"    said the professor, as they settled on a narrow,   
splintery plank, directly below the judges' stand. 
 
"One couldn't have a better view of the thing."    He laughed without reason, obviously feeling   
better out of the press of bodies. 
 
'See the mattresses?"    said Natalie gaily.    "There they are, down at the corners.p "Oh, yes.    My   
lord, what an extraordinary business." 
 
The noise of the crowd rose into a general cheer.    A wooden cart, drawn by four white Tuscan   
oxen with giant curved horns, was entering the track, surrounded by marchers in rich costume.   
On a tall pole in the cart swayed the Palio.    "Why, it's an Assumption," said Jastrow, peering   
through small binoculars tit the narrow painted cloth.    "Naive, but not bad at all." 
 
Around the piazza the cart slowly rolled, with helmeted policemen behind it driving the crowd   
 53 
 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
from the track, while sweepers cleared up papers and trash.    By now the paved square was one   
dense mass of white shirts, colored dresses, and dark heads, bringing out the half-moon shape   
of the track, and its danger. The red palazzos sloped downward to the town hall, where a   
straight street sliced off the broad curve. 
 
Heavy mattresses padded the outer barriers at these sharply cut corners. Even at the trial runs,   
Byron and Natalie had seen horses thud against the mattresses and knock their jockeys   
senseless. 
 
The sunset light on the facade of the Palazzo Pubblico, the town hall, was deepening to a blood   
color.    The rest of the piazza was in shadow, and a heavy bell was tolling in the tower.    From   
the town hall a long fanfare sounded.    The crowd fell quiet.    Trumpets struck up the old Palio   
march that had been echoing all week in Siena's streets.    Out of the palazzo courtyard trotted   
the caparisoned racehorses with their flamboyantly costumed jockeys. 
 
Natalie Jastrow's fingers slid into Byron's and clasped them, and for a moment she put her   
cheek, cool, bony, and yet soft, against his. 
 
"Idiotic, Briny?"    she murmured. 
 
He was too delighted with the contact to answer. 
 
The starting line was directly in front of them, and behind them, above the judges' stand, the   
Palio hung on its pole, stirring in a cool breeze blowing across the great amphitheatre. An   
ancient contraption of wood and rope controlled the start.    To line up the dancing, overwrought   
animals inside the ropes proved almost impossible.    The harried creatures capered in and out,   
they turned, reared, stumbled, and broke away twice in false starts.    At last the ten horses went   
thudding off in a pack, with the jockeys clubbing wildly at the creatures and at each other.    A   
yell rose above the steady roar, as two horses went down at the first set of mattresses.    After   
that BYron lost track of the race. Mule he watched an unconscious jockey being dragged off   
the dirt, another wild yell of the crowd told of more mishaps, which he couldn't see.    The pack   
came racing by in a club-waving dirt-flying jumble, strung out over five or six lengths. A   
riderless horse galloped well up among them, dripping foam, its reins dangling. 
 
"Can a riderless horse win?p Jastrow shouted at Byron. 
 
A man in the row below him turned up a fat warty red face with pointed moustaches and   
popping yellow eyes.    "Si, si.    Riderless is scosso, meestair, scosso.    Viva Brucol Scossol' X"en   
the pack came past the judges' box a second time, the riderless horse was clearly in the lead,   
and Byron could see its Caterpillar colors and emblems. 
 
'Scossol' the warty red face turned and bellowed happily at Dr, Jastrow, exhaling heavy odors   
of garlic and vane, and two fists waved at him. "See, mecstair?    Mloo!    Brucol Cater-peel-air,   
meestairl" 
 
"Yes, indeed, just so," said Jastrow, shrinking a bit against Byron. 
 54 
 
 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The noise in the piazza swelled to a general mad scream as the horses went round for the third   
and last time, with the surviving jockeys frantically beating their nags to make them overtake   
the riderless Bruco horse.    They came past the finish in a shower of dirt, a maze of bobbing,   
straining heads and flailing jockeys' arms.    The riderless horse, its eyes rolling redly, was still   
barely in front. 
 
"Brucol' screamed the warty man, leaping a couple of feet in the air. 
 
"Scossol Scossol Ha ha!"    He turned to Jastrow with a maniacal laugh, and vividly gestured   
that the horse was drugged by pumping a huge imaginary hypodermic needle into his arm.   
"Bravissimo!    WHOOI', He clattered down the narrow aisle to the track, ran on to the dirt, and   
vanished in the swarm boiling out of the seats and over the barriers. 
 
The track was full on the instant with people milling, yelling, waving arms, jumping and   
embracing in ecstasy, shaking fists, clutching their heads, beating their breasts.    Here and there   
in the mob were the bobbing Plumed heads of the horses. On the track before the judges'   
stand, a dozen white-shined young men were beating an unhelmeted jockey, on his knees in the   
dirt, holding up both arms in a plea for mercy.    The jockey's face was welling bright blood. 
 
"My lord, what's going on there?"    Jastrow quavered. 
 
"Somebody failed to doublecross , Byron said, "or else he triple crossed." 
 
"I suppose"-Jastrow put a trembling hand to his beard-"this is the part the archbishop warned   
us about.    Perhaps we had better leave, and-" Byron slammed an arm across his chest.    "Not   
now.    Sit right where you are, sir, and don't move.    You too, Natalie." 
 
A squad of young men, with yellow-and-green Caterpillar scarves around their necks, came   
driving through the mob straight for the judges' stand. They trampled up the benches past   
Jastrow, led by a pallid youngster streaming blood from his forehead.      Byron held two   
protecting arms in front of the girl and Jastrow as the bloody-faced one seized the pole.    The   
whole squad roared, cheered, and came thundering back down the benches with the banner. 
 
"Now!"    Byron took the hands of the other two.    "Come." 
 
The excited Sienese, as well as the tourists, were prudently making way for the triumphant   
Caterpillars. Moving right behind them, with one arm around the girl and another around   
Jastrow, Byron got through the archway into the main lower street of the town.    But here the   
mob eddied in behind the Palio and its triumphant escort and engulfed them, crushing uphill   
toward the cathedral. 
 
"Oh, Lord," Natalie said.    "We're in for it now.    Hang on to Aaron." 
 
"Dear me, I'm afraid I didn't bargain for this," gasped Jastrow, fumbling at his hat and his   
glasses with one    hand.    The other was pinned in Byron's grip.    "My feet are scarcely touching   
the ground, Byron."    "That's okay.    Don't fight them, sir, just go along.    At the first side street   
this jam will ease up.    Take it easy-' A convulsive, panicky surge of the crowd at this moment   
 55 
 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
tore the professor out of Byron's grasp. Behind them sounded the clatter of hoofs on stone,   
wild neighs and whinnies, and shouts of alarm.    The crowd melted around Byron and Natalie,   
fleeing from a plunging horse.    It was the winner, the Caterpillar animal.    A brawny young man   
in green and yellow, his wig awry and sliding, was desperately trying to control the animal, but   
as it reared again, a Hailing front hoof caught him full in the face. 
 
He fell bloodied to the ground, and the horse was free. It danced, reared, and screamed,   
plunging forward, and the crowd shrank away. 
 
As Byron pulled Natalie into a doorway out of the retreating mob, Aaron Jastrow emerged in   
the clear street without his glasses, stumbled, and fell in the horse's path. 
 
Without a word to Natalie, Byron ran out into the street and snatched Jastrow's big yellow hat   
off his head.    He waved the hat in the horse's face, crouching, watching the hoofs.    The creature   
neighed wildly, shied against a palazzo wall, stumbled and lost its footing, then recovered and   
reared, Hailing its forelegs at Byron, who waved the hat again, staying watchfully just out of   
range. The horse pranced about on two legs, rolling bloodshot mad eyes, foaming at the   
mouth. 
 
Half a dozen men in Caterpillar costumes now came running up the street, and four of them   
seized the reins, dragged the horse down, and began to quiet him.    The others picked up their   
injured comrade. 
 
and People from the crowd darted out and helped Jastrow get up. 
 
Natalie ran to his side.    Men surrounded Byron, slapping his shoulder shouting in Italian as he   
made his way to Jastrow.    "Here's your hat, sir." 
 
"Oh, thank you, Byron.    My glasses, you haven't seen them, have you? 
 
I suppose they're shattered.    Well, I have another pair at the villa." The professor was blinkin   
blindly, but he acted rather excited and cheerful. 
 
"Goodness, what a commotion.    What happened?    I was pushed down, I guess.    I heard a horse   
clattering about, but I couldn't see a thing." 
 
"He's all right," Natalie said to Byron, with a look straight into his eyes such as she had never   
before given him.    "Thanks." 
 
"Dr.    Jastrow, if you're not too shaken up," Byron said, taking his arm again, "we should go to   
the Caterpillar church for the thanksgiving service."    "Oh, not at all," Jastrow laughed.    The   
moment of action seemed to have cleared his nerves.    "In for a penny in for a pound.    I find all   
this rather exhilarating.    On we go.    just hang on to me a little better, Byron. 
 
You were a bit derelict there for a minute." A week or so later, Natalie and Byron were at   
work in the library, with a summer thunderstorm beating outside at the darkened windows.   
Byron, happening to look up from a map when lightning flashed, saw Natalie staring at him,   
her face sombre in the lamplight. 
 56 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Byron, have you ever been to Warsaw?" 
 
"No.    Why?" 
 
'Would you like to come there with me?" 
 
With great willpower, choking back his joy, Byron summoned up the opaque dull look With   
which he had resisted twenty years of his father's probings: "What would be the point?" 
 
"Well, it's probably worth seeing, don't you think?    Slote even says it's rather old-world and   
gay.    The thing is, Aaron's getting difficult about my trip.    You know that.    I could just tell him   
to go to hell, but I'd rather not." 
 
Byron had heard the discussions.    In the aftermath of the Palio, on learning how close he had   
come to getting injured or killed, Jastrow was having a spell of nerves.    The American consul   
in Florence had come up after the Palio for a visit; following that, Jastrow's glum mood had   
worsened. He kept insisting that the Foreign Service was getting worried over the Polish   
situation, and that Natalie's proposed trip was now too risky. 
 
Byron said, "Would my going make a difference?" 
 
"Yes.    You know what Aaron calls you behind your back now?    That golden lad.    He can't get   
over what you did at the Palio." 
 
"You exaggerated it."    "I did not.    You showed striking presence of mind.    I was impressed,   
and so was Aaron when he found out.    The horse might have killed him. 
 
If I can tell him you're coming, I bet he'll stop grumbling." 
 
"Your friend Slote might take a dim view of my showing up with you. 
 
Natalie said with a grim little smile, "I'll handle Leslie Slote. 
 
All right?" 
 
"I'll think about it," Byron said. 
 
"If you need money, I'll be glad to lend you some." 
 
"Oh, I've got money.    As a matter of fact, Natalie, there's not all that much to think about.    I   
guess I'll come along.    With Jastrow off in Greece, this will be a dismal place." 
 
"Bless your heart."    She gave him a delighted smile.    "We'll have fun. 
 
I'll see to that."    'What happens after Warsaw?"    Byron said. 
 
"Will you come back here?" 
 
"I guess so, if the consul doesn't persuade Aaron to go home meantime. He's really working on   
him.    And you, Briny?"    "Well, maybe I will too," Byron said.    'I'm at loose ends." 
 57 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
That night at dinner, when he heard the news, Dr.    Jastrow ordered up a bottle of champagne.   
"Byron, I can't tell you what a load you've taken off my mind!    This headstrong girl doesn't   
know how wild and backward Poland is. I do. From what my relatives write me, it hasn't   
improved one iota since I left there forty-five years ago.    And the situation really is unstable.   
The villain with the mustache is making nasty noises, and we must look for the worst.   
However, there's bound to be some warning.    My mind is much more at ease now.    You're a   
capable young man." 
 
"You talk as though I were some kind of idiot," Natalie said, sipping champagne. 
 
"You are a girl.    It's something you have trouble remembering. 
 
You were that way as a child, climbing trees and fighting boys. 
 
Well, I'll be here alone, then.    But I won't mind that." 
 
'Won't you be in Greece, sir?"    Byron said. 
 
"I'm not so sure." Jastrow smiled at their puzzled looks. "It's some clumsiness about my   
passport.      I let it lapse, and not being native-born, but naturalized through my father's   
naturalization, it turns out there's a bit of red tape involved in renewing it. 
 
Especially since I haven't been back in nine years.    The problem may or may not be unravelled   
by the end of August.    If it isn't, I'll just take the trip next spring." 
 
"That's something you should certainly straighten out," Byron said. 
 
. "Oh, of course. These things used to be simple, the consul says. But since the flood of   
refugees from Hitler began, the rules have tightened up.    Well, Briny, so you and Natalie will   
be off to Warsaw in a few weeks! 
 
I couldn't be more pleased and I'm sure she can use a chaperone." 
 
"Go climb a tree, Aaron," Natalie said, turning pink, and her uncle laughed at her, his first   
wholehearted laugh in a week. 
 
"I hope you'll manage to meet my cousin Berel," Jastrow said to Byron. "I haven't seen him   
since I left Poland, but we've usually exchanged three or four ' letters a year.    Presence of mind   
has always been his strong point, too." 
 
Pamela drove Commander Henry and her father to SwinemondeThe train would have been   
faster, but Henry wanted to see the countryside and the small towns, and the Englishman was   
more than agreeable.    One could almost get to like Germans, he said, if one stayed out of the   
cities. 
 
Pug was appalled at the girl's driving.    She chauffeured the rented Mercedes around Berlin in   
docile conformity to the lights and the speed laws, but once on the autobahn she rocketed the   
needle to one hundred fifty kilometers an hour.    Tudsbury chatted over the wind roar, paying   
little attention to the scenery blurring past. 
 58 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
He now thought there might be no war. The British were dealing seriously at last with the   
Russians about a military alliance.    They were starting to Turn out airplanes so much faster that   
regaining air parity, which they had lost in 1936, was in sight.    Their pledge to Poland showed   
Hitler that this time Chamberlain meant business.    The Nazi Party in Danzig had quieted down.   
Mussolini had flatly told Hitler (so Tudsbury's inside information had it) that he was not ready   
to fight. 
 
The correspondent foresaw a respite of two or three years, during which the alarmed   
democracies would    rearm faster    than the    Germans possibly    could.    The cornered    dictator   
would eventually either fall, or start a war and be crushed, or very likely get assassinated. 
 
"I can't understand why somebody hasn't shot him long ago, the way he shows himself.    He   
bears a charm," Tudsbury shouted, as the car careered out on the two-lane road to pass a long   
line of thundering trucks full of new gray-painted army tanks. Pug Henry clutched at an   
armrest, for another truck was approaching head on, swelling like a balloon; it went by in a   
howl and a screech half a second after Pamela whisked into her own lane between two trucks,   
brushing hair off her forehead with one relaxed little hand.    "But the charm is based on success.   
It may lapse once he stops moving ahead.    He's murdered a lot of people on the way up.    They   
all have relatives." 
 
Commander Grohke came to meet them at the base gate in a small car, which Tudsbury could   
barely squeeze into.    Pamela roared off to a hotel, and Grohke took the two men for a long   
tour, by car and on foot, through the Swinemonde yard. It was a gray afternoon, with low   
black clouds threatening rain.    The dank east wind off the Baltic felt pleasantly cool after the   
sultriness of Berlin.    The flat, sandy, bleak seacoast base was much like New London, Victor   
Henry thought.    If one ignored flags and signs, in fact, the naval facilities of big powers were   
hard to tell apart. 
 
They were all in the same business, imitating the British navy, which had first brought the   
industrial age to war at sea.    The low black U-boats tied in clusters to the long piers or resting   
on blocks in dry docks; the smell of tar, hot metal, and seawater; the slow clank and screech of   
overhead cranes; the blaze of welding torches, the ratite of riveters; the flat or curved sections   
of steel, painted with yellow or red primer, swinging through the air; the gigantic open sheds;   
the mounds of piping, cables, timbers, and Oil drums; the swarms of grease-blackened cheerful   
men    in    dirty coveralls, Italy,    goggles,    and    hard    hats;    the    half-finished    hulls    propped   
with   
timbers on rails slanting into dirty water-he might have been in Japan, France, or the United   
States. The differences that counted, the crucial numbers and performance characteristics,   
were not discernable. 
 
He could see that the Germans were not changing the classic double hull of a submarine, and   
that, like the Americans, they were doing more welding. He would have liked to apply his   
pocket tape measure to a steel pressure hull section.      The plate seemed thinner than in   
American submarines.    if is were, the U-boats could probably not dive quite as deep, unless the   
Germans had developed a remarkably strong new alloy. 
 
But on such a visit one used one's eye, not a camera or a tape measure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A low sun broke out under the gray clouds, and the car cast an elongated shadow when Grohke   
stopped near the entrance gate at a dry dock where a U-boat rested on blocks.    From one side   
of the dock a gangway with rails, and from the other a precarious long plank, slanted down to   
the submarine's deck. 
 
"Well, that's the tour," said Grohke.    "This is my flagship. 
 
Since I cannot have you aboard, Tudsbury, much as I would like to, I suppose we all part   
company here." 
 
Henry picked up his cue from the German's smile.    "Look, let's not stand on ceremony.    If I can   
come aboard I'll come and Tudsbury won't." 
 
"Good God, yes," said the Englishman.    "I've no business here any way. 
 
The U-boat commander spread his hands.    "I don't want to drive a wedge in Anglo-American   
friendship." 
 
A whistle blasted as they spoke, and workmen came trooping off the boats and docks, and o,ut   
of the sheds.    The road to the gate was soon thronged with them.    They came boiling out of the   
U-boat, up the gangway.    "The old navy yard hazard," Henry said.    "Run for your life at five   
o'clock, or they'll trample you to death."    Grohke laughed. 
 
'All civilians are the same." 
 
Tudsbury said,    "Well, in    my    next broadcast I'll have    to say    that the    U-boat    command is   
humming like damn all.    I hope they'll take notice in London."    "Just tell them what you saw."   
Grohke shook his hand through the car window.    "We want to be friends.    We know you have   
the greatest navy in the world.    These silly little boats can do a lot of damage for their size,   
that's all.    One of my officers will drive you to your hotel."    Since workmen were jamming the   
gangway, Grohke grinned at Henry, and pointed a thumb toward the plank on the other side of   
the dock.    Pug nodded.    The German with a gesture invited him to go first. 
 
It was a very long drop, something like seventy feet, to the greasy puddles in the concrete   
dock. Pug made his way around the rim and walked down the shaky paint-spotted plank,   
trying to look easier than he felt.    Stolid eyes of side boys in white watched from below.  
 
As he set foot on deck, they snapped to attention.    Grohke stepped off the raiding plank with a   
laugh.    "Well done, for two old blokes." 
 
U-46 
 
looked much like an American submarine, but the cleanliness, polish, and order were unusual.   
A United States ship in dry dock, with civilian workmen aboard, soon became squalid and   
dirty.      No doubt Grohke had ordered a cleanup for the American visitor, which Pug   
appreciated, being himself a spit-and-polish tyrant. Even so, he had to adimre the German   
display. The diesels looked as though they had never turned over, their red paint and brass   
fittings were unsullied by a grease spot, and the batteries seemed fresh from the factory.    The   
 60 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
sailors were starched pretty fellows, almost a crew for a nautical musical comedy.    As for the   
U-boat design, when you took the essential spaces and machines of a war vessel and stuffed   
them into the sausage casing of one long tube, the result was the same in any country: change   
the instrument legends to English, move the captain's cabin from port to starboard, add two feet   
to the wardroom, alter a few valve installations, and you were in the Grayling. 
 
'Smells pretty    good,"    he    said,    as they    passed    the tiny    galley, where cooks in    white were   
preparing dinner and somehow managing to perspire neatly. 
 
Grohke looked at him over his shoulder. You wouldn't care to eat    aboard?    It's awfully   
cramped, but these chaps don't eat too badly." 
 
Pug had a dinner appointment with the Tudsburys, but he said at once, "I'd be delighted." 
 
So he dined elbow to elbow with the captain and officers of the U-boat in the narrow   
wardroom.    He enjoyed it.    He was more at home here than in his silk-walled dining room in   
Berlin.    The four young officers were thin-lipped, ruddy, blond, shy; like Americans in their   
features, but with a different look around the eyes, more intense and wary.    They sat silent at   
first, but soon warmed to the American's compliments about the boat, and the joking of   
Grohke, who got into an excellent mood over the food and wine. Stories passed about the   
stupidity and laziness of navy yard workmen.    One of Pug's best yarns, an incident of crossed- 
up toilet plumbing on the West Virginia, brought uproarious laughter.    He had noticed before   
the German taste for bathroom humor.    The officers told tales, which they considered comic, of   
their early training: first about the cleaning of latrines, then of electric shocks to which they   
had had to submit without flinching while their reactions were filmed; exposure to cold and   
heat past the point of collapse; knee bends until they dropped; the "Valley of Death" cross- 
country run up and down hillsides, wearing seventy-pound loads and gas masks.    An officer   
emerged the better, they said, from such ordeals. Only Grohke disagreed. That Prussian   
sadism was old-fashioned, he asserted.    In war at sea, initiative was more important than the   
blind submission that the ordeals implanted. "The Americans have the right idea," he said,   
either because he sensed that Pug was shocked, or out of maverick conviction.    Tbev feasted on   
cabbage soup, boiled fresh salmon, roast pork, potato dumplings, and gooseberry torten. 
 
Obviously Grohke had ordered up this banquet on the chance that Pug might stay. 
 
Streaks of red sunset showed through the black rain clouds when Henry and Grohke I it the   
submarine.    On the dock me crewm e so en, naked except for trunks, were wrestling inside a   
cheering circle, on gray mats laid over the crane tracks.    Henry had seen everywhere this love   
of young Germans for hard horseplay. They were like healthy pups, and these U-boat men   
looked stronger and healthier than American sailors. 
 
"So, Henry, I suppose you join your English friend now?" 
 
"Not if you have any better ideas." 
 
The German slapped him on the shoulder.    "Good!    Come along." 
 61 
 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
They drove out through the gate.    "Damn quiet after five o'clock," said Pug. 
 
"Oh, yes.    Dead.    Always." 
 
Pug lit a cigarette. "I understand the British are working two and three shifts now in their   
yards." 
 
Grohke gave him an odd look.    "I guess they make up for lost time." 
 
A couple of miles from the base, amid green fields near the water, they drove into rows of   
wooden cottages.    "Here's where my daughter lives," Grohke said, ringing a doorbell.    A fresh- 
faced young blonde woman opened the door.    Three children, recognizing Grohke's ring, ran   
and pounced on the paper-wrapped hard candies he handed out.    The husband was at sea on   
maneuvers.    On an upright piano in the tiny parlor stood his picture: young, long-jawed, blond,   
stern.    "It's good Paul is at sea," Grohke said.    "He thinks I spoil the kids," and he proceeded to   
toss them and romp with them until they lost their bashfulness in the presence of the American,   
and ran around laughing and shrieking. The mother tried to press coffee and cake on the   
guests, but Grohke stopped her. 
 
)t "The commander is busy.    I just wanted to see the children. 
 
Now we go. 
 
As they got into the car, looking back at a window where three little faces peered out at him, he   
said: "It's not much of a house. 
 
Not like your mansion in the Grunewald!    It's just a cracker box. The German pay scale isn't   
like the American.    I thought you'd be interested to see how they live. 
 
He's a good U-boat officer and they're happy. He'll have a command in two years. Right   
away, if there's war.    But there won't be war. Not now." 
 
"I hope not." 
 
'I know.    There is not going to be war over Poland-So?    Back to Swinemonde?" 
 
'I guess so."    As they drove into the small coastal town, Pug said, "Say, I could stand a beer.   
How about you?    Is there a good place?" 
 
'Now you're talking!    There's nothing fancy, not in this boring town, but I can take you where   
the officers hang out.    Isn't Tudsbury expecting you?" 
 
"He'll survive."      "Yes.      Englishmen are good at that."      Grohke laughed with transparent   
pleasure at keeping the American naval attache from the famous correspondent. 
 
Young men in turtleneck sweaters and rough jackets sat at long tables in the dark, smoky,   
timbered cellar, bellowing a song to concertina accompaniment played by a strolling fat man in   
a leather apron.    "Jesus Christ, I have drunk a lot of beer in this place, Henry," said Grohke.   
They sat at a small side table under an amber lamp. Pug showed Men pictures of Warren,   
 62 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Byron, and Madeline.    After a couple of beers, he told of his worry over Warren's involvement   
with an older woman. Grohke chuckled. 
 
"Well, the things I did when I was a young buck!    The main thing is, he'll be an aviator.    Not as   
good as a submariner, but the next best thing, ha ha! 
 
He looks like a smart lad.    He'll settle down." 
 
Pug joined in a song he recognized.    He had no ear and sang badly off-key.    This struck Grohke   
as hilarious.    "I swear to God, Victor," he said, wiping his eyes after a fit of laughter, 'could   
anything be crazier than all this talk of war?    I tell you, if you left it to the navy fellows on both   
sides it could never happen.    We're all decent fellows, we understand each other, we all want   
the same things out of life.    It's the politicians.    Hitler is a great man and Roosevelt is a great   
man, but they've both been getting some damn lousy advice.    But there's one good thing.    Adolf   
Hitler is smarter than all the politicians.    There's not going to be any war over Poland."    He   
drained his thick glass stein and banged it to attract a passing barmaid. 
 
'Geben Sie gut Acht auf den Osten," he said, winking and dropping his voice.    "Watch the east!   
There's something doing in the east." 
 
The barmaid clacked on the table two foaming steins from clusters in her hands.    Grohke drank   
and passed the back of his hand over his mouth. 'Suppose I tell you that I heard the Fuhrer   
hinnelf address the senior U-boat command and tell them there would be no war?    You want to   
report that back to Washington?    Go ahead, it happens to be true.    You think he'll start a war   
against England with seventy-four operational U-boats? When we have three hundred, that'll   
be a different story, and then England will think twice about making trouble.    And in eighteen   
months, that's exactly what we'll have. 
 
Meantime watch the east." 
 
"Watch the ?"    Victor Henry said in a wondering tone. 
 
Aha, you're a little curious?    I have a brother in the foreign ministry. 
 
Watch the east!    We're not going to be fighting, Henry, not this year, I promise you.    So what   
the hell?    We live one year at a time, no?    Come on, I have a tin ear like you, but we'll sing!" 
 
Victor Henry    sat    with    his    old portable typewriter    on    his    knees,    in the    rosewood-
panelled   
library.    The magnificent antique desk was too high for comfortable typing; and anyway, the   
machine scratched the red leather top.    It was not yet four in the morning, but the stars were   
gone, blue day showed in the garden, and birds sang.    White paper, yellow paper, and carbons   
lay raggedly around him.    The room was cloudy with smoke. He had been typing    since   
midnight.    He stopped, yawning. 
 
In the kitchen he found a cold chicken breast, which he ate with a glass of milk while he heated   
a third pot of coffee.    He returned to the library, gathered up the top white pages of his report to   
the Office of Naval Intelligence, and began reading. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMBAT READINESS OF NAZI GERMANY An Appraisal Nazi Germany is a very   
peculiar country.      The contradictions strike the observer as soon as he arrives.      The old   
Germany is still here, the medieval buildings, the quaint country costumes, the clean big cities,   
the order, the good nature, the neatness, the "thoroughness," the beautiful scenery, the fine- 
looking people, especially the children.    However, there is an extra layer of something new and   
different: the Nazi regime.    It's all over the face of this old country like a rash.    How deep it   
goes is a serious question. The Nazis have certainly put up a highly patriotic, colorful, and   
warlike facade.      The swastika flags, new buildings, marching battalions, Hitler Youth,   
torchlight parades and such are all very striking. But what is behind the facade Is there a   
strong potential for war-making, or is it mainly political propaganda and bluff? 
 
this report gives the first impressions of an officer who has been in Germany four weeks, and   
has been digging for facts. 
 
It is common knowledge that since 1933 Germany has been frankly and even boastfully   
rearming.    Even before the Hitler regime, however, the army surreptitiously armed and trained   
in violation of the Versailles Treaty, with Bolshevik help.    Once the Nazis took power, though   
the Russian contact was dropped, the rearming speeded up and became open. 
 
Nevertheless, twenty years ago this nation was disarmed.    Seven years ago it was still helpless   
compared to the Allies.    The question is, to what extent has that gap been closed by Hitler?   
Building a modern combat force is a big-scale industrial process.    It takes material, manpower,   
and time, no matter what vaunting claims political leaders make. 
 
Two preliminary and interesting conclusions emerge from the facts this observer has been able   
to gather. 
 
( z ) Nazi Germany has not closed the gap sufficiently to embark on a war with England and   
France. 
 
(2) The regime is not making an all-out effort to close the gap. 
 
The next five pages contained ten-year figures-contradicting many intelligence reports he had   
read-d German factory production, of the expansion of industry, and of the output of machines   
and materials.    He drew heavily on his own reading and inquiries.    He presented comparisons   
of French, British, and German gross national products and of strength on land, sea, and in the   
air, during this decade.      These numbers indicated -as he marshalled them-that Germany   
remained inferior in every aspect of war-making, except for her air force; and that she was not   
pushing her industrial plant very hard to catch up. Contrary to popular opinion all over the   
world, there was no feverish piling of arms.    This emerged by a comparison of plant capacity   
and output figures.    He described in passing the desolate peace that fell over the Swinemonde   
navy yard at the usual quitting time.    There was not even a second shift for constructing U- 
boats, the key to German sea warfare. 
 
He argued that the edge in the air would rapidly melt away with the present British speedup in   
making airplanes and buying them from the United States. As to land war, the swarming   
 64 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
uniforms in the city streets were quite a show; but the figures proved that France alone could   
put a larger, longer trained, and better equipped army in the field. 
 
On a U-boat, passing through the squadron's tiny flag office, he had seen scrawled on the   
outside of a mimeographed report some figures and abbreviations that he    thought meant:   
operational, 5z-at sea, 6; in port, 40, overhaul, 5. These figures met the intelligence evaluations   
of the British and the French.      Grohke had claimed seventy-four operational boats, a   
predictable overestimate when talking big to a foreign intelligence officer.      But even   
exaggerating, Grohke had not gone as high as a hundred. 
 
Fifty U-boats were almost certainly the undersea strength of Nazi Germany, give or take five,   
with perhaps only thirteen under construction. 
 
In 1918 alone Germany had lost more than a hundred U-boats. 
 
Then came the crucial paragraph, which he had typed with many pauses, and which he   
anxiously read over and over. 
 
What follows gets into prognostication, and so may be judged frivolous or journalistic.   
However, the impression that this observer has formed points so strongly to a single   
possibility, that it seems necessary to record the judgment.    All the evidence indicates to me   
that Adolf Hitler is at this time negotiating a military alliance with the Soviet Union. 
 
Arguing in support of his idea, Victor Henry alluded to the Rapallo Treaty of 1922, when the   
Bolsheviks and the Germans had stunned a European economic conference by suddenly going   
off and making    a separate deal of broad scope. He pointed out that    the present German   
ambassador in Moscow, Schulenburg, was a Rapallo man. Litvinov, Russia's Jewish pro- 
Western foreign minister, had recently fallen. 
 
Hitler in two speeches had left out his usual attacks on Bolshevism. A Russo-German trade   
agreement had been in the news, but suddenly the papers had dropped all mention of it.    He   
cited, too, the remark of a man high in the U-boat command, 'Watch the east. 
 
Something's happening in the east. I have a brother in the foreign ministry." And he cited   
Hitler's pledge to the U-boat officers that there would be no war over Poland. 
 
None of this, he acknowledged, added up to hard intelligence, nor did it impress the   
professionals at the embassy. There were always, they said, rumors of theatrical surprises.   
They insisted on sticking to basic facts. 
 
The Nazi movement was built on fear and hate of Bolshevism and a pledge to destroy it.    The   
whole dieme of Mein Kampf was conquest of "living room" for Germany in the southeast   
provinces of Russia.    A military reconciliation between the two systems was unthinkable. 
 
Hitler would never propose it. If he did, Stalin, assuming that it was a trick, would never   
accept it.    The words Henry had encountered most often were "fantasy" and "melodrama." 
 
He maintained, nevertheless, that the move not only made sense, but was inevitable. Hitler   
 65 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
was far out on a limb in his threats against Poland. 
 
A dictator could not back down. Yet his combat readiness for a world war was marginal.   
Probably to avoid alarming the people, he had not even put his country on a war production   
basis, contrary to all the lurid blustering propaganda of "cannon instea ugh talk of Nazi pro of   
butter."    Despite this to politicians and newspapers, the man in the street did not want a war,   
and Hitler knew that.    A Russian alliance was a way out of the dilemma.    If Russia gave the   
Germans a free hand in Poland, the English guarantee would become meaningless.    Neither the   
French nor the British could possibly come to Poland's aid in time to avert a quick conquest.   
Therefore the Poles would not fight.      They would yield the city of Danzig and the   
extraterritorial road across the Polish corridor, which was all Hitler was demanding.    Maybe   
later, as in the case of Czechoslovakia, he would move in and take the rest of Poland, but not   
now. 
 
Victor Henry argued that the sudden reversal of alliances was an old European stratagem,   
especially characteristic of German and Russian diplomacy. He described many instances,   
fresh from his heavy history reading.    He pointed out that Hitler himself had come to power in   
the first place through a sharp reversal of political lines, a deal with his worst enemy, Franz   
von Papen. 
 
Fully clothed, he fell asleep on the red leather couch, with the report and two carbon copies   
tucked inside his shirt, after shredding the sheets of carbon paper into the wastebasket. His   
slumber was restless and brief. 
 
When    his    eyes    popped wide open    again, the    sun was    sending    weak    red rays    through 
the   
treetops.      He showered, dressed, read the report again, and walked five miles from the   
Grunewald to the Wilhelmstrasse, turning the document over in his mind.      Compared to   
Tollever's reports, which he had studied, it was a presumptuous discussion of grand strategy,   
far beyond his competence and his position; the sort of "Drew Pearson column" against which   
the Met of Naval Operations himself had warned him.    On the other hand, it seemed to him   
factual.    He had already sent in a number of technical reports like Kip's papers.    He intended to   
write one on Swinemonde.    Combat Readiness of Nazi Germany was a jump into the dark. 
 
In War College seminars, instructors had poked rude fun at "global masterminding" by officers   
below flag rank.    The question was, now that the paper was written, should he send it or forget   
it?    Pug Henry had written and later destroyed many such documents. He had a continuing   
tendency to reach beyond routine. The result Could be good or disastrous. His unsolicited   
memorandum on the battleship blisters had knocked him out of overdue sea duty and landed   
him in Berlin. That report, at least, had been within his professional sphere as an ordnance   
man. 
 
In diplomacy and grand strategy he was a naive newcomer.    Colonel Forrest knew Germany   
well and he had waved aside Henry's suggestion as nonsense.    Pug had ventured to talk to the   
charge d'affaires, whose only comment had been a subtle smile. 
 
A Foreign Service courier was flying to England at 10 A.M to board the New York-bound   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Queen Mary.    The document could be on C.N.O's desk in a week. 
 
Henry arrived at the embassy still undecided, with not much more than a half hour in which to   
make up his mind.    Except for Rhoda, there was nobody whose advice he could ask.    Rhoda   
liked to sleep late.    If he called her now he would probably wake her, and even then he could   
scarcely describe the report on the German telephone.    But would Rhoda in any case offer a   
judgment worth having?    He thought not.    It was up to him-the courier, or the burn basket. 
 
He sat at his desk in the high-ceilinged, cluttered office, sipping coffee, looking out across   
Hermann Goering Strasse at Hitler's monumental new chancellery of pink marble.    The sentry   
guards were changing: eight helmeted black-clad heavy SS men marching up, eight others   
marching away to a drum and LIFE.    Through the open Windows he heard the ritual orders in   
shrill German, the squeal of the LIFE, the scraping tramp of the big black boots. 
 
Victor Henry decided that his job was intelligence, and that for better or worse this report told   
truly what he had seen so far in Nazi Germany. He hunted up the courier and gave him the   
document for urgent delivery to the OfEce of Naval Intelligence. 
 
Admiral Preble read Combat Readiness of Nazi Germany a week later, and sent one page of   
extracts to the President. The Nazisoviet pact broke on the world on the twenty-second of   
August, as one of the most stunning surprises in all history.    On the twenty-fourth Preble   
received the page back in an envelope from the White House.    The President had scrawled at   
the bottom, in strong thick pen strokes in black ink: Let me have V. Henry's service record. 
 
FDR The announcement of the pact shrieked at Byron and Natalie from the news placards in   
the Rome airport.    They had set out from Siena before dawn in an old Renault, and while the   
whole world was chattering about the astounding news, they had innocently driven down along   
the Apennines in golden Italian sunlight, mid old mountain towns, wild airy gorges, and green   
valleys where peasants worked their fields. 
 
With Natalie Jastrow at his side for a three-week journey that was only starting, Byron was in   
the highest of spirits, until he saw the bulletins. 
 
He had never found a European airport so busy or so noisy. 
 
Gesticulating travellers    were    besieging    the reservation    desks, nearly    everybody    was either   
walking fast or running, and sweaty porters wheeling heaps of luggage were snarling at   
passengers and at each other. The loudspeaker never stopped its thunderous echoing drivel. At   
the first kiosk, he bought a sheaf of papers.      The Italian papers shrilled that this great   
diplomatic coup by the this had ended the war danger. The headlines of the Paris and London   
newspapers were big, black, and frightened.    The German press giggled coarse delight in tall   
red block letters. The front page of a Swiss newspaper caricatured Hitler and Goering in   
Russian blouses and fur hats, squatting and kicking out their boots, to the music of a concertina   
played by Stalin in an SS uniform. Across a Belgian front page, the stark headline was 
 
1914? 
 67 
 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
in a crowded, buzzing airport restaurant, while they ate a hasty lunch of cannelloni and cold   
white wine, Natalie astonished him by talking of going on. To proceed into a country that   
might soon be invaded by Germans struck Byron as almost mad. 
 
But Natalie argued that the tourists milling in the airport were mere sheep.    If a sudden political   
change could panic them, they had no right to be in Europe.    She had stayed in Paris through   
the Munich crisis. Half of her American friends had fled, and later had straggled back-those   
who had not felt too silly.    There was always less danger than most people thought.    Even in a   
war, an American passport spelled safety.    She wanted to see Poland.    She wanted to see Leslie   
Slote and had given him her promise.    She would be in and out of Poland in three weeks.    The   
world wasn't going to end in three weeks. 
 
It did not cheer Byron to perceive how much she really wanted to rejoin Slote.    Since the Palio,   
he had hoped that she was warming to himself. The girl had been downright affectionate   
during the second Palio, which they had watched without Jastrow, and at one point in the   
evening -when they were well into a third botdc of Soave at dinner after the race -she had   
remarked that it was too bad he wasn't a few years older, and a Jew. "My mother would take to   
you, Briny," she had said.    "My troubles would be over.    You have good manners.    You must   
have lovely parents. 
 
Leslie Slote is nothing but an ambitious, self-centered dog.    I'm not even sure he loves me.    He   
and I just fell in a hole." 
 
But now she was on her way to her lover, and a political explosion that had staggered Europe   
made no difference to her. 
 
By now he knew something of her rash streak.    Climbing on mountainsides or ruins, Natalie   
Jastrow took unladylike    chances. She leaped gaps, she teetered along narrow ledges, she   
scrambled up bare rocks, careless alike of her modesty and her neck. She was a strong,   
surefooted girl, and a little too pleased with herself about it. 
 
He sat slouched in his chair, contemplating her across the red and white checked cloth, the   
dirty dishes, the empty wineglasses.    The Alitalia plane was departing for Zagreb on the first   
leg of their flight in little more than an hour.    She stared back, her lips pushed out in a wry   
pout.    Her dark gray travelling suit was sharply tailored over her pretty bosom.    She wore a   
black crushable hat and a white shirt.    Her ringless fingers beat on the cloth.    "Look," she said,   
"I can well understand that for you it's no longer a gay excursion.    So I'll go on by myself." 
 
'I suggest you telephone Slote first.    Ask him if you should come." 
 
Natalie drummed her fingers.    "Nonsense, I'll never get a call through to Warsaw today." 
 
"Try." 
 
"All right," she snapped.    "Where are the damned telephones?" 
 
The long-distance office was mobbed.      Two switchboard girls were shouting, plugging,   
 68 
 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
unplugging, scrawling, waving their hands, and wiping sweat from their brows. Byron cut   
through the crowd, pulling Natalie by the hand. When she gave the operator a number in   
Warsaw, the girl's sad huge brown eyes widened.    "Signorina-Warsaw?    Why don't you ask me   
to ring President Roosevelt?    It's twelve hours' delay to Warsaw."    "That's the number of the   
American embassy there," Byron said, smiling at her, "and it's life and death." 
 
He had an odd thin-lipped smile, half-melancholy, half-gay, and the Italian girl warmed to it as   
to an offered bunch of violets. 
 
"American embassy?    I can try." 
 
She plugged, rang, argued in German and Italian, made faces at the mouthpiece, and argued   
some more.    "Urgent, emergency," she kept shouting.    This went on for ten minutes or more,   
While Byron smoked and Natalie paced and kept looking at her watch.    With a surprised look,   
the operator all at once nodded violently, pointing to a booth. 
 
Natalie stayed inside a long time, and came out red-faced and scowling. 
 
"We were cut off before we finished. I'm choking to death. Let's get some air." Byron   
brought her out into the terminal.    "He got angry with me.    He told me I was insane. 
 
The diplomats are burning their papers.... It was an awfully good connection.    He might have   
been around the corner." 
 
"I'm sorry, Natalie, but it's what I expected.    yp "He said I should get the hell out of Italy and   
go straight home, with or without Aaron. Is that what you'd have told me?"    She turned on him. 
 
'I'm so hot!    Buy me a lemonade or something." 
 
They sat at a little table outside an airport cafe.    She said, "Let's see the plane tickets." 
 
"I'm sure we can get refunds."    He handed her the envelope. 
 
She extracted her ticket and gave the envelope back.    "You get a refund. They burned papers   
before Munich too.    England and France will fold up now just the way they did then.    Imagine   
a world war over Danzig!    Who the hell knows where Danzig is?    Who cares?" 
 
"Natalie, that embassy will be swamped.    You won't see much of him." 
 
"Well, if he's too busy for me, I'll do my sightseeing alone.    My family lived in Warsaw for   
years.    I still have relatives there.    I want to see it.    I'm on my way and I'm not turning back."   
The girl looked in her pocketbook mirror and jammed her hat further down on her head.    "It   
must be about time for me to check in." 
 
He held out his hand. "Give me the ticket. I'll check both of us in while you have your   
lemonade." 
 
She brightened, but looked suspicious.    "Are you sure you want to go? 
 69 
 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
You needn't, honestly.    I'm releasing you.    Don't come.    I don't want you. 
 
Tell Aaron I said that." 
 
"Oh shut up, Natalie.    Let's have the ticket." 
 
She gave him a playful smile, clutching the green and yellow ticket to her bosom. "Well!   
listen to Briny Henry being master of. 
 
The whole thing so is, darling, if anything does go wrong, I don't ever want to feel I dragged   
you into trouble." 
 
This was the first time Natalie Jastrow had-however casually-used a term of endearment to   
him.    Byron stood up and pulled the ticket from her gloved hand. 
 
The scheduled eight-hour trip lasted a day and a half.    No connections worked.    Their baggage   
vanished.    They spent the night on benches in the Budapest terminal.    At Warsaw, they were   
the only foreigners arriving at the small field in the nearly empty, rusty, shabby LOT plane,   
which turned right around and took off jam-packed with people fleeing Poland. Disconsolate   
travellers crowded the fence and watched it go. 
 
A beefy young Pole in an olive uniform, speaking broken French, asked the two Americans   
many hostile questions and seemed to regard them as spies or lunatics.    He confiscated their   
passports, muttered with other officials, told them to wait, and disappeared.      They were   
famished,    but    the    throng    of    refugees in    the canteen,    mostly Germans, sitting on    luggage,   
squatting on the floor, or crowding every bench and chair, had long since eaten up all the food.   
Byron pounced on a couple of seats vacated for a moment.    Bottles of warm Polish beer stood   
in the center of the table, with an opener and some glasses, so they drank warm beer and paid   
the waiter who came swooping down. Then Byron found a telephone and talked the waiter   
into calling the embassy. Slote was shocked to hear his voice. He appeared at the airport   
within the hour, chewing nervously on his cold pipe, in a shiny blue Chevrolet that prompted   
stares.    Out came not only the passports, with various entry documents badly printed in purple   
ink on crude paper, but their luggage too, mysteriously rescued from the Balkans.    They piled   
into the embassy car and set off for the city. 
 
Natalie looked trim and pert after a last grooming in the ladies' loungee size of a telephone   
booth, she said, with one cold water tap, and no seat on the single toilet bowl. 'Dens this   
continue, ic?"    she said.    "I mean, this is the airport of the capital of Poland!    The further east   
we've come, the smaller the airports have gotten, the more loused-up the schedules, the worse   
the airplanes, the surlier the officials, the cruder the johns, and the rougher the toilet paper.    I'm   
not sure my bottom would survive a trip to Russia." 
 
"Well, eastern Europe is another world, Natalie.    And you're seeing it at a bad time.    This little   
airport's usually deserted and half asleep. However -he jabbed the stem of his pipe toward   
her-"if you choose to go on a pleasure trip during a time of general mobilization-" 
 
"Here it comes, Briny," she said, her eyes full of dark amusement. 
 70 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Slote reached a caressing hand, with a large blue-gemmed college ring, to her face.    The easy   
intimate gesture hurt Byron's eyes, signalling the end of his exclusive (if unheated) possession   
of the girl's company. 
 
He slumped glumly in the back seat. "I'm thrilled to see you, darling, though you're stark   
mad," Slote said.      "Things are looking much better tonight.      England finally signed her   
guarantee to Poland, just today. The betting was that the pact with Russia would make  her   
crawfish. Nothing of the sort.    There's reliable word from Sweden that Hitler's calling off his h   
unmistakable." 
 
invasion.    The English knocked his breath out, that's I hope." 
 
"Where are you putting us?    A place with bathtubs, "It's no problem. In the past three days the   
hotels have emptied.    The Europeiski has some luxurious rooms, quite Western, really, and at   
Eastern prices. Don't figure on staying long. The situation can still Turn sour overnight." 'I   
thought maybe a week," Natalie said.    "Then Byron and I can fly or drive down to Cracow and   
visit Medzice, and then fly on back t'o Rome." 
 
"Great bloody Christ, what are you talking about?    Medzice!    just forget it, Natalie!    'y should   
I?    Uncle Aaron said I should visit the family in Medzice.    That's where we're all from.    My   
gosh, this is flat country.    Flat as a table." 
 
They were driving through fields of sweet-smelling ripe grain, interspersed with pastures   
where cows and horses grazed. Far, far ahead on the level plain, the buildings of Warsaw   
dimly rose. 
 
"Exactly, and that's Poland's curse.    It's a soccer field, a hundred thousand square miles in size.   
Fine for invasions.    Even the low mountains along the south have nice wide easy passes.    Half   
a million German soldiers are in Czechoslovakia at this moment, poised at the Jablunka pass,   
forty miles from Medzice.    Now do you understand?" 
 
Natalie made a face at him. 
 
Warsaw was much calmer than Rome.      In lamplit twilight, welldressed crowds, heavily   
sprinkled with uniforms, were happily promenailing on the broad avenues, eating ice cream,   
smoking, chatting. 
 
The green parks were thronged with jocund children. Bright red buses went by with side   
placards    advertising a movie;    the name    SHMEY    TEMPLIE stood out from Polish words.   
Splashy billboards touted Cennan toothpastes, radios, and hair tonic.    The long rows of four- 
story gray or brown buildings, the boulevards    running into great squares    flamboyant    with   
statues, bordered by baroque official buildings or palaces, the electric signs beginning to flash   
and dance-all this made Byron think of Paris and London. It was strange to find such a   
metropolis at the end of the primitive air journey.    The Europeiski Hotel had a lobby as ornate   
as any he had seen, with a massive brown-and-white marble staircase jutting down to the front   
door. 
 71 
 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Natalie went up in the elevator.    Slote detained Byron by touching his arm, then lit his pipe   
with harried flaming puffs.    To Byron, seeing him after a lapse of many months, the Foreign   
Service man appeared impossibly old for Natalie; bespectacled, baggy-eyed, with marked lines   
in his lean sallow cheeks. A double-breasted chalk-striped dark suit emphasized his stodgy   
mature air, and he appeared shorter than Byron remembered. 
 
'I wish I had time to buy you a drink," Slote said.    "I'd like to talk to you.    This Cracow trip is   
dangerous nonsense.    I'm going to get you air reservations out of here as soon as I can.    They   
must be booked solid for a week, but the embassy has some pull.    If it takes both of us to put   
her bodily on a plane back to Rome, it's got to be done. 
 
Don't tell her tonight, though. 
 
She'll become unmanageable."    "Okay.    You know her better than I do." 
 
Slote shook his head, laughing.    "I wonder, at this point.    I ought to be deeply touched by this   
cuckoo visit-and I    am, I am, of    course I am-but Natalie Jastrow is too much for almost   
anybody.    See you at dinner.    The embassy's a madhouse.    If I can't get away, I'll telephone."   
Byron sat for a while in his cavernous gloomy room with tall wl'windows facing the Bristol   
Hotel, wondering what the hell he was doing in Poland. He picked up the antique ivory- 
handled telephone, and with some haggling in German managed to get connected to Natalie's   
room. 
 
"Hello.    Are you in the bathtub yet?"    "Well, I'm glad you can't see me. What's up?, "I'm beat.   
You have dinner with Slote. I'm going to bed." 'Stop that rubbish. You're dining with us,   
Briny.    You come and fetch me at nine, do you hear?    Leslie has booked me into Paderewski's   
suite, or something.    it's fantastic.    I've got a fun-length mirror here, held up by two big brown   
wooden angels."    This way," Slote said. 'Our table's ready." 
 
An orchestra in gold-frogged red coats was thumping old jazz tunes in the main dining room of   
the Bristol, which for size, silk hangings, white linen, gilt-and-crystal chandeliers,   
obsequiousness of waiters, fine dress of the thronging customers, and ineptness on the dance   
floor, might have been in any first-class hotel in Europe.    Certainly there was no trace of a war   
scare. 
 
"Sorry I'm late.    It's the Jews," Slote apologized when they sat down. 
 
"They're storming the embassy.    We've all become visa officers, right on up to Biddle.    Christ   
knows I don't blame them.    If they can show a relative, a friend, a letter, anything, we process   
them.    A New York telephone book, today in Warsaw, is worth a hundred zlotys, that's about   
twenty dollars." 
 
"That puzzled me," Natalie said.    "I understood Warsaw was full of Jews. I've seen very few so   
far." 
 
"Oh, they're here, all right.    A third of this city's Jewish."    At this point a tailcoated, homing   
headwaiter brought a menu, and Slote had a long colloquy with him in Polish.    Natalie listened   
 72 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
With an admiring, envious look. 
 
"Les, was it very hard to learn?    One day I'll try," she said as the waiter left.    "My folks used to   
talk Polish when they didn't want me to understand.    I'm haunted by a sense of being back in   
my childhood, and yet this is such a foreign place!    It's all very singular." 
 
They ate amazingly good smoked salmon, a strange egg dish, and tough roast meat.    Slote kept   
tossing off brown Polish vodka in a thimblesize glass, while the others drank good French   
wine. 
 
"Leslie, you're going to be stone drunk."    Natalie sounded more jovial than disapproving. 
 
'There's so little in every glass," Slote said, pouring more from the bottle.    "I've had a very hard   
day.    Even without you turning up, you fool." 
 
They smiled at each other.    Byron wished he had gone to bed. 
 
Slote looked at him and with a polite effort resumed talking. 
 
"Hell, yes. 
 
It's a historical puzzle, really, how three and a half million Jews came to settle in Poland.    It's   
such an anarchic country.    You'd think they'd have chosen a more stable place.    I have a theory.   
I sort of wonder what Aaron would make of it." 
 
"What's your theory about us Polish Jews, Leslie?"    Natalie said with a grin. 
 
"That the anarchy was the inducement. Imagine a government of nearly a thousand barons,   
any one of whom could veto any legislation. 
 
That's the way they stumbled along here for centuries.      No wonder Poland kept getting   
partitioned!    Well, as long as the Jews could work things out with each individual nobleman   
they could at least live and farm and work.    No oppression to fear." 
 
"Not bad," said Natalie.    "But in point of fact, didn't the Polish kings welcome them in with cia   
sPe I protective laws?    When Spain expelled them and the Holy Church was having one of its   
bad spasms of bounding and massacring the Jews?    That's as I recall it." 
 
"I haven't studied the thing," Slote said, "but the Poles eventually took to doing that too." 
 
"That's why I was born on Long Island," said Natalie.    "My grandfather got out, and a good   
thing." 
 
"What military shape are the Poles in?"    Byron asked Slote.    "Will they give Hitler a fight, if it   
comes to that?" 
 
"A fight?"    Slote sucked on his pipe, looking up into the air. 
 
His tone turned measured and professional.    "My, ask any one of them, and he'll probably tell   
you they'll defeat the Germans.    After all, they defeated them brilliant, talking in x4lO1 These   
 73 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
are strange people, Byron.    They can be about politics and history, yet they don't give a damn   
that Germany is now an industrial giant, while Poland remains all farms and Jews and castles   
and mazurkas. Maybe they're right. Maybe the Polish fighting spirit will scatter the stupid   
unwilling cattle of Hitler. That's the talk. There are supposed to be two and a half million   
Poles in uniform, more men than Hitler's got.    A highly questionable figure, but in this country,   
any statistics-"'Say, isn't that 'Stardust'?"    Natalie put in.    "It sounds a bit like 'Stardust." 
 
Dance with me." 
 
Byron thought Slote looked more like her uncle than her sweetheart, steering her clumsily   
around the floor.    But Natalie's clinging attitude, closed eyes, and touching cheek weren't the   
ways of a niece. They exchanged a few laughing words, then Natalie said something that made   
Slote look serious and shake his head.    They argued as they danced. 
 
"I'll find him without you," Natalie was saying as they came back to the table. 
 
"I didn't say I wouldn't help you find him.    I said if you're going to talk to him about going to   
Medzice-" 
 
"Just forget it.    Forget I mentioned it." 
 
Slote took two more shots Natalie glowered at the meat on her plate of vodka.    To lighten the   
atmosphere, Byron asked Slote about the workings of the embassy.    Looking relieved, Slote   
turned on the measured voice. 
 
it blurred his brain; it made him talkative. 
 
The alcohol hadn He sketched the organization and said that he was in the political section, but   
that since his arrival, he had been preoccupied with the flood of emigrants, as had everybody   
else. 
 
"Were you fellows surprised by the pact?" 
 
"Naturally.    Even the Poles were struck dumb, and in their history they've seen everything.    But   
nobody can predict Hitler. That's his genius, if you want to call it that. He does have an   
instinct for the breathtaking." 
 
The cloud was clearing from Natalie's face.    "Leslie, why did Stalin go along?" 
 
"Honey, that's perfectly simple.    Hitler offered him a piece of cake on a gold platter, and he   
simply said, 'Yes, thank you!" Stalin's completely turned the tables on England and France   
now.    They froze him out o'f Munich- In effect, they handed Czechoslovakia to Hitler and said,   
'Here, boy, leave us alone and go smash Russia."    Now Stalin's done a Munich in reverse.    'No,   
no, here, boy, take Poland, and go and smash the West."' With little rapid puffs of blue smoke,   
clearly enjoying the chance to expound, Slote went on, "Lord, how the British have been   
asking for this! 
 
An alliance with Russia was their one chance to stop Germany. 
 74 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
They had years in which to do it.    All of Stalin's fear of Germany and the Nazis was on their   
side.    And what did they do?    Dawdle, fuss, flirt with Hitler, and give away Czechoslovakia.   
Finally, finally, they sent some minor politicians on a slow boat to see Stalin. When Hitler   
decided to gamble on this alliance, he shot his foreign minister to Moscow on a special plane,   
with powers to sign a deal.    And that's why we're within inches of a world war." 
 
"Is it going to come?"    Natalie asked. 
 
"Why, I thought you and Aaron were the authorities for the view that it won't." 
 
I'm not ready to panic.    It just seems to me that Hitler will get what he wants, as usual." 
 
Slote's face turned pinched and sombre.    He pulled at the pipe, sucking in his pallid cheeks.   
"No. The Poles now have the signed British guarantee. Very gallant, very irrational, very   
belated, and probably futile.    To that extent we're back in 1914.    Poland can plunge the world   
in by standing firm.    it's all up to Hitler.    If he wants to arm some more first, the crisis will   
subside, and that seems to be in the Wind at the moment. 
 
But for all we know, he's already given the order to march. 
 
That's why I'm being such a pill about Medzice.    Down there, in the next two weeks, you have   
a fifty-fifty chance of being captured by German soldiers.    I do think that's a bit risky, dear." 
 
After dinner Slote drove them to another part of town: street after street of old brick houses of   
three and four stories, with shops everywhere at ground level.    Here indeed were Jews by the   
thousands, strolling on the sidewalks through narrow cobbled streets, looking out of windows,   
sitting in shop doorways.    On the street corners knots of bearded men argued with loud voices   
and sweeping gestures, as on Manhattan's Lower East Side.    Many of the men wore kaftans, or   
else the boots, blouses, and caps of the countryside. There were men in ankle-length black   
coats and black hats, and a few youngsters in army uniform. There were some prosperous   
people, too, smooth-shaven men wearing bowlers and wellgroomed women looking much like   
the Warsaw Gentiles around the darted about at their street games, boys in caps Europeiski.   
Children and short trousers and girls in neat colored frocks, and their mothers gossiped as they   
watched them. 
 
'I thought you said they were all storming the embassy," Byron remarked to Slote. 
 
"There are three hundred and fifty thousand of them, Byron. Maybe one in a hundred has   
foresight. That puts three or four thousand hammering at our doors. The rest believe what   
they want to believe, and vaguely hope for the best.    The government keeps telling everybody   
there won't be a war."    Natalie was looking around with an absent, pleased expression at the   
horse-drawn wagons and handcarts in the streets, and at an old trolley car clanking by.    "My   
parents described all this to me when I was a child," she said.    'It seems not to have changed."   
People    stopped and looked    after    the embassy car as    it    passed. Once    Slote halted    to    ask   
directions.    The Jews came clustering around, but gave only vague cautious answers in Polish. 
 
'Let me try," Natalie said, and she began to talk Yiddish, causing an astonished outbreak of   
 75 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
laughter, followed by a burst of warm, friendly talk. 
 
A chubby boy in a ragged cap volunteered to run ahead of the car and show the way.    They set   
off after him. 
 
"Well done," Slote said. 
 
"I can hack out Yiddish after a fashion, if I must," Natalie said. 
 
"Aaron's a master of it, though he never utters a Yiddish word." 
 
Natalie and Slote got out at a gray brick apartment building with tall narrow windows, an   
ornate iron door, and window boxes of blooming geraniums.    It overlooked a small green park,   
where Jews congregated on the benches and around a gushing fountain in noisy numbers.   
Curious children ran from the park to ring Byron in the American car. Under their merry   
stares, as they freely discussed him and the machine, Byron felt somewhat like an ape behind   
glass. The faces of the Jewish children were full of life and mischief, but they offered no   
discourtesy, and some gave him shy smiles. He wished he had gifts for them.    He took his   
fountain pen from his pocket, and through the open window offered it to a blackhaired girl in a   
lilac dress with white lace cuffs and collar. The girl hung back, blinking wary dark brown   
eyes. The other children encouraged her with shouts and giggles.    At last she took the pen, her   
little cool fingers brushing his hand for a moment, and ran lightly away. 
 
"Well, wouldn't you know.    He's not there," Natalie said, returning to the car with Slote a few   
minutes later.    "Gone to Medzice for his son's wedding, with the whole family, just my luck.   
Aaron told me he deals in mushrooms, but can that be such a good business?    He's evidently   
well off."    'llnusually so," Slote was starting the car. 
 
"This must be the best apartment house around here." 
 
The little girl in lilac reappeared, leading her parents, the father in a knee-length gray frock   
coat and a mode-brimmed gray hat, the mother kerchiefed, wearing a German-tailored brown   
suit, and carrying a baby in a pink blanket. 
 
'He's thanking you," Slote said to Byron, as the father gravely spoke in Polish through the   
%indow, holding the fountain pen, "and he says it's much too expensive, and please take it   
back."    'Tell him the American fell in love with his daughter.    She's the most beautiful girl in   
the world, and she must keep it." 
 
The father and mother laughed when Slote translated.      The little girl shrank against her   
mother's skirt and shot Byron an ardent look. 
 
The mother undid from her lapel a gold brooch with purple stones, and pressed it on Natalie,   
who tried to decline it, speaking in Yiddish. 
 
Again this caused surprise and a cascade of jocund talk, the upshot of which was that she had   
to keep the brooch.    The little girl kept the pen, and they drove off to shouted farewells. 
 76 
 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Well, I wasn't on a looting expedition," Natalie said.    "Here, Byron. 
 
It's beautiful.    Give it to your girlfriend, or your sister, or your mother." 
 
"Keep it, it's yours, " he said rudely.    "I could consider staying in Warsaw and waiting for that   
girl to grow up "Not with those parents," Slote said.    "She's for a rabbi." 
 
"Steer clear of ewish girls anyway, they're bad loss," Natalie said. 
 
"Amen," said Slote. 
 
Natalie was pinning the brooch on her jacket.    "I guess I'll see Berel in Medzice, then, Too bad,   
Aaron said he was very clever, and could show me things in Warsaw that nobody else could.   
They used to study the Talmud together, though Berel was much younger." 
 
At the mention of Medzice, Slote despairingly shook his head. 
 
ATALI:G telephoned Byron in his room at seven O!clock one morning, Natter they had stayed   
up till well past three, touring nightclubs with Slote; dismal Polish imitations of Paris dives.    In   
a nervously merry mood, she had pushed them on from one club to another, ignoring Slote's   
show of collapsing fatigue. 
 
'Hi, Briny, are you dead?"    From her chipper note, she might have had ten hours' sleep.    "This   
is playing sort of dirty, but I have two seats on the plane to Cracow, and it leaves at eleven.    I   
bought them yesterday. 
 
If you'd rather sleep and just stay here, okay.    I'll be back in a couple of days. 
 
Half awake, Byron said, "What?    Slote's got us on the plane to Rome tomorrow, Natalie, and   
those reservations were mighty hard to come by." 
 
"I know.    I'll leave him a note.    Maybe I'll phone him from the airport. If you come, we won't   
have to return to Warsaw at all. We'll go straight on to Rome from Cracow, Saturday or   
Sunday, after I visit my family." 
 
"Have you got reservations from there?"    'No.    But Cracow's a hub. 
 
There are half a dozen ways to get out. 
 
We'll buy our tickets-plane or train or bus-as soon as we arrive there. 
 
Well?    Byron!    Have you fallen back asleep?"    "I'm thinking." 
 
Byron was weighing the advantage of leaving Warsaw and Slote, against these harebrained   
travel arrangements.    The war crisis seemed to be abating. 
 
The Poles in the nightclubs had acted gay and carefree, though Slote had remarked on the   
absence of foreigners, especially Germans. 
 
The streets were as calm as ever, and there were no visible preparations for war.    Byron had   
 77 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
taken to gauging the state of the crisis by the tone of Radio Warsaw.    He now knew a few key   
words and phrases about the crisis, and much could sometimes be surmised from the shaky or   
relieved accents of the newscasters.    In the United States, announcers in a time of crisis tended   
to use sonorous doom-filled voices, to thrill ffieir listeners.    The Polish broadcasters, nearer the   
action, were less bent on being dramatic.    In the past day or two they had not sounded quite so   
worried. 
 
He said, 'Have you heard any news?" 
 
"I just got BBC on shortwave.    Same bulletins as last night. 
 
Henderson's talking to Hitler." 
 
"Natalie, this would be a damned wild excursion."    'y?    I'll probably never have another chance   
to see where my parents were born. 
 
I'm here now.    Leslie himself said last night that the worst seems to be over, that they've agreed   
to negotiate.    Anyway, you don't have to come. I mean that.    It'll be a bore for you, slogging   
around in the Polish countryside." 
 
"Well, I'll have breakfast with you."    Byron packed fast.    The more time he spent with Natalie   
Jastrow the more she puzzled him.    Her relationship with Uslie Slote now baffled him too.    If   
they were spending time in bed together-and he had to assume that this was part of her purpose   
in coming to Warsaw, if not all of it-they were finding odd hurried occasions for this, or taking   
pains to mislead him.    Night after night Slote had said his farewells in the hotel lobby.    She   
treated Slote, when they were together, with the loving warmth of a fiance, yet when Byron   
tried to %ithdraw from their company-for dinner, for a concert or the theatre, even for a tour of   
the embassy-she made him come along.    It had crossed his mind, of course, that she might be   
using him-perhaps had even asked him along to Warsaw-to provoke Slote. 
 
If so, the tactic was failing.    The Foreign Service man was cordial to Byron and appeared to   
take his tagging along entirely for granted. But it was hard to tell anything about Slote, except   
that he was weary, swamped with work, and very concerned about Natalie's presence in   
Poland. 
 
There had been more to her persistence in the journey-that was becoming clear to Byron-than   
desire for her lover. The Jewish streets of Warsaw fascinated her. No matter where they   
started an evening, they ended in those narrow byways.    She had even dragged Byron (Slote   
had begged off) to a performance of O'Neill's Ah, Williss!    at a little Yiddish theatre in a back   
alley, with a stage not twenty feet wide and a ragged curtain. For him it was a bizarre and   
tedious experience. 
 
But the mixture of apple-pie American characters and stylized jemish emoting in that shabby   
hall had much amused and moved her. 
 
"That was me, I guess," she had said, coming out of the theatre into the warm night, in the   
muddy alley bordered with sagging half-timbered houses. 
 78 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"That exact strange mixture. I never quite understood that, and I'm still sorting it out. It's   
disconcerting but exciting.    like seeing myself for the first time in a home movie."    Evidently   
this same fascination was drawing her to Medzice. 
 
She was waiting for him in the restaurant.    Somewhere she had bought a Polish dress, a bright   
flowery print with an open neck, and she had combed her heavy hair forward covering much of   
her forehead in an outdated American style, as the Warsaw women did. 
 
"Will I get by?    I'm so bored with all these stares, as though I had horns."    "So long as you've   
got your passport handy, okay.    Don't go too nalive." 
 
"Oh sure, and there's always this."    At her feet was a blue suede sack with drawstrings.    'Suit,   
shirt, bat, stockings, girdle. I can go into a ladies' room anytime    and emerge a complete   
Amerikanka, full of indignation and waving dollars.    Are you coming?    No, of course." 
 
"Yes.    My bag's in the lobby."    "Honestly?    You're as goofy as I am, Briny."    She looked at him   
from under her eyebrows, with a slow blink of her dark eyes, and Byron thought of the little   
ghetto girl in the lilac dress.    "Tell me, don't you like Slote a little better now?" 
 
"I don't dislike him.    I'm sorry for him at the moment, he's certainly in over his head."    The   
waitress put down plates of food.    He said, "Well, you ordered for both of us.    Fine.    There's   
nothing like this Polish ham." 
 
She said, 'I'm even beginning to feel slightly guilty here, eating ham. 
 
Imagine!"    Natalie cut and ate the thick pink meat with no visible remorse. 
 
"I don't know anything about your religion," Byron said. "Neither do I, andies hardly my   
religion. I dropped it before I was eleven years old-temple, Hebrew classes, everything. It   
grieved my father: he's a Zionist, an officer in the temple, and all that.    But our rabbi was such   
a boring dunce, Briny! And my father simply couldn't answer my questions. He's not an   
intellectual like Aaron, he's a businessman. When I was eleven I'd re 
 
ad more books than he had." 
 
"But he just allowed you to drop it?"    Byron said.    "Like that? 
 
My father wouldn't have, that's for sure."    "Possibly military men are different," Natalie said   
with a skeptical smile.    "Most fathers can't do much with daughters.    Anyway, I was an only   
child, and very good, on the whole.    I just wouldn't keep up flummery that made no sense to   
me. 
 
Well!"    She set her knife and fork down.    "Coffee and then on to Medzice.    Correct?" 
 
"I'm with you." 
 
A rickety taxi, with thick surgical tape criscrossing the cracked yellow windows, brought them   
to the airport. The lone aircraft on the sunny field looked so rusty and patched that Byron   
thought it might be a wreck; but as they arrived, People came out on the grass and began   
 79 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
boarding it. 
 
"I don't know," Byron said as He paid the cab driver. "Do you suppose it will leave the   
ground?    Maybe we should have this fellow wait." 
 
Natalie    laughed and went to telephone Slote; but he was not in his apartment,    nor at the   
embassy.      The terminal was still crowded with Germans, though so few seemed left in   
Warsaw.    Only Poles, and a few Jews, boarded the Cracow plane and took the awkward iron   
seats. 
 
The plane did leave the ground, with bumps and shudders that slightly parted the metal floor   
plates, affording a view underfoot of green fields and admitting a jet of warm air that billowed   
Natalie's skirt. She tucked it under her thighs and fell asleep.    After a half hour or so the plane   
dived, slamming down to a stop near a barn in an open field, amid tall grass and wild flowers.   
BY]ron thought it was a forced landing, but several passengers took their valises and got off. 
 
Another bop of about an hour brought them to Cracow, the plane passing from green fladands   
to low mountains, part forested, part farmed, all checkered with fields of yellow, black, and   
purple. 
 
The Cracow terminal was a wooden hut behind a wire fence. Byron was glad to leave the   
plane, which reeked of hot iron and gasoline, and to walk out on a sunny, breezy field as   
fragrant as a flo gard either de of the tar ed la weren.    On sir nding strip, kerchiefed peasant   
women were mowing hay in the sunshine. There were no cars in sight and only one mud- 
caked green bus. Some Passengers, met by their relatives, climbed into heavy horse-dravm   
wagons and went creaking off. 
 
"Any idea how we get to Cracow?"    Byron said. 
 
"That bus must go there," Natalie said. 
 
A brown-bearded Jew standing alone and erect at the gate, in a long dark coat and a wide Hat   
dark hat, drew near, touching his hat with his hand. 'You excuse?    Americans?    Jastrow?" 
 
Natalie regarded him dubiously.    'y, yes.    You're not Berel?" 
 
"Yes, yes.    jochanan Berel Jastrow.- He broke into a broad smile. 
 
"You excuse, poor English.    Speak you Dytsche?    Franos?" 
 
'Frans, un pew,; and she switched into French. "How did you know we'd be on this plane?   
Wellf Byron, this is Uncle Aaron's cousin, my father's cousin.    Byron Henry is a good friend of   
mine, Berel." 
 
The two men shook hands, and the Jew smoothed his long grayflecked brown beard, scanning   
Byron's face.    Berel Jastrow had a broad nose, heavy eyebrows, and surprisingly blue deeset   
eyes with a" almost Tartar slant. His glance was incisive, Byron felt that Jastrow classed him in   
a second or two as a Gentile, though probably a friendly one. 
 80 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Enchants," Jastrow said. 
 
He led them to a rust-pitted car on the other side of the shed. 
 
The driver was a scrawny man in a light sweater and a skullcap, with a little bright red beard.   
After a parley in Yiddish they set off. 
 
Natalie explained to Byron that they were going straight to Medzice. 
 
The Jastrow family was agog to see her, and Cracow was twenty miles the other way.    They   
regarded it as a wonderful omen that the American cousin was falling on them from the skies   
the day before the wedding. 
 
Natalie had telegraphed to jochanan Jastrow, Medzice, saying she expected to arrive today.   
But she had not mentioned the plane, scarcely expecting that the wire would reach him. 
 
'Mais pourquoi pas?    La Pologne nest pas I'Afrique ' Berel interI objected, brightly following   
Natalie's    English. 'gest un pays    tout a fait moderne    et civili."    Byron    found it decidedly   
peculiar to hear clear good French spoken he would by this figure out of a ghetto painting or   
play.    Jastrow told him arrange for their return to Rome the day after tomorrow; he had good   
connections in Cracow, and getting train or air tickets would be no problem at all. 
 
Swerving to avoid the worst holes, the car bounced along a bad tar road. They drove through   
tiny villages of straw-thatched log houses, painted with strips of blue between the logs.    The   
driver had to maneuver around pigs, chickens, and cattle wandering in the road.    Many of the   
houses were weathered gray, sagging, or toppling; some had no windows; but nearly all had   
new, or freshly varnished, doors.    Close to each village, on a rise of ground, stood a church of   
wood.    In the sun-flooded fields women and men toiled with hand implements or horse-drawn   
plows. The car passed massive wagons of hand-hewn wood pulled by muscular, resigned   
horses, and driven by muscular, resigned women and men, their sex indistinguishable except   
for marks like kerchiefs and beards.    No tractor or automobile or any other machine appeared   
along the way until they came to Oswiecim, a medium-sized railroad town of brick buildings   
and wide streets, cut in two by a muddy river.    Here the car stopped in the main square at the   
telephone exchange, and Natalie got out with Berel to phone Slote. 
 
Byron strolled around the square in the hot sun, attracting covert looks from the townspeople.   
He bought ice cream, and the shopgirl took his money without a word.    Oswiecim was nothing   
like Warsaw: a flat town of low drab buildings, with an air of back-country dislike of strangers-   
Byron was glad to leave it.    Natalie told him as they drove out into level green fields, on a dirt   
road along the river, that Slote, furious and alarmed, had said uncomplimentary things about   
Byron's intelligence, though she had tried to take all the blame on herself.    "I think he's got a   
case of nerves," she said.    "You don't suppose he's afraid of the Germans?" 
 
"Look, it was an unceremonious way to leave him." 
 
She said, with an odd little glance at Byron, "It wasn't all that um ceremonious. We were   
together till dawn, you know, talking.    He ought to be tired of me." 
 81 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'What?    I saw you Turn in at three." 
 
"Oh, yes, but then he rang me from the lobby, said he was too exhausted to sleep, or   
something, and I came down and we went out again." 
 
"I see.    You must be really beat." 
 
"Strangely enough I feel wonderful.    The nap on the plane, and now, all this sweet country air!   
Poland smells delicious.    I never read that in a book." 
 
"Poland a foist-class country," Berel spoke up in English, stroking his beard.    "Strong pipple.   
Hitler a big bluff.    No war." 
 
Byron's stay in Medzice remained in his memory forever after as something like a trip to the   
moon.    Though the usual church stood on the usual knoll, the villagers were almost all Jews.   
Medzice was a cluster of houses on crooked narrow dirt or cobbled streets, some log, some   
plastered, a few of brick, sloping down toward a flat green meadow and the winding river. 
 
About a mile beyond the town, a roofless great house in the style of a French chateau lay   
ruined on the river bank.    The noble family was extinct, the house was a casualty of the World   
War, but the village survived. 
 
The Jastrows and their relatives seemed to comprise half of Medzice. 
 
They swarmed on Natalie and Byron and marched them joyously from home to home. The   
dark interiors were all much the same: tiny rooms, enormous stoves, heavy polished Victorian   
furniture, lace curtains, each house seething underfoot with children ranging from crawlers to   
adolescents. Wine, cake, tea, hard candies, vodka, and fish appeared on table after table.    There   
was no polite way to refim.    After a while Byron was physically uncomfortable, because there   
was never a toilet pause.    In all the hours that this was going on, he never understood a word   
that anybody said.    It seemed to him that all the Jews talked continuously and simultaneously.   
Natalie chattered away with these bearded men in dark blouses, breeches, and heavy boots,   
these unpainted work-worn women in plain dresses that reached their ankles.      They all   
appeared enthralled by her. 
 
Outside each house a crowd gathered, joining the conversation through the windows.    The visit   
of the two Americans was obviously one of the grandest events in Medzice since the war.  
 
what a world!    No sidewalks, no shops, no movie houses, no garages, no cars, no bicycles, no   
streetlights, no hydrants, no billboards; not a sound, not a sight to connect the town with the   
twentieth century, except a string of telegraph poles stretching along the river. Yet Natalie   
Jastrow was only one generation removed from this place.    Dr. Aaron Jastrow, the author of A   
jeuls Jesus, the full professor of history at Yale, the urbane friend of the archbishop of Siena,   
had lived here until his fifteenth year, and had looked like one of these pale, skinny, studious   
boys in big black skullcaps and ear curls! Byron could not imagine what these people made of   
him, but they were fully as cordial to him as to Natalie, substituting smiles and gestures for the   
talk with which they flooded her.    (The next day Natalie told him that she had identified him as   
 82 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
her protector, an American naval officer sent along by Uncle Aaron.    They had accepted this   
without question, since anything Americans did was equally unlikely and shocking and   
Marvelous.) The sleeping arrangements that night were as novel as everything else. Byron was   
quartered at the home of the rabbi.    This was the outcome of a tremendous argument in which   
half the population participated, including at one point the village priest, a brown-bearded man   
who, except    for his bare head and black robe, rather resembled Berel, and whose sudden   
appearance on the scene sobered everybody.    The parleying language shifted to Polish, then to   
German, which Byron well understood. The priest wanted to extend his hospitality to the   
Gentile American. Berel managed, with a timely word of help in German from Byron, to   
deflect this offer. When the priest left, both Berel and Byron became the center of jubilant   
triumph, and the American was borne off to the rabbi's brick house by an escort of singing,   
hand-clapping yeshiva boys, led by the bridegroom himself, a pale lad of eighteen or so with a   
wispy goatee. 
 
Here the rabbi and his wife tried to give him their own bed, but since it was obviously exactly   
that, the only large bed in the house, a black fourposter piled with huge pillows, Byron   
wouldn't have it. This caused another grand parley in Yiddish. The house had a second   
bedroom conraining two beds, and a plank and mattress stretched across two chairs.    In this   
room there were already five tittering girls, who, as the discussion went on, began blushing and   
roaring with laughter.    The idea seemed to be to put Byron into one of those beds.    Evidently   
no decent solution could be hammered out. He ended up sleeping on the floor of the main   
room, a sort of parlor and dining room combined, lined with giant leather-bound books.    The   
rabbi gave him a feather mattress to lie on, and as six of the boys from the Cracow yeshiva   
shared the floor With him on similar mattresses, he did not feel ill-treated. Indeed he slept   
better on the floor of the rabbi's house in Medzice than he had in Waraw's Europeisld Hotel.   
He found the feather mattress lulling. 
 
He spent much of the next day walking with Natalie around the town and in the fields and   
along the river, past an old cemetery to the ruined great house. The preparations    for the   
wedding were going forward, so today the family let the visitors amuse themselves. The   
muddy narrow streets of Medzice-it had rained hard during the night, and the rattling on the   
rabbi's roof had increased Byron's sense of snugness-were filled with an autumnal fragrance of   
hay and ripening fruit, made more tangy by the smells of the free-roaming ducks, chickens,   
goats, and calves.      Some of the fowl were encountering tragedy, happily strutting in the   
morning sunshine one moment, and the next swooped down upon by laughing children and   
carried off squawking and flapping to be slaughtered.    In the fields beyond the outlying houses   
and barns-mostly one-room log structures with heavy yellow thatch roofsows and horses   
grazed in tall waving grass spotted with wild flowers.    Water bugs skated on the surface of the   
slow-moving brown river.    Fish jumped and splashed, but nobody was fishing. 
 
Natalie told him she had stayed up half the night talking to the family. Most of what she had   
heard was news to her.    Her father had tended to reminisce more about Warsaw than about his   
birthplace, and as a child she had been bored by the little she had heard, since she had only   
wanted to be a true-blue American. In the village, Uncle Aaron and her father were the   
legendary ones who had made an American success.    Aaron Jastrow was variously thought to   
 83 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
be a great surgeon, an astronomer, and a cancer specialist; "Professor" had ambiguous   
meanings in Polish and Yiddish.    Nobody but Berel knew that he had written a famous book   
about Jesus, and Natalie gathered that Aaron's cousin was at some pains to keep the   
achievement quiet.    Berel (this was a familiar name for jochanan, his real name) was the local   
success.    He had begun trading in mushrooms while still a student in Cracow, had branched   
into other exports, and had prospered enough to move his family to Warsaw; but he had sent   
his son back to the Cracow yeshiva, and had found the boy a bride in Medzice among the   
second cousins.    The numerous Jastrows, like the rest of the villagers, lived by farming and by   
selling dairy products in the markets of Oswiecim and Cracow. 
 
Clambering around the ruined great house, Natalie went exploring out of sight, broke through   
some rotten flooring, and fell ten or twelve feet. Byron heard the splintering noise, her shriek,   
and the thud.    He hurried to find her.    She lay sprawled like a broken doll, her skirt up around   
her gartered white thighs.    She had landed on dirt and thick grass; whatever the floor here had   
been, probably parquet or marble, nothing was left of it.    Byron pulled down her skirt and lifted   
her to a sitting position. 
 
She was conscious but stunned, and greenish pale.    In a minute or into her eyes.    She shook her   
head.    "Ye gods, I really saw stars, Byron.    I thought I'd broken my silly neck."    She put her   
head on his shoulder. 
 
"Glory, what a scare.    I'm all right, help me up."    She limped; her left knee bothered her, she   
said.    She took his arm with an abashed grin and leaned on him.    Byron had tried to keep her   
from climbing the decayed staircase, and the grin was her only apology, but it was enough.    He   
was worried by the injury, and still angry over her casual disclosure that she had been with   
Slote until dawn the day before. 
 
However, to have this girl leaning on him, in a sunlit orchard full of apple scent by a river,   
seemed to Byron almost all the pleasure he wanted in the world.    just holding her like this was   
sweeter than any delight any other girl had ever given him.    Whatever it was that made a girl   
desirable-the enigmatic look in the eyes, the soft curve of a cheek, the shape of a mouth,. 
 
the sudden charm of a smile, the swell of breasts and hips under a dress, the smoothness of   
skin-Natalie Jastrow for Byron was all composed of these lovely glints, all incandescent with   
them.    That she stemmed from the strange Jews of Medzice, that she was, by all evidence, the   
mistress of a dour man ten years older than himself, that she was only a solid and human girl- 
indeed very heavy, leaning on him and limping-with a stubborn streak and some unattractive,   
almost coarse tomboy bravado: all these drawbacks just made her Natalie Jastrow, instead of   
the perfect girl he had been dreaming about since his twelfth year.    The perfect girl had in fact   
been a blonde, and something of a sex fiend, like the dream girls of most boys.    She was gone   
now, and this prickly Jewish brunette held her place.    And here they were alone on a riverbank   
in south Poland, in golden sunshine, a mile from any house, amid apple trees laden with ripe   
fruit "This will be slow work, getting back," she said. 
 
"I can try to carry you." 
 84 
 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
What, a horse like me?    You'd rupture yourself.    I'm fine if I keep my weight off it.    It's just   
such a bore."    'I'm not bored," said Byron. 
 
They passed an old abandoned scow half full of water.    "Let's use this," he said, tipping it to   
empty it out. 
 
Natalie appreciatively watched him heave up the scow unaided.    "No oars," she said. 
 
"We can float downstream." 
 
He guided the scow with a long rough plank that lay in it, using the plank as a rudder and as a   
pole.    The river was very sluggish, almost oily, calm and brown.    Natalie sat on the bow edge   
of the scow, facing Byron, her shoes in the seeping water.    She said as they floated past the   
cemetery, "That's where all my ancestors are, I guess.    The ones that aren't buried in Palestine."   
-Or Egypt or Mesopotamia," Byron said. 
 
Natalie shuddered.    "I don't know.    It's a godforsaken place, Briny." 
 
'Medzice?" 
 
"Poland.    I'm glad grandma and grandpa got the hell out of here." 
 
He banked the scow near the village.    She climbed out and walked slowly, not limping.    There   
was    no doctor here,    she said, and she didn't    want to generate    a crisis    around the    injured   
American cousin. 
 
She would have her knee taped in Cracow tomorrow.    None of the villagers noticed anything   
the matter with her. 
 
Byron tried to find out the war crisis news. There was one working radio in Medzice, and   
several broken-down ones.    The priest had the working radio.    The rabbi told Byron, in Yiddish   
tortured into a barely comprehensible kind of German, that the last broadcast from Warsaw had   
been encouraging: the prime minister of England had gone to his country home for the   
weekend, and the crisis seemed to be passing. 
 
"Henderson, Henderson," the rabbi said.    "Henderson talked to Hitler." 
 
And he winked shrewdly, rubbing one hand over the other to pantomime a money deal The   
wedding made Byron wish over and over that he were a writer and could record it; a Jew, and   
could comprehend it. 
 
The mixture of solemnity and boisterousness baffled him.    In his training, decorousness was   
the essence of a wedding, except    for the shoes-and-rice    moment    at the very end, but the   
Medzice Jews-though arrayed in their best, the women in velvet dresses and the men in black   
satin coats or formal city clothes did not seem to know what decorum was. They crowded,   
they chattered, they burst into song; they surrounded the veiled, silent, seated bride and   
discussed her vehemently; they danced, they marched here and there in the houses and in the   
streets, performing strange little rites; one and then another stood on a chair to speak or to sing   
 85 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the guests wildly laughed and wildly cried.    The pallid bridegroom, in a white robe and a   
black hat, looked on the verge of fainting.    Byron accidentally learned, by offering him a plate   
of cakes at the long men's table where the American visitor sat in a place of honor beside the   
groom, that the weedy boy had been fasting for twenty-four hours, and still was, while   
everybody around him continuously ate and drank with vast appetite. 
 
Byron, eating and drinking with the rest, and feeling very good indeed, was not sure for hours   
whether the marriage ceremony had or had not taken place. But near midnight a sudden   
gravity fell on the guests. 
 
In a courtyard, with the bright moon and a blaze of stars overhead, in a series of stern and   
impressive acts-including solemn incantations over silver goblets of wine and the lighting of   
long tapers-the bride and groom were brought together for a ring ceremony and a kiss, much as   
in a Christian union, under a hand-held canopy of purple velvet. Then the groom ground a   
wineglass to bits under his heel, and jubilation broke out that made everything before it seem   
staid and pale. 
 
Byron almost became the hero of the evening by putting on a black skulkap and dancing with   
the yeshiva boys, since there was no dancing with the girls.    M the guests gathered to clap and   
cheer, Natalie in the forefront, her face ablaze with fun. Her knee healed or forgotten, she   
joined in the girls' dances; and so she danced, and Byron danced, inside the house and outside,   
far into the morning hours.    Byron scarcely remembered leaving the bride's home and falling   
asleep on the feather mattress on the floor of the rabbi's house. 
 
But there he was when a hand shook him and he opened his eyes. 
 
Berel Jastrow was bending over him, and it took Byron a moment or two to recall where he   
was and who this man was, with the clever, anxious blue eyes and the long gray-streaked   
brown beard. All around him the yeshiva boys were sitting up and rubbing their eyes, or   
dressing.    The girls were hurrying here and there in their nightclothes.    It was hot, and the sun   
was shining into the room from a clear blue sky. 
 
"Yes?    What is it?"    he said. 
 
"Der Deutsch," the Jew said.    "Les Allemands."    "Huh?    What?" 
 
'De Chormans." 
 
Byron sat up, his voice faltering.    "Oh, the Germans?    What about them?" 
 
"Dey comink." by General Armin von Roon (adapted from his Land, Sea, and Air Operations   
of World War Id English Translation by VICTOR HENRY 
 
BY VICTOR HENRY 
 
I never expected to translate a German military work. For years, like many flag officers, I   
planned to write up my own experiences in World War II; and in the end, like most of them, I   
decided against it. 
 86 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
it was said of the late Fleet Admiral Ernest King that, if it had been up to him, he would have   
issued a single communique about the Pacific war: "We won."    My war memoirs boil down   
more or less to this: "I served." 
 
Upon retiring from the Navy, I became a consultant to a marine engineering firm.    On my last   
business trip to Germany, in 1965, I noticed in the windows of bookstores, wherever I went,   
stacks of a small book called World Empire Lost, by General Armin von Roon.    I distinctly   
recalled General von Roon, from my days of service in Berlin as naval attache to the American   
embassy. I had met him, and chatted with him; and he came to one of my wife's frequent   
dinner parties.    He was then on the Armed Forces Operation Staff.    He had a distant, forbidding   
manner, a pudgy figure, and a large beaked nose, almost Semitic, that must have given him   
some grief.    But of course, as his name indicates, he was of simon-pure Prussian descent.    He   
was obviously brilliant, and I always wanted to know him better, but did not get the   
opportunity.    I little thought then how well I would come to know him one day through his   
book! Out of curiosity I bought a copy of World Empire Lost, and found it so absorbing that I   
visited the publisher's office in Munich, to learn who had printed it in America. 
 
I then discovered that the work had not yet been translated into English.    On my return to the   
States, I induced the publishers of this volume to acquire the English-language rights.    I was   
planning to retire from business, and I thought that translating the book might ease the pa in of   
putting myself out to pasture. 
 
World Empire Lost is an abstract from a huge two-volume operational analysis of the war,   
written by General von Roon in prison. 
 
He called it Land, Sea, and Air Campaigns of World War II, and he had plenty of time to write   
it; for at Nuremberg he got twenty years, for complicity in war crimes on the eastern front.   
This exhaustive technical work is not available in an English translation, and I doubt that it will   
be. 
 
Roon    prefaced    his    account    of    each    major    campaign with    a    summary of    the   
strategic and   
political background.    These brief sketches, pulled out and compiled by the publisher after his   
death, constitute World Empire Lost.    (I doubt that the general would have approved of that   
melodramatic title.) World Empire Lost is, therefore, not solid military history, but rather a sort   
of publisher's stunt. 
 
It runs together Roon's sweeping assertions about world politics in one short volume, and omits   
the meticulous military analysis that backed them.    However, I believe the result is readable,   
interesting, and valuable. 
 
The remarkable thing about the book is its relative honesty. 
 
Nearly all the German military literature glosses over the killing of the Jews, the responsibility   
for the war, and Hitler's hold on the army and the people. About all these sticky questions,   
Roon writes with calm frankness.    He planned to withhold his work from publication (and did)   
until he was safely dead and buried; so, unlike most German military writers, he was not trying   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
either to save his neck or placate the victors.    The result is a revelation of how the Germans   
really felt, and may well still feel, about Hitler's war. 
 
Here then is a German general levelling, insofar as he can do so. 
 
Roon was an able writer, much influenced by the best French and British military authors,   
especially de Gaulle and Churchill. His German is more readable than that of most of his   
countrymen who write on military matters. I hope I have at least partly conveyed this in   
translation. 
 
My own style, formed in a lifetime of writing U.S. Navy reports, has inevitably crept in here   
and there, but I trust no substantial distortion has resulted. 
 
This author, to my mind, portrays the Germans under Hitler as they were: a remarkably tough   
and    effective    fighting nation,    not    a    horde of    stupid    sadists    or    comic    bunglers,    as 
popular   
entertainment now tends to caricature them. For six years these people battled almost the   
whole world to a standstill, and they also committed unprecedented crimes. 
 
The stake they were gambling for was, in Shakespeare's expressive phrase, nothing less than   
"the great globe itself." 
 
What was going on in their minds seems to me of Importance.    That is why I have translated   
Roon. 
 
His version of events, while professional and well informed, can scarcely be taken at face   
value.    He was a German through and through. 
 
On the whole I have let General von Roon describe the war in his own way. I could not,   
however, translate certain passages without challenging them; hence my occasional comments. 
 
Roon starts on his first page, for instance, exactly as Adolf Hitler started all his speeches: by   
denouncing the Versailles Treaty as an injustice imposed on an honorable and trusting   
Germany by the cruel Allies.    He does not mention the historical catch to that.    German writers   
seldom do.    In 1917 Lenin overthrew the Kerensky government and sued for a separate peace   
on the eastern front. 
 
The Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, dictated by the Germans over a year before the Treaty of   
Versailles, deprived Russia of a territory much larger than France and England combined, of   
almost sixty million inhabitants, and of almost all her heavy industry.    it was far harsher than   
the Versailles Treaty. 
 
I used to bring up this little fact during my Berlin service, whenever Versailles was mentioned.   
My German friends were invariably puzzled by the comparison. They thought it made no   
sense at all.    The Treaty of Versailles had of the Germans, hcippened to them; Brest-Litovsk   
had happened to the other fellow. In this reaction they were sincere. I cannot explain this   
national quirk but it should never be forgotten in reading World Empire Lost. 
 
Ookton, Virginia 27 May, 1966 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Victor Henry 
 
(IT 
 
Z1.6-C 
 
The Responsibility for Hitler In writing this book, I have only one aim: to defend the honor of   
the German soldier. 
 
To trace the rise of Adolf Hitler, our leader in World War II, is not necessary here.    No story of   
the twentieth century is better known. 
 
When the victorious Allies in 1919 created the crazy Treaty of Versailles, they also created   
Hitler. 
 
Germany in 1918, relying on the Fourteen Points of the American President Wilson, honorably   
laid down arms.    The Allies treated the Fourteen Points as a scrap of paper, and wrote a treaty   
that partitioned Germany and made an economic and political madhouse of Europe. 
 
In thus outwitting the nllve American President and butchering up the map, the British and   
French politicians probably imagined they would paralyze the German notion forever. The   
cynical policy boomeranged. Winston Churchill himself has called the Versailles settlement a   
"sad and complicated idiocy."    The oppression of Versailles built up in the vigorous German   
people a volcanic resentment; it burst forth, and Adolf Hitler rode to power on the crest of the   
eruption.    The Nazi Party, a strange alliance of radicals and conservatives, of wealthy men and   
down-and-outers, was united only on the ideal of a resurgent Germany, and unfortunately on   
the old middle-European political slogan of discontentanti-Semitism.      A riffraff of vulgar   
agitators, philosophic idealists, fanatics, opportunists, bullies, and adventurers, some of them   
extremely able and energetic, swept into power with Hitler.    We of the General Staff for the   
most part watched these turbid political events with distaste and foreboding.    Our loyalty was   
to the state, however it was governed, but we feared a wave of weakening social change.  
 
it is fair to say that Hitler surprised us.    Swiftly, without bloodshed, this brilliant and inspiring   
politician    repaired    one injustice of Versailles    after another.    His methods    were direct    and   
strong.    The Weimar regime had tried other methods, and had met only with contempt from   
Britain and France.    Hitler's methods worked. 
 
Inside Germany, he was equally strict and harsh when needed. 
 
Here too the methods worked, and if historians now call his regime a terror, one must concede   
that it was then a popular terror.    Hitler brought prosperity and he rearmed us.    He was a man   
with a mission. 
 
His burning belief in himself and in his mission swayed the German masses. Though he   
usurped much power, the masses would probably have granted it all to him freely anyway.  
 
Case Red 
 89 
 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Naturally, the swift renascence of Germany under Hitler created anger and dismay among the   
Allies.      France, war-weary, luxury-loving, and rotted by socialism, was reluctant to take   
effective action. 
 
England was another matter. 
 
England still ruled the world with her global navy, her international money system, her   
alliances, and her empire on five continents.    In ascending to mastery of Europe, and upsetting   
the balance of power, Germany was once more challenging her for world rule. 
 
This was the confrontation of the Great War again. 
 
Nothing could avert this showdown, for Germany early in the twentieth century had passed   
England in both population and industrial plant. In this sense Churchill correctly calls the   
Second World War a continuation of the first one, and both conflicts together "another Thirty   
Years' War." 
 
We of the German General Staff knew that at some point in Hitler's spectacular normalizing of   
Europe, England would intervene.      The only questions were, when, and under what   
circumstances?    Already in 1937 we had prepared a plan for a two-front war against England   
and Poland: Fall Rot ("Case Red"). 
 
We kept updating it as Adolf Hitler scored one bloodless victory after another, and our   
strategic situation and armed strength improved by leaps while Britain and France contented   
themselves with feeble scolding protests. We began to hope that the forceful Fuhrer might   
actually bring his new order to Europe without bloodshed, by default of the perpetrators of   
Versailles. Had this occurred, he could have launched his grand crusade against the Soviet   
Union for living space in the east-the aim of his lifes a one-front war. History would have   
followed a different course. 
 
But on March 31, 1939, a day that the world should not forget, all this changed.    The British   
Prime    Minister    Chamberlain    suddenly gave Poland an    unconditional    guarantee    of military   
assistance!    His pretext was anger at Hitler for breaking his promise not to occupy the weak   
fragment of Czechoslovakia, left after the Munich partition-the deal which Chamberlain   
himself had engineered.    Hitler's promises, like those of all politicians, were merely contingent   
and tactical, of course.    It was asinine of Chamberlain to think otherwise, if he did. 
 
Whatever the motive for the Polish guarantee, it was a piece of suicidal stupidity.    It stiffened   
the corrupt Polish army oligarchy to stand fast on the just German grievances involving Danzig   
and the Polish Corridor. it placed in the hands of these backward militarists the lever to start   
another world war.    Otherwise it had no meaning, because in the event, England was unable to   
give Poland actual military help.    With Russian participation the guarantee might have made   
sense; in fact it might have stopped Hitler in his tracks, because he feared above all things, as   
the General Staff also did, a two-front war.    But the British gentlemen-politicians disdained the   
Bolsheviks, and Poland in any case utterly refused to consider admitting Russian protective   
troops.    So foolishness and weakness joined hands to trigger the catastrophe. 
 90 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
For Chamberlain's defiant move, like the weak pawing of a cornered robbit, only spurred the   
Fuhrer to greater boldness. Like lightning, down came the word to our staff to prepare an   
operation order for an attack on Poland in the fall.    Working day and night, with Case Red as a   
basis, we prepared the plan. 
 
On April 5 it went to the Fuhrer under a new code name; Fall Weiss-"Case White." 
 
Historic Ironies 
 
Case White, the plan for smashing Poland, shaped itself on a few major and classic   
geographical facts. 
 
Poland is a plain; a larger Belgium with few natural obstacles and no real boundaries. The   
Carpathian Mountains to the south are breached by the Jablunka pass, affording ready access   
from Czechoslovakia to Cracow and the Vistula.    The rivers Vistula, Narew, and San present   
problems, but in the summer and early autumn the water levels are low and the rivers are in   
many places fordable by motor vehicles and horses. 
 
Poland is itself a political freak, reflecting its formless geography. It has no permanent shape,   
no continuity of regime or national purpose. it has several times disappeared from the map of   
Europe, divided up as provinces of stronger and abler powers. Today it is again little more   
than a Russian province. At Yalto the Allied leaders moved the entire crude geographical   
parallelogram called "Poland" about two hundred kilometers to the west, to the Oder-Neisse   
Line. 
 
This was done at the expense of Germany, of course, giving to Poland cities, territories, and   
populations which had been German from time immemorial, and causing the tragic uprooting   
and resettling of millions of people.    Such is war.. 
 
to the victor, the spoils; to the defeated, the costs. The Second World War began over the   
question of Polish territorial integrity, but Poland has not recovered, and will never recover, its   
1939 borders.    It has lost that part of its territory which, through the deal between Hitler and   
Stalin, was absorbed into the Soviet Union.    England went to war with us over the question of   
these borders, dragging in France and eventually the United States.    At Yalta, England and the   
United States endorsed forever Hitler's gift of Polish territory to the Soviets. 
 
Such are the ironies of history. 
 
The Polish strategic situation in 1939 was poor.    The entire land could be regarded as a weak   
salient into Germany and German-occupied territory, flanked by East Prussia to the north and   
Czechoslovakia to the south, and wholly flat and open to a thrust from Germany to the west.   
To the rear, in the east, the Soviet Union stood poised, newly linked to Germany through the   
nonaggression pact engineered by Ribbentrop, The Fatal Pact insufficient attention is paid to   
the plain fact that this treaty, hailed at the time as a masterstroke, all but lost Germany the   
Second World War before a shot was fired.    The alliance with Bolshevism (however temporary   
and tactical) was certainly a repudiation of the Dictator's ideals, running counter to the German   
national spirit; but this might have been allowable had the tactical advantage proved real.    In   
 91 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
politics, as in war, only success matters. 
 
But the contrary was the case. 
 
This pact handed Stalin the Baltic states and about half of Poland, allowing the Slav horde to   
march two hundred kilometers nearer Germany. Two years later we paid the price.      In   
December 1941, the gigantic drive of our Army Group Center toward Moscow-the greatest   
armed march in world history-was halted forty kilometers from its goal, with advance patrols   
penetrating within sight of the Kremlin towers. 
 
Had the German forces jumped off from a line two hundred kilometers nearer Moscow, they   
would have engulfed the Russian capital, deposed Stalin, and won the campaign before the first   
flake of snow fell on the Smolensk road.    England certainly would have made peace then, and   
we would have won the war. 
 
Regarded as a triumph of daring diplomacy even by our enemies, this treaty contained between   
its lines the two words, finis Germaniae. 
 
Seldom in history has there been such a political coup de theetre. 
 
Seldom has one so disastrously backfired.    Yet we of the Staff who ventured to express doubts   
at the time, or merely to convey with our eyes our mutual dismay at the news, were very much   
in the minority. 
 
No member of the armed forces, including Hitler's own chief of staff, Keitel, and the chief of   
operations, Jodl, knew of the secret protocol yielding half of Poland to the Bolsheviks.    It was   
only when Stalin angrily telephoned Ribbentrop in the third week of the campaign, bitterly   
complaining about the advance of our Fourteenth Army into the southeast oil area, that the   
Wehrmacht received its specific chop lines, and retreated before the Russians, who airily rolled   
in without shedding a drop of their own, or of Polish, blood. 
 
It was I who received at Supreme Headquarters the staggering telephone call from our military   
attache in Moscow around midnight of September 16, informing me that the Russians were   
marching into Poland in accordance with a secret agreement Hitler had made in August. I   
immediately telephoned General Jodl with the news that the Russians were on the move.    His   
response, in a tremulous voice most uncharacteristic of Alfred Jodl, was "Against whom?"    So   
completely was the army in the dark. 
 
In the last few days of August, as Case White preparations speeded up, Hitler tried to cash in   
on Ribbentrop's big political surprise with a comedy of peace negotiations.    In the spring, in a   
calmer mood, he had stated with his usual prescience that the Western powers would not again   
permit a bloodless victory, that this time there would be battle. 
 
We had prepared Case White with feelings    varying    from misgivings    to a sense of doom,   
because our combat readiness was much below par for a major conflict.    We were so low on   
tanks, to cite just one key item, that even for Case White we had to deploy large numhad only   
about fifty subbers of Czech tanks of limited value; and the navy marines ready for action.   
 92 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Worst of all, the Fuhrer was far from ordering full wartime production, even then, for he knew   
it would be an unpopular move.    All in all we were going out on very thin ice. 
 
The staff placed no hope in the peace talks.    Hitler, however, while going through his planned   
histrionics with Henderson, apparently got carried away by his own playacting and the constant   
assurances of Ribbentrop; he began to believe that England might be bluffed once more and   
might present us with another Munich.      At Supreme Headquarters, in the first days of   
September, nobody could fail to notice that when the Western declarations of war came   
through, the Fuhrer was surprised and shaken.    But there was nothing to do at that point but   
execute Case White. 
 
Strategy The plan called for simultaneous flank attacks from the north and the south, aimed to   
cut off the Corridor and proceed to Warsaw.      The Poles elected to stand all along their   
indefensible border, thus inviting quick fragmenting, encirclement, and reduction. 
 
They should    have prepared    their    main    defenses    along    the lines    Vistula-Narew-Bug. This   
would have prolonged hostilities, and encouraged the British and French to attack our weak   
holding force in the west. 
 
This could have been devastating.      Adventurous authoritarian leadership had exposed the   
German people to a bad risk.    However, the gods smiled on us at the time, the Poles proved as   
inept in their strategic dispositions as they were brave in the field, and the French sat in their   
camps and fortresses, scarcely firing a shot. Nowadays German commentators write of the   
"miracle" of the French static defense in September 1939, which made the Polish blitzkrieg   
possible. 
 
It is hard to see where the "miracle" lay.      French military thinking was defensive and   
positional, because such thinking had triumphed in 1918. They had an obsession with the   
theoretical ten-to-one advantage of the defense in mechanized warfare.    There is no doubt that   
in September France could have sent millions of A well-trained soldiers, with More armored   
divisions than the Wehrmacht had in Poland, crashing out of the Maginot fortresses, or via the   
northern plain through    Belgium    and Holland,    into our    paper-thin    western    formations,    and   
rolled to Berlin. But the will was not there. 
 
Adolf Hitler's political and military gamble on this vital point proved brilliant. Of all his   
opponents, he throughout best understood and anticipated the French. 
 
Victory 
 
The Polish breakthrough phase took approximately four days. 
 
Complete tactical surprise was achieved because the hypocritical Polish politicians, though   
wholly aware of the danger, kept giving their people false assurances.    The Polish air force of   
almost a thousand planes was destroyed on the ground. 
 
Thereafter the Luftwaffe freely roomed the skies.    Polish ground resistance was moderate to   
heavy, and our commanders in the field had to admire the bold cavalry dashes against tank   
 93 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
formations.    Perhaps the legend is true that the Polish horsemen were told by their government   
that our tanks were papier-mache dummies!    In that case, they were soon sadly disabused.    The   
contrast between the possibilities of mechanized warfare and classic military tactics was never   
more strikingly demonstrated than in these ineffectual charges of the Polish horsemen against   
iron tanks. 
 
Nevertheless, the Wehrmacht too was operating with but a thin knife-edge of fully motorized   
armored divisions. Our important ground advances were made by infantry masses on foot,   
exploiting the breakdown of communication" the panic, and the disarray of battle lines created   
by the narrow panzer thrusts. 
 
And while the Luftwaffe played a strong support role, it was the horse-drawn artillery massed   
outside Warsaw, and not the air bombardment, that in the end knocked out the city's capacity to   
resist and brought the eventual surrender.    This heavy reliance on horses betrayed our serious   
lack of combat readiness for world war. 
 
By September 21 the city was ringed by Wehrmacht forces; and the news from outside was of   
Polish soldiers being taken prisoner in the hundreds of thousands, of one pocket after another   
being liquidated, of a total collapse of the front, of a national government Pusillanimously   
fleeing to Rumania.    Yet it was not until September 27 that the city, under a round-the-clock   
rain of shells and bombs, without food, water, or light, with many foflaisttsmbiun buildings in   
ruins, with disease spreading, finally gave up its vain hopes of deliverance from the West, and   
surrendered. 
 
Observations 
 
From first to last, the Fuhrer and his propagandists played down the Polish campaign as a local   
Police action, a "special task" of the Wehrmacht.    Hitler personally cancelled many sections of   
Case White dealing with rationing, troop mobilization, and transport, with one aim in mind: to   
soften the impact on the German people.    This political meddling represented a considerable   
setback to operations, and precious months passed before the damage was righted.    I may say   
here, that due to similar Party and Fuhrer interference, which never ceased, the war effort was   
never, by professional standards, organized fully or properly. 
 
The shabby farce enacted at our radio station at Gleiwitz near the Polish border on the night of   
August 31-the pretense that Polish soldiers had crossed over to attack the station and been   
repulsed, the dressing of condemned political prisoners in Polish uniforms and the scattering of   
their bullet-riddled bodies near the station, as an excuse for starting the invasion-none of this   
trivial humbug was known to the Wehrmacht. We were irrevocably on the march toward   
Poland seventy-two hours earlier.    I myself did not learn of the incident until the Nuremberg   
trials; I was too busy at the time with serious matters.* Himmler was probably responsible. 
 
Poland in    1939    was a    backward    and    ill-informed    dictatorship of    reactionary colonels   
and   
politicians with fantastic territorial aims, a government extremely brutal to minorities   
(especially the Ukrainians    and the Jews) and unjust and mendacious    to its    own people;    a   
government that pounced like a hyena    on Czechoslovakia at the Munich crisis and tore a   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
province from that country in its hardest hour; a government that clumsily played a double   
game with Germany and the Soviet Union for twenty years; and to the last tried to talk and act   
like a major military power when it was in fact as weak as a kitten. It was to support this   
reactionary, bluffing, bigoted dictatorship that the democracies embarked on the Second World   
War.    That government quickly and ignominiously fell to pieces and disappeared forever.    But   
the war went on, and its starting point was soon all but forgotten.    Some day, however, sober   
historians must again give the proper emphasis to these absurd paradoxes that governed the   
provoking of the world's biggest war. 
 
The final absurdity of this inept start to a terrible global struggle was that Czechoslovakia,   
betrayed by England in 1938, did not fight, and in the whole war period lost less than one   
hundred thousand people. Poland, supported by England in 1939, fought and lost almost six   
million dead (though about half of these were Jews).    Both countries ended up as Communist   
puppets under the heel of the Soviet Union. Which government then was the wiser, and which   
people the more fortunate?    When great powers fall out, small powers do well to bow to the   
storm wind, in whichever direction it blows strongest.    That was what the Poles forgot.  
 
The veracity of this statement is questionable.-V.H. 
 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTE: The reader will have to grow used to the German habit of blaming   
other countries for getting themselves invaded by Germans. This note recurs throughout   
General von Roon's book, as through most of their military literature.    Officers raised under the   
General Staff system apparently lost the power to think in other terms. 
 
Roon's discussion of the Polish government and the British guarantee are the telling passages   
in his preliminary sketch of Case White. 
 
-V.H. 
 
GERMAN ARMY ATTACKS POLAND; CITIES BOMBED, PORT BLOCKADED;   
DANZIG IS ACCEPTED INTO THE REICH The New York Times, raising its voice to suit   
the occasion in its Teight-column once-in-a-generation italic headlines, topped the sprawl of   
newspapers on the desk under Hugh Cleveland's stocking feet.    The other papers had headlines   
far larger and blacker than the Times's genteel bellow. Tilted back in his shirt-sleeves in a   
swivel chair, a telephone cradled between his head and left shoulder, Cleveland was making   
quick red crayon marks on a sheaf of yellow typing paper and sipping coffee as he talked.   
Eight years in the broadcasting business had made him deft at such juggling. 
 
Though he looked the picture of busy contentment, his voice was angry. 
 
His morning show, called Who's in Town, featured interviews with celebrities passing through   
New York. The war crisis, suddenly roaring into the Columbia Broadcasting System, had   
snatched off Cleveland's secretary to the newsroom for emergency service, and he was   
protesting to the personnel office, or trying to.    He still could not get through to the manager. 
 
A short girl in a flat black straw hat appeared in the open doorway. 
 95 
 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Behind her, in the big central offices of CBS News, the hubbub over the war news was still   
rising.    Secretaries were rattling at typewriters or scampering with papers, messenger boys ran   
with coffee and sandwiches, knots of men in shirt-sleeves gathered at the chattering teletypes,   
and everybody appeared to be either shouting, or smoking, or both. 
 
"Mr.    Cleveland?"    The girl's voice was sweet but shaky.    Her awed round eyes made her look   
about sixteen. 
 
Cleveland put his hand on the mouthpiece of his telephone.    "Yes?" 
 
"The personnel office sent me up to you." 
 
"You?    How old are you?" 
 
"Twenty." 
 
Cleveland appeared skeptical, but he hung up the telephone. 
 
"What's your name?" 
 
'Madeline Henry." 
 
Cleveland sighed.    "Well, okay, Madeline.    If you're in the pool, you must know the ropes.    So   
take off that cartwheel and get started, okay? 
 
First get me another cup of coffee and a chicken sandwich, please. 
 
Then there's tomorrow's script"-he rattled the yellow sheets-"to be typed over." 
 
Madeline could bluff no further.    She was in New York to buy clothes. 
 
The outbreak of the war had prompted her to walk into CBS to see if extra girls were needed.   
In the employment office a harried woman wearing yellow paper cuffs had thrust a slip at her,   
after a few questions about her schooling, and sent her up to Cleveland.    "Talk to him.    If he   
likes you, we may take you on. He's screaming for a girl and we've got nobody to spare."   
Stepping just inside the door and planting her legs apart, taking off her hat and clutching it,   
Madeline confessed that nobody had hired her yet; that she was visiting New York, lived in   
Washington, had to go back to school, detested the thought of it, feared her father too much to   
do anything else, and had just walked into CBS on an impulse. He listened, smiling and   
surveying her with eyes    half-closed. She wore a sleeveless red cotton frock and she had   
excellent color from a sailing weekend. 
 
"Well, Madeline, what does it add up to?    Do you want the job or not?" 
 
"I was thinking-could I come back in a week or so?"    Hi pleasant look faded.    He picked up the   
telephone.    "Get me Personnel again. 
 
Yes, you come back sometime, Madeline." 
 
She said, "I'll fetch you your coffee and sandwich right now.    I can do that.    I'll type your script   
 96 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
today, too.    Couldn't I work for you for three weeks?    I don't have to go back to school until the   
twenty-second. My father will kill me when he finds out, but I don't care." 
 
"Where's your father?    In Washington?" 
 
"He's in Berlin.    He's the naval attache there." 
 
"What?"    Hugh Cleveland hung up the telephone and took his feet off the desk.    "Your father is   
our naval attache in Nazi Germany?" 
 
'that's right."    'Imagine that.    So!    You're a Navy junior."    He threw a five-dollar bill on the   
desk.    "All right.    Get    me    the sandwich, Madeline, please.      White meat, lettuce, pepper,   
mayonnaise. Black coffee.    Then we'll talk some more. 
 
Buy yourself a sandwich too." 
 
"Yes, Mr.    Cleveland." 
 
Holding the bill, Madeline rushed into the outer hall and stood there dazed.    Having heard the   
Who's in Tourn program a few times, she had at once recognized Cleveland's peculiarly warm   
rich voice; a real broadcaster, with his own program, and all at once she was working for him. 
 
That was wartime for you! A girl swishing by with a bag of food told her where to buy   
sandwiches.    But twenty chattering girls swarmed at the takeout counter of the luncheonette off   
the lobby.    She went out on Madison Avenue and stood blinking in the warm sunshine.    The   
New York scene was normal.    Crowds marched on the sidewalks; cars and buses ed both ways   
in a stench of fumes; people carried packages into and stream out of stores and looked in   
windows.    The only novelty was that the news vendors with fresh stacks of afternoon papers   
were crying war. 
 
Madeline ran to the big drugstore across the street, where the soda fountain was jammed with   
secretaries and shoppers, talking and laughing over bowls of chili or soup.    The usual sort of   
people were wandering through the aisles, and cheap clocks. A fat old buying toothpaste,   
lotions, aspirin, candy, blonde woman in an apron and cap quickly made up her sandwiches.  
 
"Well, honey, who's going to win the war?"    she said sociably as she peppered the chicken. 
 
"Let's just hope Hitler doesn't," Madeline said. 
 
"Yes, isn't he something?    Sieg Heil!    Ha, ha.    I think the man's crazy. 
 
I've always said so, and this proves it."    She handed Madeline the sandwiches.    "Well, honey,   
so long as we keep out of it, what do we care who wins? 
 
Madeline bought an evening paper that offered gigantic headlines but no fresh news.    just to   
scan such a dramatic front page was novel fun. 
 
Though the war was happening so far away, Madeline felt a springtime quickening in her   
veins.      A scent of freedom, of new action, rose from the headlines.      The President had   
 97 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
announced at once, very firmly, that America was staying out of it.    But things were going to   
be mighty different from now on.    That was inevitable!    All her thoughts were about the letter   
she would write to her father, if only she could get this job. 
 
Cleveland, feet on his desk again, a flirtatious smirk on his face, was telephoning.    He nodded   
at Madeline and-as he went on coaxing some girl, in his warmly rumbling voice, to meet him at   
Toots Sbor's restaurant -he wolfed the sandwich. 
 
"Why don't you eat the other one?"    Madeline said.    "I'm not hungry." 
 
"Are you sure?      I don't want to rob you."      He hung up and unwrapped her sandwich.   
"Ordinarily I don't eat much during the day, but with all this war talk-" He took a great bite and   
went on talking. 
 
"Thanks.    I swear I'm as hungry as I get at funerals.    Ever notice how famished you get at a   
funeral, Madeline? It's the sheer delight of being alive, I guess, while this Now listen, you   
want other poor joker's just been buried in a dingy hole.    i e to work for me for three weeks, is   
that it?    That'll be fine.    It'll give me a chance to look over what's around in Personnel."    He   
flourished a brown envelope at her. "Now then.    Gary Cooper is at the Saint Regis, Room 641- 
this is a sample Who's in Town script.    Take it to him.    We may get him for Thursday." 
 
"Gary COOPER?    You mean the movie star?"    Madeline in astonishment zoomed words like   
her mother. 
 
'Who else?    He may ask you questions about the show and about me. 
 
So listen and get this rundown in your head.    We work inchwiatirhso,ubtoaonks auience in a   
little studio, very relaxed.    It's a room with a rug, really nice, like a library in a home.    It's the   
same room Mrs.    Roosevelt uses for her show.    We can do the script in extra big type, if he   
needs show runs an hour and a half. 
 
I started this 71 
 
that.    He can take five minutes or fifteen.    e whole '34 and did it there show in Los Angeles   
back in for three years.    I called it 0-ver the Coffee then.    Maybe he heard it.    Of course he may   
be too busy to go into all that. Anyway,    act as though you've been with the show for a   
while.Too dazzled and excited to talk, Madeline held out her hand for the envelope.    Cleveland   
gave it to her, saying, "All set? 
 
Anchors aweigh.    For Christ's sake, don't ask him for his autograph. 
 
Telephone me if there's any holdup.    Don't fail to reappear. 
 
Madeline blurted, "You must have had some very stupid girls working for you," and hurried   
out. 
 
A maid opened the door of the hotel suite where Gary Cooper, in a gray suit, sat eating lunch at   
a wheeled table.    The star rose, immensely tall and slim, smiling down at Madeline.    He put on   
 98 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
black-rimmed glasses, glanced over the script as he drank coffee, and asked questions.    He was   
all business, the farthest thing from a bashful cowboy; he had the manner of an admiral.    When   
she mentioned the Over the Coffee show he brightened.    "Yes, I remember that." 
 
Almost at once, it seemed, she was out on the sunny street again, overwrought, thrilled to her   
bones.    "England mobilizes! 
 
Hitler smashes into Polandi)) the news vendor at the corner hoarsely chanted. 
 
"Bless your little heart!"    Cleveland said as she came into the office. 
 
He was banging rapidly at a typewriter.    "Cooper just called.    He likes the idea and he's in."   
Ripping the yellow sheet out of the machine, he clipped it with others.    "He remarked on what   
a nice girl you were. What did you say to him?" 
 
"Hardly anything." 
 
"Well, you did a good job.    I'm off to interview him now.    There's tomorrow's script.    Do a   
smooth copy of the red-checked pages, then get the whole thing to mimeo instanter. Room   
309A." Cleveland stepped into his shoes, straightened his tie, and threw on a rust-colored   
sports jacket.    He scratched his heavy blond hair, and grinned at her, raising thick humorously   
arched eyebrows. She felt she would do anything for him. He was charming, she decided,   
rather than actually handsome. There was something infectiously jovial about him, a spark of   
devilish amusement in his lively blue eyes.    She was a bit disappointed to see, when he stood   
up, that though he could not be more than thirty-one or so, his stomach bulged. 
 
But it didn't matter. 
 
He paused at the door.    "Do you mind working nights?    You'll get paid overtime.    If you come   
back here around eight-thirty tonight, you'll find Thursday's rough on my desk, with the   
Cooper spot." 
 
"Mr.    Cleveland, I haven't been hired yet." 
 
"You have been.    I just talked to Mrs.    Hennessy.    After you get that script to mimeo, go down   
and fill out your papers." 
 
Madeline toiled for five hours to finish the script. She turned it in, messy though her work   
was, hoping it would not end her radio career then and there.    At the employment office she   
learned she was starting at thirty-five dollars a week.    It seemed a fortune.    She took her aching   
back to the drugstore, made    a quick dinner of a chocolate drink and a bacon and tomato   
sandwich, and walked back to CBS.    Over the tall black Madison Avenue buildings, checkered   
with gold-lit windows, a misty full moon floated in a sunset sky.    This day when Hitler's war   
began was turning out the most delightful in Madeline Henry's life. 
 
On Cleveland's desk the interview with Gary Cooper now lay, a mass of crude typing, quick   
scrawls and red crayon cuts.    The note clipped to it said: Try to copy it all over tonight.    See   
you around ten. 
 99 
 
805 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Madeline groaned; she was terribly tired. 
 
She put in a call to Warren at the bachelor officers' quarters of the Pensacola flying school.    He   
wasn't there, but an operator with a Southern accent like a vaudeville imitation offered to track   
him down. 
 
In the smoky newsroom, girls kept crisscrossing with long teletype strips or paper cups of   
coffee, men were talking loud and fast, and the typewriter din never stopped. Through the   
open door Madeline heard contradictory rumors: Poland was already collapsing, Hitler was on   
his way to Warsaw, Mussolini was flying to Berlin, the French were pressing England for   
another Munich deal, Hitler was offering to visit Chamberlain. 
 
The telephone rang at ten dclock and there was Warren on the line, with music and laughter in   
the background.    He was at the beach club, he said, at a moonlight dance on a terrace lined   
with palm trees.    He had just met a Marvelous girl, the daughter of a Congressman. 
 
Madeline told him about the CBS job, and he seemed amused and impressed. 
 
'Say, I've heard Who's in Town," he said. "This fellow Hugh Cleveland has an interesting   
voice.    What's he like?" 
 
"Oh, very nice.    Do you think it's all right?    Will Dad be furious?" 
 
"Matty, you'll be back at school in three weeks, before he even knows about it.    Where will you   
stay?... Oh, yes, that's an all-women hotel, I know that one.    Ha!    Little Madeline on the town." 
 
"You don't oh ect?" 
 
"Me?    Why, I think it's fine.    just be a good girl, and all that. 
 
What's the word at CBS, Madeline?    Is the war on?    The scuttlebutt down here is that England   
is chickening out." 
 
"Nothing but rumors here too, a dozen an hour.      Is your date really the daughter of a   
congressman?"P "YOu bet, and she is a dish." 
 
"TOugh life you're leading.    How's the flying coming?" 
 
"I groundlooped on my second solo landing, but don't write Dad that. I'm doing better now.    it's   
great."    "Good, you're still here," Cleveland said, walking into the office a few minutes after   
this conversation. With him was a tall beauty in a black straw hat much Wider than Madeline's,   
and a gray silk dress.    Her gardenia perfume was too strong for the small office.    Cleveland   
glanced at Madeline's typed pages- 'Need a little practice, ehr "I warm up as I go along.- Her   
voice trembled.    She Cleared her throat. 
 
"Let's hope so.    Now look, do you by any chance know of an admiral named Preble?    Is he   
some high muckymuck?" "Preble? Do you mean Stewart Preble?"Stewart Preble, exactly.   
Who is he?" 
 100 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Why, he's the Chief of Naval Operations.)) "That's a big job, eh?" 
 
Madeline was used to civilian ignorance of the armed forces, but this shocked her. "Mr.   
Cleveland, there's nobody higher in the United States Navy."    "Fine.    Then he's our boy.    I just   
found out he's at the Warwick.    We keep tabs on the big hotels, Madeline.    Now let's get off a   
letter to him." 
 
He leaned on the edge of the desk and started to dictate.    The yawning beauty crossed glorious   
legs, lit a cigarette, and leafed the Hollywood Reporter.    Madeline desperately tried to keep up,   
but had to plead with him to go slower. 
 
Don't you know shorthand?" 
 
"I can learn it quickly enough." 
 
Cleveland glanced at his watch and at the beauty, who drooped her eyelids contemptuously at   
Madeline.    Madeline felt like a worm. 
 
Cleveland rumpled his hair and shook his head. "Look, you know these Navy characters.   
Write him a letter, that's all. Invite him to come on the Thursday morning show. Mention   
Gary Cooper, if you want to. 
 
Sign my name, and take it over to the Warwick.    Can you do that?" 
 
'Certainly." 
 
"Fine.    Wendy and I want to catch a ten o'clock movie.    She plays a bit in it.    Say, this Preble   
fellow, does he know your father? How about that, Wendy? This Idd's father is our Navy   
attache in Berlin." 
 
Wendy yawned. 
 
Madeline said coldly, "Admiral Preble knows my father."    "Well, how about mentioning that,   
then?"    He gave her his persuasive impish smile. 
 
'I'd really like to get him, Madeline.    Admirals and generals are usually crappy guests.    Too   
cautious and stiff to say anything interesting.    But there's a war on, so for the moment, they're   
hot. 
 
See you in the morning.    I go on at nine, you know, so get here not later than eight." 
 
As he had told Madeline, Warren was dancing away this first night of the war in moonlight,   
with a congressman's pretty daughter. 
 
The moon floats out in space, some thirty diameters of the earth away, shining on the just and   
the unjust as the cloud cover allows.    It had lent dim but helpful light to the columns of young   
Germans in gray uniforms, miles and miles long, trudging across the Polish border. Now   
Europe had rolled into the sun, giving the Germans better illumination to get on with the work,   
and the same moon was bathing the Gulf of Mejdco, and the terrace of Pensacola's Harbor   
 101 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
View Club.    The German General Staff had carefully planned on the moonlight, but the silver   
glow fell on Warren Henry and Janice Lacouture by a pleasant chance. 
 
Everyone    said    it    was the    best    club    dance in    years.    The big    headlines,    the excited   
radio   
broadcasts, had created a pleasurable stir in flat quiet them more glamorous; war was in the air,   
and however remote the combat, Pensacola.    The student aviators felt more important and the   
girls found these were warriors.    The talk about the German attack soon gave way to homier   
topics, however: the horse show, the new base commander, recent flying accidents, recent   
romances. Der Fuhrer, for these happy people, remained the queer hoarse German of the   
newsreels, with the wild gestures and the funny mustache, who had managed to start up a   
European mess, but who could scarcely menace the United States just yet. 
 
Lieutenant (junior grade) Henry took a different view.    The invasion really interested him, a nd   
that was how he first caught the interest of Janice Lacouture.    At the Academy he had excelled   
on the subject of the World War.    They sat in a far corner of the terrace in the moonlight soon   
after they met, and instead of talking aviation or making a pass at her, this student pilot told her   
about the Schlieffen Plan to capture Paris, and the way von Moltke had fatally tampered with   
it; about the feat of German railroading that had made the Tannenberg victory possible; about   
the strategic parallels of 1914 and 1939.    He had begun with the usual aviator chitchat, which   
after years of Pensacola dating stupefied Janice. 
 
But once they began on the war and she allowed her own knowledge of history and politics to   
show, he turned serious. It had been an exciting talk, the sort in which lovers sometimes   
discover each other without speaking a romantic word. 
 
Despite the big Lacouture nose, a mark of French ancestry, and rather irregular front teeth,   
Janice was one of the belles of Pensacola.    Her mouth, skin, and hazel eyes were lovely; her   
figure so striking that all men automatically stared at her as at a fire.    She was tall, blonde, with   
a soft pushing voice, and a very lively manner. 
 
Her family owmed the largest house in the club estates. The L-acoutures were solidly rich,   
from two generations in the timbering that had destroyed the Gulf pine forests for hundreds of   
miles, and turned northern Florida into a sandy insect-swarming waste. Her father was a   
wonder in somnolent and self-satisfied Pensacola, the first Lacout'ure who had ever bestirred   
himself in politics. 
 
In Washington Janice had grown up farseeing and sober.    She had majored in economics and   
American history at George Washington University, and she was about to start law school.   
She wanted to marry a public man; a congressman, a senator, a governor; with luck, why not a   
future President?    This was hard on the young men who fell for her beauty and chic.    Janice   
was out for big game, and she had acquired a reputation for frostiness which amused her.    The   
last thing she had expected was to meet anybody worth knowing during her enforced summer   
in Pensacola. 
 
And of all people, a naval aviator!    Nevertheless there was something different about Warren   
Henry.    He was oddly appealing, with those pen ctrating eyes, bony ramshackle frame) gray- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sprinkled hair, and easy smile, with its hint of shrewdness and immorality.    He acted as though   
he knew women far too well for an Annapolis honor student. 
 
This did not trouble her; it added tang to Warren. 
 
They stopped talking after a while and danced close-hugged in the moonlight.    The Pensacola   
onlookers began inquiring about the background of the lieutenant junior grade with the scar;   
for Warren's ground loop had given him a forehead wound requiring nine stitches. 
 
The naval aviators told each other with envy who the Lacouture girl was. 
 
When Warren returned to the bachelor officers' quarters he found two telephone messages   
from Mrs.    Tarrasch.    This was his Baltimore divorcie; the woman of thirty for whom he had   
risked expuwon from the Academy; the woman with whom he had spent the afternoon in bed   
the day his parents had sailed off to Germany.    In his third Academy year, he had come upon   
her as the lady hostess in a tearoom.    Responding to a bold remark, she had agreed to see him   
after the restaurant closed. 
 
She was a clever little woman, with a hard-luck story about two beastly husbands; she was a   
reader, a lover of the arts, and hungrily passionate.    Warren had grown attached to her, and had   
briefly even thought of marrying her, when she had once roused his jealousy by going off with   
an older man for a weekend. Byron had talked him out of that, rendering him the greatest   
service in the power of a brother.    Helene Tarrasch wasn't a bad woman, simply a lonely one.   
If young officer candidates are to be kept by law from marrying, then the lively ones win find   
one or another Mrs. 
 
Tarrasch.    warren's worst mistake had been asking her to come to Pensacola, but he had been   
three years at sea. Now she was installed at the San Carlos Hotel as the receptionist in the   
main dining room. 
 
But how obsolete she suddenly was!    Not only because of Janice Lacouture; Hitler's invasion   
of Poland had given the future a shape. 
 
Warren believed the United States would be at war within a year. 
 
The prosBut he was going to iqy in this war, pect glittered.    He might get killed and if God   
allowed, he was going to get a good war record, Warren believed in God, but thought he must   
be much more broad-minded than the preachers made him out. A Being who could create   
something as Marvelous as sex was not likely to be priggish about it; Warren was fond of   
saying that God had clearly given a man balls not for beauty but for use.    Sitting in his bleakly   
furnished room with the old-fashioned high ceiling, trying to ignore his room-mate's snores,   
Lieutenant Henry looked out of the window at the quiet moonlit lawn in front of the b.O.Q and   
allowed his mind to run to golden postwar fantasies. 
 
Politics attracted him.    His avid history study had taught him that politicians were the leaders,   
military men only the mechanics, of war. 
 103 
 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Warren had closely observed politicians visiting the Academy and the fleet.      Some were   
impressive men like his father, but more were gladbanders with worried eyes, phony smiles,   
and soft bellies.    His father's ambition, he knew, was flag rank in the Navy.    Warren wanted   
that, but why not dream of more?    Janice Lacouture had brains.    She had everything.    A single   
day had transformed Warren Henry's life.    In the morning the war had Opened up the future; in   
the evening the perfect partner for that future had come out of nowhere. 
 
He did a strange thing.    He walked to the window and looking out at the moon, he whispered a   
prayer.    His youthful marching to church with his father had taken that much hold.    "Let me   
have her, and let me pass this course and be a good naval aviator.    I don't ask you to let me   
live, I know that's up to me, and the numbers, but if I do live and get through the war, then))-he   
smiled at the dark star-splashed sky-"well, then we'll see.    All right?"    Warren was charming   
God. 
 
He went to bed without telephoning Mrs.    Tarrasch.    She was always ready for a call from him.   
But now she seemed to him like somebody he had known in high school. shortly before six in   
the morning    a ring fromsttahffemeemebtianssgyonwothkee Victor Henry.    The charge was   
summoning an urgent 
 
outbreak of the war. 
 
Rhoda muttered and turned, throwing a naked white arm over her crossed the bed and eyes.   
From a crack in the curtains a narrow sunbeam the covers.    Hitler was dust motes danced in the   
wan light as Pug threw back having good weather for the kickoff, Pug sleepily thought; just the   
bastard's luck!    The invasion news was no great surprise.    Since the Nazi-soviet pact the Polish   
crisis had been skidding downhill. At the big Argentine embassy supper the night before,   
everybody had noticed the absence of German military men and foreign office people, and had   
talked of war.    One American correspondent had told Pug flatly that the invasion was on for   
three o'clock in the morning; that man had had the dope!    The world had crossed a red line in   
time, and Victor Henry jumped out of bed to go to work in a new era.    It wasn't his war, the   
one he had been training for all his life; not yet.    But he was fairly sure it would be.    Despite of   
surprise, he was excited and moved. 
 
In the library he switched on the radio, which seemed to take a long time to warn up, and   
opened the french windows.    Birds sang in the sunny garden, whence a mild breeze, passing   
through a red-flowering shrub at the window, brought in a heavy sweet odor. The radio   
hummed and crackled and an announcer came on, not sounding much different than any Berlin   
announcer had during the past week, when the air had been full of the "incredible atrocities"   
perpetrated    against    Germans    in Poland:    rape, murder,    disembowelling    of pregnalt    women,   
cutting off of children's hands and feet.    In fact, after this long diet of gruesome bosh, the news   
that the war had started seemed almost tame. The voice was just as strident, just as full of   
righteousness, describing the Fuhrer's decision to march, as it had been in denouncing the   
atrocities. 
 
The account of a Polish attack at Gleiwitz to capture a German radio station-the outrage which,   
according to the broadcast, had sent the Wehrmacht rolling two million strong into Poland "in   
 104 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
self-defense"was narrated with the same matter-of-fact briskness as the report of the plunge of   
the Germans across Polish soil, and of the surprise collapse of the Polish border divisions.   
Obviously an invasion of this magnitude had been laid on for a month or more and had been   
surging irreversibly toward Poland for days; the Polish 'attack" was a silly hoax for childish   
minds. 
 
Victor    Henry was    getting    used    to Berlin    Radio's    foggy mixture    of facts    and    lies, but   
the   
contempt of the Nazis for    the intelligence of the Germans could still surprise him.      The   
propaganda had certainly achieved one aimto muffle the impact of the new war. 
 
Rhoda came yawning in, tying her negligee, and cocking her head at the radio.    "Well!    So he   
really went and did it.    Isn't that something!" 
 
'Sorry it woke you.    I tried to keep it low." 
 
'Oh, the telephone woke me.    Was it the embassy?"    Pug nodded.    "I thought so.    Well, I guess   
I should be up for this.    We're not going to get in it, are we?"    'Most unlikely.    I'm not even sure   
England and France will go to bat."    'How about the children, Pug?" 
 
"Well, Warren and Madeline are no problem. The word is that Italy won't fight, so Byron   
should be okay, too."    Rhoda sighed, and yawned. 
 
'Hitler's a very strange person.    I've decided that.    What a way to act! I liked his handshake, sort   
of direct and manly like an American's, and that charming bashful little smile. But he had   
strange eyes, you know? Remote, and sort of veiled.    Say, what happens to our dinner for that   
tycoon from Colorado?    What's his name?    Will that be off?" 
 
"Dr.    Kirby.    He may not get here now, Rhoda."    "Dear, please find out. I have guests coming,   
and extra help and food, you know."    'I'll do my best." 
 
Rhoda said slowly, "World War Two... You know, Time has been writing about 'World War   
Two' for months.    It always seemed so unreal, somehow. Now here it is, but it still has a funny   
ring." 
 
'You'll soon get used to it."    'Oh, no doubt it's on now.    I'm supposed to have lunch with SaBy   
Forrest.    I'd better find out if that's still on.    What a mess!    And my hair appointment-oh, no,   
that's tomorrow.    Or is it?    I don't function this time of the morning." 
 
Because of the early meeting, Pug gave up his cherished five-mile morning walk to the   
embassy, and drove there.    Berlin was, if anything, quieter than usual.    There was a Sunday   
morning look to the tree-lined avenues in mid-city, a slackening of auto traffic, a scarcity of   
people on the sidewalks.    All the shops were open. 
 
Small trucks with machine guns at the ready, manned by helmeted soldiers, stood at some   
intersections, and along the walls of public buildings workmen were piling sandbags. 
 
But it was all a desultory business. The coffee shops were full of breaktasters, and in the   
Tiergarten the early morning strollers-nannies, children, elderly people-were out as usual for   
 
 
 
 
 
 
the fine weather, with the vendors of toy balloons and ice cream. 
 
Loudspeakers everywhere were Matting the news, and an unusual number of airplanes went   
humming across the sky. The Berliners kept looking at the sky and then at each other with   
cynical sad grins.    He remembered pictures of the happy cheering Berliners crowding linter den   
Lnden at the start of the last war. 
 
Clearly the Germans were going into this one in a different mood. 
 
The embassy was a maelstrom of scared tourists and would-be refugees, mainly old Jews.    In   
the charge's large quiet office the staff meeting was sombre and short.    No special instructions   
from Washington had yet come in.    Mimeographed sheets of wartime regulations were passed   
around. 
 
The charge urged on everyone special care to preserve a correct tone of neutrality.    If England   
and France came in, the embassy would probably look out for their people caught in Germany;   
a lot of lives might depend on appropriate American conduct at this touchy moment toward the   
truculent Germans.    After the meeting Victor Henry attacked an in-tray stuffed with paper in   
his office, telling his yeoman to try to track down Dr.    Palmer Kirby, the electrical engineer   
from Colorado who bore a "very important" designation from the Bureau of Ordnance.  
 
Alistair Tudsbury telephoned.    "nullo!    Would you like to hear the bad man explain all to the   
Reichstag?    I can get you in to the press box. This is my last story from Berlin.    I have my   
marching papers and should have left days ago, but got a medical delay.      I OWe You   
something for that glimpse of Swinemonde." 
 
"You don't owe me anything, but I'll sure come." 
 
"Good.    He speaks at r.    Pa a thee m will call for you at two. 
 
We're packing up like mad.    I hope we don't get interned.    It's this German food that's given me   
the gout." 
 
The yeoman came in and laid a telegram on the desk. 
 
"Tudsbury, can't I take you and Pamela to lunch?" 
 
"No, no.      No time.      Many thanks.      After this little unpleasantness, maybe.      In 1949 or   
thereabouts." 
 
Pug laughed.    "Ten years?    You're a pessimist." 
 
He opened the telegram, and got a bad shock.    DO You KNow WHEREABOUTS YOUR SON   
BYRON AND MY NIECE NATALIE PLEASE WRITE OR CALL. 
 
It was signed: AARON JASTROW, with an address and telephone number in Siena. 
 
Pug rang for the yeoman and handed him the telegram.    "Try to get through to Siena, to this   
man.    Also wire him: NOT KNOWN.    PLEASE WIRE LAST KNOWN WHEREABOUTS.   
 106 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"'Aye aye, sir."    He decided not ' to tell Rhoda.    Trying to go back to work he found himself   
unable to comprehend the substance of simple letters. He gave up, and looked out of the   
window at the Berliners going their ways in bright sunshine. 
 
Open trucks full of soldiers in gray were snorting along the street in a long procession.    The   
soldiers looked bored.    A small silver blimp came floating across the clear blue sky, towing a   
sign advertising Odol toothpaste.    He swallowed his worry as best he could, and attacked his   
in-basket again. 
 
The telephone rang as he was leaving the office for lunch.    He heard multilingual jabber and   
then a cultured American voice with a faint accent, 'Commander Henry?    Aaron Jastrow.    It's   
very good of you to call." 
 
'Dr.    Jastrow, I thought I'd better tell you immediately that I don't know where Byron and your   
niece are.    I had no idea they weren't in Siena with you." 
 
"Well, I hesitated to wire you, but I thought you could help locate them.    Two weeks ago they   
went to Warsaw."    'Warsaw!" 
 
"Yes, to visit a friend in our embassy there." 
 
"I'll get on it right away.    Our embassy, you said?" 
 
'Yes. The second secretary,    Leslie Slote, is a former pupil of mine, a brilliant fellow. I   
imagine he and Natalie will get married one day." Pug scrawled the name.    Jastrow coughed.   
'Excuse me.    It was a risky trip to make, I guess, but they did set out before the pact. 
 
She's twenty-seven and has quite a will of her own.    Byron volunteered to go with her.    That's   
really why I refuse to worry.    He's a very capable young man." 
 
Victor Henry, dazed by the news, still found pleasure in this good word for Byron.    Over the   
years he had not heard many.    'Thanks.    I'll wire you when I find out something.    And if you   
get any word, let me know." 
 
Jastrow coughed again.    'Sorry.    I have a touch of bronchitis.    I remember the last war SO well)   
Commander!    It really wasn't long ago, was it? All this is giving me a strange, terribly sad   
feeling.    Almost despairing. 
 
I hope we'll meet one day.    It would give me pleasure to know Byron's father.    He worships   
you." 
 
The long table in Borcher's restaurant was a listening post, an information exchange, and a   
clearing house for little diplomatic deals. 
 
Today, the cheery clink of silverware in the crowded restaurant, the smell of roast meats, the   
loud animated talk, were much the same; but at this special table there were changes.    Several   
attaches    had put on their uniforms. The Pole-a big cheerful Purple-faced man    with great   
moustaches, who usually outdrank everybody-was gone.    The Englishman was missing.    The   
 107 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
French attache, in heavy gold braid, gloomed in his usual place. The comical Dane, senior   
among them, white-haired and fat, still wore his white linen suit; but he was stiff and quiet.   
The talk was constrained.    Warsaw Radio claimed the Germans were being thrown back, but   
nobody could confirm that. On the contrary, the flashes from their capitals echoed Gerfnan   
boasts: victory everywhere, hundreds of Polish planes smashed on the ground, whole armies   
surrounded.    Pug ate little and left early. 
 
Pamela Tudsbury leaned against the iron grillwork in front of the embassy, near the line of sad- 
looking Jews that stretched around the block. 
 
She wore the gray suit of their morning walk on the Bremen. 
 
"Well,"    he said, as they walked side by Side, "SO the little    tramp    went.She gave b'len a   
surprised, flattered look.    "Didn)t he ever! 
 
Here's our car. Directly after the speech we're off. We're flying to Copenhagen at six, and   
lucky to have the seats.    They're like diamonds." 
 
She drove the car in nervous zigzags through side streets, to get around a long convoy of tanks   
on a main boulevard. 
 
"Well, I'm sorry to see you and your dad go," Pug said.    "I'll sure miss your fireball style at the   
wheel.    Where to next?" 
 
" My guess is back to the USA.    The governor's well liked there, and it'll be the number-one   
spot, actually, with Berlin shut down." 
 
"Pamela, don't you have a young man in London, or several, who object to your being so much   
on the move?"    The girl-that was how he thought of her, which showed his own age-looked   
flushed and sparklingeyed.    The driving gestures of her small white hands were swift, sharp,   
and well controlled.    She diffused an agreeably light peppery scent, like carnations.  
 
"Oh, not at the moment, Commander.    And the governor does need me since his eyes have got   
so bad.    I like to travel, so I'm happy enough to -bless my soul.    Look to your left.    Don't be   
obvious about it." 
 
Beside them, halted at the traffic light, Herman goering sat at the wheel of an open red two- 
seater, looking imperious and enormous. 
 
He wore a tan double-breasted business suit, with the flaring lapels that all his clothes   
displayed.    The broad brim of his Panama hat was snapped down to the side and back, in an   
out-of-date, somewhat gangsterish American style. The fat man's swollen be-ringed fingers   
drummed the steering wheel, and he chewed at his very long upper lip. 
 
The light changed.    As the red car darted forward, the policeman saluted, and Goering laughed   
and waved his hand. 
 
"How easy it would have been to shoot him," Pamela said. 
 108 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pug said "The Nazis puzzle me. Their security precautions are mighty loose. Even around   
Hitler.    After all, they've murdered a lot of people."    The Germans adore them.    The governor   
got in trouble over one of his broadcasts from a Party Day in Nuremberg.    He said anybody   
could kill Hitler, and the free way he moved around showed how solidly the Germans were for   
him. Somehow this annoyed them." 'Tamela, I have a son I hope you'll meet when you're   
Statde."    He told her about Warren. 
 
The girl listened with a crooked smile. "You've already mentioned him. Sounds too tall for   
me.    what's he actually like?    Is he like you?" 
 
"Not in the least.    He's personable, sharp as a tack, and very attractive to the ladies."    'Indeed.   
Don't you have another son?" 
 
"Yes.    I have another son."    He hesitated, and then he briefly told Pamela what he had not yet   
told his wife-that Byron was somewhere in Poland in the path of the German invasion,   
accompanying a Jewish girl in love with another man. Pug said Byron had a caes way of   
getting out of trouble, but he expected to owe a few more gray hairs to his son before this   
episode was over. 
 
"He sounds like the one I might enjoy meeting." 
 
"He's too young    for you."    "Well, maybe    not. I never do hit it quite right. There's the   
governor."    Tudsbury stood on a corner, waving. His handshake was violent. 
 
He wore tweed far too heavy for the weather, and a green velour hat. 
 
"Hello there, my dear fellow!    Come along.    Pam, be back at this corner at four and wait, won't   
you? This won't be one of his three-hour harangues. The bad man hasn't had much sleep   
lately." 
 
A young German in a business suit met them, clicked his heels at Pug, and took them past SS   
men, along corridors and up staircases, to the crowded little press balcony of the Kroll Opera   
House, which the Nazis used for Reichstag meetings. The stylized gold eagle perched on a   
wreathed swastika behind the podium, with gold rays shooting out to cover the whole wall, had   
a colossal look in photographs, but before one's eyes it was just garish and vulgar-a backdrop   
well suited to an opera house. 
 
This air of theatrical impermanence, of hastily contrived show, was a Nazi trademark. The   
new Reichstag, still under construction, was dully massive, to suit Hitler's taste, and the heavy   
Doric colonnades were obviously of stone, but the building made Pug think of a cardboard film   
setting. 
 
Like most Americans, he could not yet take the Nazis, or indeed the Germans, very seriously.   
He    thought they    worked    with fantastic    industry at    kidding themselves.      Germany    was an   
unstable old-new country, with heavy baroque charm in some places, and Pittsburgh-like   
splotches of heavy industry in others; and with a surface smear of huffing, puffing political   
pageantry that strove to instill terror and came out funny. So it struck him.    Individually the   
 109 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Germans were remarkably like Americans; he thought it curious that both peoples had the   
eagle for their national emblem.    The Germans were the same sort of businesslike go-getters:   
direct, roughly humorous, and usually reliable and able.    Commander Henry felt more at home   
with them, in these points, than with the slower British or the devious talkative French. 
 
But in a mass they seemed to become ugly gullible strangers with a truculent streak; and if one   
talked politics    to an individual German he tended to turn into such a stranger, a sneering   
belligerent Mr.    Hyde. 
 
They were a baffling lot.    In a demor4red Europe, Pug knew, t e German horde h s of marching   
men, well drilled and well equipped, could do a lot of damage; and they had slapped together a   
big air force in a hurry. He could well believe that they were now rolling over the Poles.  
 
The deputies were streaming,to their seats. Most of them wore uniforms, confusing in their   
variety of color and braid, alike mainly in the belts and boots. It was easy to pick out the   
military men by their professional bearing.    The uniformed Party officials looked like any other   
politicians-jovial, relaxed,    mostly grizzled    or bald-stuffed into    splashy costumes;    and they   
obviously took Teutonic pleasure in the strut and the Pomp, however uncomfortable jackboots   
might be on their flat feet, and gun belts on their bulging paunches.      But today these   
professional Nazis, for all their warlike masquerade, looked less jaunty than usual.    A subdued   
atmosphere pervaded the chamber. 
 
Goering appeared.    Victor Henry had heard of the fat man's quick 
 
costume changes; now he saw one.    In a sky-blue heavily medalled uniform with flaring buff   
lapels, Goering crossed the stage and stood with feet spread apart, hands on belted hips, talking   
gravely with a deferential knot of generals and Party men.    After a while he took his place in   
the Speaker's chair.    Then Hitler simply walked in, holding the manuscript of his speech in a   
red leather folder.    There was no heavy theatricalism, as in his Party rally entrances.    All the   
deputies stood and applauded, and the guards came to attention.    He sat in a front platform row   
among the generals and cabinet men, crossing and uncrossing his legs during Goering's brief   
solemn introduction. 
 
Henry thought the Fuhrer spoke badly.    He was gray with fatigue. 
 
The speech rehashed the iniquity of the Versailles Treaty, the mistreatment of Germany by the   
other powers, his.    unending efforts for peace, and the bloody belligerence of the Poles.    It was   
-almost all in the first person and it was full of strange pessimism.    He spoke of falling in battle   
and of the men who were to succeed him, Goering and Hess.    He shouted that 1918 would not   
recur, that this time Germany would triumph or go down fighting.    He was extremely hoarse.   
He took awhile to work up to the flamboyant gestures; but at last he was doing them all.   
Tudsbury whispered to Henry once, "Damn good handwork today," but Pug thought it was   
absurd vaudeville. 
 
Nevertheless this time Hitler impressed him.    Badly as he was performing, the man was a blast   
of willpower.    all the Germans sat with the round eyes and tense faces of children watching a   
 110 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
magician.    The proud cynical face of Goering, as he sat perched above and behind Hitler, wore   
exactly the same rapt, awestruck look. 
 
But the Fuhrer himself was a bit rattled, Pug thought, by the gravity of what he was saying.   
The speech sounded like the hasty product of a few sleepless hours, intensely personal,   
probably all the truer for being produced under such pressure.    This whining, blustering "I-I-I"   
apologia must be one of the oddest state documents in the history of warfare. 
 
The Fuhrer's face remained a comic one to Pug's American eyes: the long straight thrusting   
nose, a right triangle of flesh sticking out of a white jowly face, under a falling lock of black   
hair, over the clown mustache.    He wore a field-gray coat today-his 'old soldier's coat," he said   
in his speech-and it was a decidedly poor fit.    But the puffy glaring eyes, the taut downcurved   
mouth, the commanding arm sweeps, were formidable.    This queer ups tart from the Vienna   
gutters had really done it, Henry thought.      He had climbed to the combined thrones, in   
Tudsbury's phrase, of the Hohenzollems and the Holy Roman Emperors, to try to reverse the   
outcome of the last war; and now he was giving the word.    The little tramp was going!    Pug   
kept thinking of Byron, somewhere in Poland, a speck of unimportance in this big show. When   
they emerged on the street in balmy sunshine, Tudsbury said, "Well, what did you think 
 
"I don't think he's quite big enough." 
 
Tudsbury stopped in his tracks and peered at him. "Let me tell you, he's big. That's the   
mistake we've all made over here for much too long." 
 
"He has to lick the world," Pug said.    What'll he do it with?" 
 
"Eighty million armed and ravening Germans." 
 
"That's just talk.    You and the French have him outmanned and outgunned." 
 
"The French," Tudsbury said.    He added in a pleasanter tone, "There comes Pam.    Let us drive   
you back to the embassy." 
 
'I'll walk."    The car stopped under a waving red swastika banner. 
 
Tudsbury shook hands, blinking at Henry through glasses like bottle bottoms. 
 
"We'll put up a show, Henry, but we may need help.    Stopping this fellow will be a job, And   
you know it must be done." 
 
"Tell them that in Washington."Don't you    think I will? You tell them, too.2) Henry said   
through the car window, "Good-bye, Pam.    Happy landings." 
 
She put out a cold white hand, with a melancholy smile.    "I hope You'll see your son soon.    I   
have a feeling you Will." The Mercedes drove off. Lighting a cigarette, Pug caught on his   
hand the faint carnation scent. 
 
A big lean man in a pepper-and-salt suit, with a soft hat on his knees, was sitting in Henry's   
outer office.    Henry did not realize how big he was until he stood up; he was six feet three or   
 111 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
so, and he stooped and looked a little    ashamed    of his    height,    like    many overgrown men.   
"COnlmander Henry?    I'm Palmer Kirby, he said.    "If you're busy just throw me out." 
 
"Not at all- Welcome.    How'd you get here?" 
 
"Well, it took some doing.    I had to dodge around through Belgium and Norway.    Some planes   
are flying, some aren't."    Kirby had an awkward manner, and somewhat rustic western speech.   
His pale face was Pitted, as though he had once been a bad acne sufferer.    He had a long nose   
and a large loose mouth; altogether an ugly man, with clever mrinIded eyes and a sad look. 
 
The yeoman said, 'Commander, sir, couple of priority messages on your desk." 
 
'Very well.    Come in, Dr.    Kirby."    Pug sized him up with relief as a serious fellow out to get a   
job done; not the troublesome sort who wanted women, a good time, and an introduction to   
high-placed Nazis.    A dinner and some industrial contacts would take care of Palmer Kirby. 
 
WARSAW 
 
9 - z - 39BYRON HENRY NATALM JASTROW SCRMDULED LEAVE CRACOW   
TODAY FOR BUg ST AND ROME AM EMEAVORING.CONFMM DEPAR'rURE.    Slote. 
 
This dispatch, in teletyped strips on a gray department blank, gave Henry an evil qualm.    In the   
afternoon bulletins, Berlin Radio was claiming a victorious thrust toward Cracow after a   
violent air bombardment. 
 
The other message, a slip of the charge d'affaires' office stationery, was an unsigned scrawled   
sentence: Please see me at once. 
 
Kirby    said he would be glad to wait.      Victor Henry    walked down the hall to the richly   
furnished suite of the ambassador where the charge had held the staff meeting. 
 
The charge looked at him over his half-moon glasses and waved at an armchair.    'So you were   
at the Reichstag, eh?    I heard part of it. 
 
How did it strike you?"      'The man's punch-drunk."      The charge looked surprised and   
thoughtful.    'qbat's an odd reaction.    It's true he's had quite a week.    Incredible stamina, though.   
He undoubtedly wrote every word of that harangue.    Rather effective, I thought. 
 
What was the mood there?"    "Not happy."    'No, they have their misgivings this time around,   
don't they?    Strange atmosphere in this city."    The charge took off his glasses and leaned back   
in his large, leather-covered chair, resting the back of his head on interlaced fingers.    'You're   
wanted in Washington."    "Sec Nay?"    Pug blurted. 
 
'No.    State Department, German desk.    You're to proceed to Washington by fastest available   
transportation, civilian or military, highest priority, prepared to stay not more than one week in   
Washington, and then to return to your post here.    No other instructions.    Nothing in writing.   
That's it."    For twenty-five years Victor Henry had not made a move like this without papers   
from the Navy Department, orders stencilled and mimeographed with a whole sheaf of copies   
 112 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
to be left at stops on the way. 
 
Even his vacations had been 'qeaves" ordered by the Navy. The State Department had no   
jurisdiction over him.    Still, an attache had a queer shadowy status.    His mind moved at once to   
executing the assignment. 
 
"If I have nothing in writing, how do I get air priorities?" 
 
"You'll get them.    How soon can you go?" 
 
Commander Henry stared at the charge, and then tried a smile. The charge smiled back.   
Henry said, "This is somewhat unusual." 
 
"You sent in an intelligence report, I'm given to understand, on the combat readiness of Nazi   
Germany?" 
 
"I did." 
 
"That may have something to do with it.    In any case, the idea seems to be that you pack a   
toothbrush and leave." 
 
"You mean today?    Tonight?" 
 
"Yes." 
 
Pug stood.    "Plight.    What's the late word on England and France?" 
 
"Chamberlain's addressing Parliament tonight.    My guess is the war Will be on before you get   
back." 
 
"Maybe it'll be over." 
 
"in Poland, possibly."    The charge smiled, and seemed taken aback when Henry failed to be   
amused. 
 
The commander found Dr.    Kirby, long legs sprawled, reading a German industrial journal and   
smoking a pipe, which, with blackrimmed glasses, much enhanced his professorial look.    'I'll   
have to turn you over to Colonel Forrest, our military attache, Dr.    Kirby," he said. "Sorry the   
Navy can't do the courtesies.    I'll be leaving tovrn 
 
"Right.tt for a week." 
 
"Can you give me an idea of what you're after?" 
 
Dr.    Kirby took from his breast pocket a typewritten sheet. 
 
"Well, no problem here," Pug said, scanning it. 'I know most of these people. I imagine   
Colonel Forrest does, too.    Now, Mrs.    Henry has a dinner laid on for you, Thursday evening.   
As a matter of fact"-Henry tapped the sheet-"Dr.    Witten will be one of the guests." 
 113 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'Won't your wife prefer to call it off?    I'm not really much on dinner parties."    "Neither am I,   
but a German's a different person in his office than he is at a table after a few glasses of wine.   
Not a setup, you understand, but different.    So dinners are useful." 
 
Kirby smiled, uncovering large yellow teeth and quite changing his expression to a humorous,   
coarse, tough look.    He flourished the trade journal- "They don't seem to be setups, any way   
you look at them." 
 
"Yes and no.    I've just come from the Reichstag- They've sure been a setup for this character   
Hitler.    Well, let me take you across the hall to Colonel Forrest.    It may be he and Sally will   
host the dinner. 
 
We'll see."    Driving home through the quiet Berlin streets Pug thought less about the summons   
to Washington than of the immediate problem-Rhoda and how to handle her, and whether to   
disclose that Byron was missing. The trip to the United States might well prove a waste of   
time; to speculate on the reason for it was silly.    He had been on such expeditions before. 
 
Somebody high up wanted certain answers in a hurry-answers that perhaps did not exist-and   
started burning up the wires.    Once he had flown three thousand miles during a fleet exercise   
only to find, on his arrival aboard the 'Blue" flagship in Mindanao, that his services were no   
longer required, because the battle problem had moved past the gunnery sconng. 
 
She was not at home.    By the time she got back, he was strapping shut his suitcases.    "Now   
what on earth?"    she said breezily.    Her hair was whirled and curled.    They had been invited to   
an opera party that evening. 
 
"Come out in the garden." 
 
He told her, when they were well away from the house, about the strange Washington   
summons. 
 
'Oh, lord.    For how long?" 
 
'Not more than a week.    If the Clippers keep flying, I should be back by the fifteenth."    "When   
do you go?    First thing tomorrow?" 
 
"Well, by luck, they've got me on a plane to Rotterdam at eight tonight."    'Tonight!"    Vexation   
distorted Rhoda's face.    "You mean we don't even get to go to the opera?    Oh, damn.    And what   
about that Kirby fellow?    Is that on or off?    How can I entertain a person I haven't even met?   
What an aggravating mess!' Pug said the Forrests would be co-hosting the Kirby dinner, and   
that the opera might not be on. 
 
"On?    Of course it's on.    I saw Frau Witten at the hairdresser's. 
 
They're planning a Marvelous supper, but naturally I won't be there. 
 
I'm not going to the opera unescorted. Oh, hell. And suppose England and France declare   
war?    How about that, hey?    That's going to be just peachy, me stranded alone in Berlin in the   
 114 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
middle of a world wart" I'll get back in any case via Lisbon or Copenhagen.    Don't worry.  
 
I'd like you to go ahead with the Kirby thing.    BuOrd wants the red carpet out for him." 
 
They were sitting on a marble bench beside the little fountain, where large goldfish disported   
in the late sunshine. Rhoda looked around at the close-cropped lawn, and said in a calmer   
tone, "All right. 
 
I've been planning cocktails out here- Those musicians who played at Peggy's tea are coming.   
It'll be nice at that.    Sorry you'll miss it." 'Bill Forrest said nobody in this world puts on dinners   
like you." 
 
Rhoda laughed.    "Oh, well.    A week goes by fast.    Berlin's interesting now."    A pair of black- 
and-yellow birds darted past them, swooped to a nearby tree, and Perched carolling.   
"Honestly, though, would you believe there's a war on?" 
 
"It's just starting." 
 
"I know- Well, you'll see Madeline, anyway. And be sure to telephone Warren, that rascal   
never writes. I'm glad Byron's up in the Italian hills. He'll be all right unless he shows up   
married to that Jewish girl. 
 
But he won't. Byron seems much crazier than he is." She put her hand in her husband's.   
'Inherits it from his mother, no doubt.    Sorry I threw my little fit, dear.    You know me.aasping   
her hand tight, Victor Henry decided not to upset ]Rhoda further with the news of Byron's   
disappearance. She could do nothing about it, after all, but fret vainly; and he guessed that   
whatever pickle Byron was in, he would get himself out of it.    That had been the boy's history.  
 
Pug flew off on schedule that evening to Rotterdam- Tempelhof AirPort was transfonned- The   
shops were dark. All the ticket counters save Lufthansa were shut down. On the field, the   
usual traffic of European airliners had vanished, and squat Luftwaffe interceptors stood in grim   
shadowy rows.    But from the air, Berlin still blazed wid, all its electric lights, as in peacetime.   
He was pleased that Rhoda had decided to dress up and go to Der Rosenkavalier, since Frau   
Witten had found a tall handsome Luftwaffe colonel to escort her. 
 
Byron was changing a tire by the roadside when he was strafed. 
 
He    and Natalie    were    out    of Cracow    and    heading    for    Warsaw    in    the    rust-pitted Fiat   
raid,   
together with Berel Jastrow, the bridal couple, the bearded little driver, and his inconveniently   
fat wife. 
 
Cracow on the morning of the invasion had smoked and flamed here and there, but the   
picturesque city had not been much damaged by the first German bombardment.    Byron and   
Natalie had had a good if hurried look at its splendid churches and castles and its magnificent   
old square like Saint Marles in Venice, as they drove around in cheery sunshine trying to find a   
way out.    The populace was not in panic.    The Germans were more than fifty miles away.    Still,   
crowds moved    briskly in the streets, and the railroad station was mobbed.    Berel Jastrow   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
somehow obtained two tickets to Warsaw. Byron and Natalie would not use them, hard as   
Berel tried to persuade them to, so he shipped off his wife and twelve-year-old daughter.    Then   
he adroitly took them to one office after another, through little streets and unused doors and   
gates, seeking to send them safely away.    He seemed to know everybody, and he went at the   
job with assurance, but he couldn't get Byron and Natalie out.    Air traffic was finished.    The   
Rumanian border was reported closed. Trains were still departing at unpredictable    times,   
eastward toward Russia and north to Warsaw, with people hanging from windows and clinging   
to the locomotives.    Otherwise there were the roads. 
 
The    bearded taxi    driver    Yankel    and    his    wife,    poor    relatives    of    Berel,    were   
willing    to    go   
anywhere. Berel had managed to get him an official paper, exempting the cab from being   
commandeered; but Yankel had small faith that it would work for long.    The wife insisted on   
driving to her flat first, picking up all the food she had, her bedding, and her kitchenware, and   
roping them onto the car top.    Berel thought the Americans should head for their embassy in   
Warsaw, three hundred kilometers away, rather than chance a dash to the border in the path of   
the German army. 
 
So this odd party set forth: seven of them jammed in an ancient rusty Fiat, with mattresses   
flapping on the roof, and copper pots rhythmically banging. 
 
They stopped at night in a town where Jastrow knew some Jews. 
 
They ate well, slept on the floor, and were off again at dawn. 
 
They found the narrow tarred roads filling with people on foot and horse-drawn wagons laden   
with children, furniture, squawking geese, and the like.    Some peasants drove along donkeys   
piled with household goods, or a few mooing cows.    Marching soldiers now and then forced   
the car off the road. 
 
A troop of cavalry trotted by on gigantic dappled horses.    The dusty riders chatted as they rode,   
strapping fellows with helmets and sabres glittering in the morning sun.      They laughed,   
flashing white teeth, twirling their moustaches, glancing down with good-humored disdain at   
the straggling refugees.    One company of foot soldiers went by singing. The clear weather, the   
smell of the ripening corn, made the travellers feel good, though the as it climbed got too ho   
ere were no comba in t on sun t- The tants sigh the long black straight road through yellow   
fields when a lone airplane dived from the sky, following the line of the road and making a   
hard stuttering noise. It flew so low that Byron could see the painted numbers, the black   
crosses, the swastika, the clumsy fixed wheels. The bullets fell on people, horses, and the   
household goods and children in the carts. 
 
Byron felt a burning and stinging in one ear.    He was not aware of toppling into the dirt. 
 
He heard'a child crying, opened his eyes, and sat up.    The blood on his clothes surprised him- 
big bright red stains; and he felt a warm trickle on his face. Natalie kneeled beside him,   
sponging his head with a sodden red handkerchief.    He remembered the airplane.    Across the   
road the crying girl clutched a man's leg, looking down at a woman lying in the road.    Between   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sobs she screamed a few Polish words over and over. The man, a blond barefoot Pole in ragged   
clothes, was patting the child's head. 
 
"What's that, what's she saying?" 
 
"Are you all right, Byron?    How 'do you feel?" 
 
"Sort of dizzy.    What's that little girl saying?" 
 
Natalie looked strange.    Her nose seemed pinched and long, her hair was in disorder, her face   
was livid and dirty, and her lipstick was cracked. 
 
She had a little of Byron's blood smeared on her forehead.    "I don't know. 
 
She's hysterical." 
 
Berel stood beside Natalie, stroking his beard.    He said in French, "She keeps saying, 'Mama   
looks so ugly 11 
 
Byron got to his feet, propping one hand against the car's hot fender. 
 
His knees felt watery.    "I think I'm okay.    What does the wound look like?" 
 
Natalie said, "I don't know, your hair is so thick.    But it's bleeding a lot.    We'd better get you to   
a hospital and have it stitched." 
 
The driver, hastily tightening the bolts of the jacked-up wheel, smiled at Byron.    Sweat rolled   
off his pallid nose and forehead into his beard. His wife and the bridal couple stood in the   
shade of the car, a look of shock on their faces, gazing at the sky, at the road, and at the crying   
girl.      All down the road, wounded horses were plunging and screaming, and fowls from   
overturned    carts    were scampering    helter-skelter,    chased by children    making    a    great noise.   
People were bending over the wounded or lifting them into carts, with much excited shouting   
in Polish.    The sun burned down white-hot from a clear sky. 
 
Byron walked uncertainly to the crying girl, followed by Natalie and Jastrow.    The mother lay   
on her back.    She had caught a bullet straight in the face.    The big red hole was an especially   
bad sight because her fixed eyes were undamaged.    Berel spoke to the father, who had a stupid,   
gentle face and a bushy yellow mustache. The man shrugged, holding the little girl close.   
Yankel's wife came and offered a red apple to the child, whose sobbing almost at once died   
away.    She took the apple and bit it.    The man sat by his dead wife, folding his dusty bare feet,   
and began to mutter, crossing himself, his shoes dangling around his neck. 
 
Natalie helped Byron, who was very dizzy, into the car.    They drove on; jasirow said there was   
a good-sized town three miles away, where they could tell the authorities about the wounded   
on the highway. 
 
The bride, who out of her wedding clothes was just a freckled girl with thick glasses, started to   
cry, and cried all the way to the town, repulsing her wan-faced husband and burying her face in   
the huge bosom of the driver's wife. 
 117 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The town was undamaged, and the hospital, a small brown brick building beside a church, was   
quiet and cool inside.    Several nurses and nuns went off in a truck after Jastrow told his story.   
Byron was led to a white-painted room full of surgical equipment and buzzing flies.    A fat old   
doctor in a white jacket and patched canvas trousers sewed up his head.    The shaving of the   
hair around the wound hurt worse than the actual stitching.    He suggested to Natalie, when he   
came out, that she get her knee taped, for she was limping again. 
 
"Oh, hell," Natalie said.    'Let's go.    We can still reach Warsaw tonight, Yankel says.    I'll get it   
fixed there."      What with the tablespoon of pain-killer the doctor had given him, general   
weariness, and the aftermath of shock, Byron dozed. He did not know how much time had   
passed when he woke. On a broad cobbled    square near a red brick railway station,    two   
soldiers, rifles in hand, had halted the car.    The station and a freight train were on fire; flame   
and black smoke billowed from their windows. Several buildings around the square were   
smashed or damaged; two were in flames.    People were crowding around shops, passing out   
merchandise, carrying it off. Byron realized with surprise that this was looting. Across the   
square, men were pumping water at the burning railroad station from horse-drawn fire engines,   
such as Byron had not seen except in old silent movies.    A crowd was watching all this as it   
would any peacetime excitement. 
 
"What is it?"    Byron said. 
 
One of the soldiers, a big young blond fellow with a square red face marred by boils, walked   
around to the driver's window.    A conversation ensued in Polish between the soldier, Yankel,   
and Jastrow. 
 
The soldier kept smiling with peculiar unpleasant gentleness, as though at children he disliked.   
His scrawny companion came and looked through the yellow glass, coughing continually over   
a cigarette.    He spoke to the big one, addressing him repeatedly as Casimir.    Byron knew by   
now that Zhid was a Polish epithet for "Jew"; Zhid was occurring often in this talk. Car   
addressed the driver again, and once reached in and gave his beard a caress, and then a yank,   
apparently displeased with his answers. 
 
Jastrow muttered something to Natalie in Yiddish, glancing at Byron. 
 
"What is it?"    Byron said. 
 
Natalie murmured, "There are good Poles and bad Poles, he says. 
 
These are bad."    Casimir 'gestured with his gun for everybody to get out. 
 
Jastrow said to Byron, "Dey take our automobile." 
 
Byron had a rotten headache.    His ear had been nicked by the bullet, and this raw patch burned   
and throbbed, hurting him more than the stitched head wound.    He had vague cramps, having   
eaten odd scraps and drunk dirty water in the past two days, and he was still doped by the   
medicine.    He had seldom felt worse.    "I'll try talking to Redface, he seems to be in charge," he   
said, and he got out of the car. 
 118 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Look," he said, approaching the soldiers, "I'm an American naval officer, and I'm returning to   
the embassy in Warsaw, where they're expecting us.      This American girl"-he indicated   
Natalie-"is my fiancee, and we've been visiting her family.    These people are her family."    The   
soldiers wrinkled their faces at the sound of English, and at the sight of Byron's thick blood- 
stained bandage.    "Amerikanetz?"    the big one said. 
 
Jastrow, at the car window, translated Byron's words. 
 
Casimir scratched his chin, looking Byron up and down. The condescending snile made its   
reappearance.    He spoke to Jastrow, who translated shakily into French, "He says no American   
Navy officer would ever marry a Jew.    He doesn't believe you." 
 
"FeB him if we're not in Warsaw by tonight the American ambassador wig take action to find   
us.    And if he's in doubt let's go to a telephone and call the embassy." 
 
'Tassport," Casimir said to Byron, after Jastrow translated. 
 
Byron produced it.    The soldier peered at the green cover, the English words, the photograph,   
and at Byron's face.    He spoke to his coughing companion and started to walk off, beckoning to   
Byron. 
 
'Briny, don't go away," Natalie said. 
 
'I'll be back.    Keep everybody quiet." 
 
The smaller soldier leaned against the car fender and lit another cigarette, hacking horribly and   
grinning at Natalie. 
 
Byron fojlowed Casimir down a side street, into a two-story stone building festooned outside   
with official bulletins and placards.    They walked past rooms full of files, counters, and desks   
to a frosted glass door at the end of the ball. Car went inside, and after about ten minutes   
poked his head out and beckoned to the American. 
 
A pudgy man in a gray uniform, smoking a cigarette in an amber holder, sat behind the big   
desk at the window; an officer, to judge by his colored tabs and brass ornaments.    The passport   
was open before the man. 
 
He sipped tea from a glass as he glanced at it, and tea dripped on Byron's picture. In the   
narrow grimy room, metal files and bookshelves were shoved in a corner, with dirty legal   
tomes tumbled about. 
 
The officer asked him if he spoke German.    That was the language they used, though both were   
bad at it.    He made Byron tell his story again and asked him how an American naval officer   
happened to be mixed up with Jews, and how he came to be wandering around Poland in   
wartime. 
 
When his cigarette was consumed to the last quarter inch, he lit another. 
 
He queried Byron hard about the head injury, and smiled sourly, raising his eyebrows at the   
 119 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
account of strafing on the highway.    Even if this were all true, he commented, Byron had been   
acting foolishly and could easily get himself shot. He wrote down Byron's answers with a   
scratchy pen, in long silent pauses between the questions; then clipped the scrawled sheets to   
the passport, and dropped them into a wire basket full of papers. 
 
"Come back tomorrow afternoon at five o'clock." 
 
'I can't.    I'm expected in Warsaw tonight."    The officer shrugged. 
 
Byron wished his temples would stop throbbing.    It was hard to think, especially in German,   
and his vision was blurry, too. "May I ask who you are, and by what right you take my   
passport, and by what right this soldier tried to take our car?" 
 
The unpleasant smile that Casimir had displayed-Casimir stood by the desk all through the   
interview with a wooden look-now appeared on the officer's face.    "Never mind who I am.    We   
have to make sure who you are.)) 'Then telephone the American embassy and ask for Leslie   
Slote, the political secretary.    That won't take long." 
 
The officer drank off his cold tea and began signing papers with a mutter in Polish to Casimir,   
who took Byron's arm, pushed him out of the room, and led him back to the car. 
 
The station and freight cars were pouring steamy white smoke, and a smell of wet burned wood   
filled the street.    The looting was over. 
 
Policemen stood in front of the wrecked shops. The faces of the three women looked out   
tensely through the yellowed car glass at Byron. 
 
Casimir spoke to his companion, who caused the bride to shrink from the window by knocking   
on the glass and winking at her; then they went off. 
 
Byron told Natalie what had happened and she recounted it in Yiddish to the others.    Jastrow   
said they could stay the night in the home of a friend in this town.    When Byron got in behind   
the wheel, Yankel seemed glad to retire to the back seat beside his wife. 
 
Following Berel's directions, Byron maneuvered to a crossroad.    A large arrow pointing left,   
down a road through fields stacked with corn sheaves, read: WARSAW, 95 Ken.    Jastrow told   
him to turn right, along a road which led past small houses toward an unpainted wooden   
church. 
 
Byron, however, shifted gears and swooped left, driving out into the fields.    "That's a bad outfit   
back there," he said to Natalie. 
 
'We'd better keep going." 
 
Natalie exclaimed, "Byron, stop, don't be crazy!    You can't drive around among these people   
without your passport." 
 
"Ask Berel what he thinks.There was colloquy in Yiddish.    "He says it's much too dangerous   
for you.    Go back." 'Why?    If we run into any trouble, I'll say I lost the passport in a   
 120 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
bombardment.    I've got this hole in my head."    Byron had the accelerator pressed to the floor,   
and the overloaded bumping old Fiat was doing its best speed, about thirty miles an hour.   
Overhead the pots were making a great din, and Byron had to shout.    'Ask him if it isn't safest   
for you and for the rest to get the hell out of here." 
 
He felt a touch on his shoulder and glanced around.    Berel Jastrow's bearded face was fatigued   
and ashen, and he was nodding. 
 
It took them two days to go the ninety-five kilometers.    While it was happening it seemed to   
Byron a saga that he would be telling his grandchildren, if he lived through it.    But so much   
happened afterward to him that his five-day drive from Cracow to Warsaw soon became a   
garbled fading memory.    The breakdown of the water pump that halted them for half a day on a   
deserted back road in a forest, until Byron, tinkering with it in a daze of illness, to his   
astonishment got it to work; the leak in the gas tank that compelled them to take great risks to   
buy more; the disappearance of the hysterical bride from the hayfield where they spent one   
night, and the long search for her (she had wandered to another farm, and fallen asleep in a   
barn); the two blood-caked boys they found asleep by the roadside, who had a confused story   
of falling out of a truck and who rode the last thirty kilometers to Warsaw sitting on wooden   
slats on the bouncing hood of the Fiat this dimmed.    But he always remembered how ungocUy   
sick to the stomach he was, and the horrible embarrassment of his frequent excursions into the   
bushes; Natalie's unshakable good cheer as she got hungrier, dirtier, and wearier; and above all,   
never to be forgotten, he remembered the hole in his breast pocket w tie passport ha which   
seemed to throb more than the gashes in s ear and his scalp, because he now knew that there   
were Polish officers capable of ordering Men taken out and shot, and soldiers capable of doing   
it.    Following Jastrow's directions, he wound and doubled on stony, muddy back roads to avoid   
towns, though it lengthened the journey and played hell with the disintegrating car.  
 
They arrived in the outskirts of Warsaw in the chill dawn, crawling among hundreds of horse- 
drawn wagons. All across the stubbled fields, women, children, and bent graybeards were   
digging trenches and putting up tank barriers of tangled iron girders.    The buildings cluttered   
against the pink northeast horizon looked like the heavenly Jerusalem. The driver's immense   
wife, squeezed against Natalie for days and nights in an intimacy the girl had never known   
with another human being, smelling more and more like an overheated cow, embraced Natalie   
and kissed and hugged her.    It took three more hours before the groaning, clanking car reached   
the embassy.    The two boys jumped off the hood and ran away down a side street.    'Go ahead,   
go in quickly," the mushroom dealer said to Natalie in Yiddish, stepping out of the car to kiss   
her. "Come and see me later if you can." 
 
When Byron said good-bye, Berel Jastrow would not let his hand go. 
 
He clasped it in both his hands, looking earnestly into the young man's face.    "Merci.    Mimi   
lois merci.    Tousand times tank you. 
 
American save Poland, yes, Byron?    Save de vorld." 
 
Byron laughed.    'That a big order, but I'll pass it on, Berel." 
 121 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"What did he say?"    Berel asked Natalie, still holding Byron's hand. 
 
When she told him Berel laughed too, and then astonished Byron by giving him a bear hug and   
a brief scratchy kiss. 
 
A lone marine stood watch at the closed gates.    Gray sandbags lined the yellow stucco walls,   
ugly X-shaped wooden braces disfigured the windows, and on the red tile roof an enormous   
American flag had been painted. All this was strange, but strangest was the absence of the long   
line of people. Nobody but the marine stood outside. The United States embassy was no   
longer a haven or an escape hatch. 
 
The guard's clean-scraped pink suspicious face brightened when he heard them talk. 'Yes,   
ma'am, Mr.    Slote sure is here.    He's in charge now." 
 
He pulled a telephone from a metal box fastened on the gate, regarding them curiously.   
Natalie put her hands to her tumbled hair, Byron rubbed his heavy growth of red bristles, and   
they both laughed. 
 
Slote came running down the broad stairway under the embassy medallion. 
 
"Hello!    God, am I ever glad to see you two!"    He threw an arm around Natalie and kissed her   
cheek, staring the while at Byron's dirty blood-stained head bandage.    "What the devil?    Are   
you all right?" 
 
'I'm fine.    What's the news?    Are the French and British fighting?" 
 
'Have you been that out of touch?    They declared war Sunday, after fussing at Hitler for three   
days to be nice and back his army out of Poland. I'm not aware that they've done anything   
since but drop leaflets." 
 
Over a wonderful breakfast of ham and eggs, the first hot food they had eaten in days, they   
described their journey.    Byron could feel his racked insides taking a happy grip on this solid   
boyhood fare and calming down. 
 
He and Natalie ate from trays on the ambassador's broad desk. 
 
Washing. 
 
ton had ordered the ambassador and most of the staff out of Poland when the air bombing   
began; as the only bachelor on the number three level, Slote had been picked to stay. The   
diplomat    was appalled    at Byron's    tale Of aban&rung his PassPort- "Ye. gods, man,    in a   
country at war! It's a nmrvel you weren't caught and jailed or shot.    That you're a German agent   
would be far more plausible than the real reason you've been wandering around.    YOU two are   
an incredible pair. 
 
Incredibly lucky, too." 
 
"And incredibly filthy," Natalie said.    "What do we do now?" 
 122 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Well,    you're    just in it, my love. There's no getting out of Poland at the moment.    The   
Germans are overrunning the countryside, bombing and blasting.    We have to find you places   
to stay in Warsaw until, well, until the situation clarifies itself one way or another. 
 
Meantime you'll have to dodge bombs like the rest of us."    Slote shook his head at Byron. 
 
"Your father's been worrying about you.    I'll have to cable him. 
 
We still have communication via Stockholm.    He'll let A.J. know that Natalie's at least found   
and alive." 
 
'I am dying for a bath," Natalie said. 
 
Slote scratched his head, then took keys from his pocket and slid them across the desk.    'I've   
moved in here.    Take my apartment.    It's on the ground floor, which is the safest, and there's a   
good deep cellar.    When I was there last the water was still running and we had electricity." 
 
"What about Byron?" 
 
Byron said, "I'll go to the Methodist House." 
 
"It's been hit," Slote said.    "We had to get everybody out, day before yesterday." 
 
'Do you mind," Natalie said, "if he stays with me?" 
 
Both men showed surprise and embarrassment, and Byron said, "I think my mother would   
object." 
 
"Oh, for crying out loud, Byron. With all the running into the bushes you and I have been   
doing and whatnot, I don't know what secrets we have from each other."    She turned to Slote.   
"He's like a loyal kid brother, sort of." 
 
"Don't you believe her," Byron said wearily.    "I'm a hot-blooded beast. 
 
Is there a Y.M.C.A?"    "Look, I don't mind," Slote said, with obvious lack of enthusiasm. 
 
"There's a sofa in the sitting room.    It's up to Natalie." 
 
She scooped up the keys.    "I intend to bathe and then sleep for several days-between bombings.   
How will we ever get out of Poland, Leslie?" 
 
Slote shrugged, cleared his throat, and laughed.    "Who knows? 
 
Hitler says if the Poles don't surrender, Warsaw will be levelled. 
 
The Poles claim they've thrown the Wehrmacht back and are advancing into Germany. 
 
It's probably nonsense.    Stockholm Radio says the Nazis have broken through everywhere and   
will surround Warsaw in a week.    The Swedes and the Swiss here are trying to negotiate a safe- 
conduct for foreign neutrals through the German lines.    That's how we'll all probably leave. Till   
 123 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
that comes through, the safest place in Poland is right here." 
 
"Well then, we did the sensible thing, coming to Warsaw," Natalie said. 
 
"You're the soul of prudence altogether, Natalie."    As the trolleybus wound off into the smaller   
residential streets, Byron and Natalie saw more damage than they had in Cracow-burned-out or   
smashed houses, bomb holes in the pavemen an occasional rubble-filled street roped off-but by   
and large Warsaw looked much as it had in peacetime, less than a week ago, though now   
seemingly in a bygone age.    The threatened German obliteration was not yet happening, if it   
ever would. 
 
The other passengers paid no attention to Byron's bandage or growth of beard.    Several of them   
were bandaged and most of the men were bristly. 
 
A thick human smell choked the car. 
 
Natalie said when they got off, "Ah-air!    No doubt we smell just like that, or worse.    I must   
bathe at once or ".U go mad.    Somehow on the road I didn't care.    Now I can't stand myself   
another minute." 
 
Slivers of sunlight through the closed shutters made Slote's flat an oasis of peaceful half- 
gloom.    Books lining the sitting room gave it a dusty library smell.    Natalie flipped switches,   
obviously quite at home in the place.    'Want to wash up first?"    she said.    'Once I get in that tub   
there'll be no moving me for hours.    There's only cold water. 
 
I'm going to boil up some hot.    But I don't know.    Maybe you should find a hospital, first thing,   
and get your head examined." 
 
After the phrase was out of her mouth it struck them both as funny. 
 
They laughed    and laughed    and couldn't    stop laughing. "Well,    while    we still    both stink,"   
Natalie gasped, 'come here."    She threw her arms around him and kissed him.    "You damned   
fool, abandoning your passport to protect some dopey Jews." 
 
" My head's all right," Byron said.    The touch of the girl's mouth on his was like birdsong, like   
flowers, exhausted and filthy though they both were.    'I'll clean up while you boil your water." 
 
As he shaved she kept coming into the bathroom emptying steaming kettles into the cracked   
yellow tub, humming a polonaise of Chopin. 
 
The music had introduced the noon news broadcast, in which Byron had understood only a few   
place-names: towns and cities more than halfway in from the western and southern borders   
toward Warsaw. 
 
"My God, how pale you are, Briny," she said, inspecting his cleanshaven face, nicked here and   
there by the cold-water shave, "and how Young!    I keep forgetting.    You're just a boy." 
 
'Oh, don't exaggerate.    I've already flunked out of graduate school," Byron said.    'Isn't that a   
mature thing to do?"    "Get out of here.    I'm diving into that tub." 
 124 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
An unmistakable wailing scream sounded outside about half an hour later. Byron, on the sofa,   
dozing    over    an    old    issue    of    Time,    snapped    awake    and    took binoculars from    his   
suitcase.   
Scarlet-faced and dripping, Natalie emerged from the bathroom, swathed in Slote's white terry- 
doth robe. 
 
'Do we have to go to the cellar?" "I'll have a look." The street was deserted: no cars, no   
people.    Byron scanned the heavens from the doorway with his naked eye, and after a moment   
saw the airplanes. 
 
Sailing forth from a white cloud, they moved slowly across the sky through a scattering of   
black puffs.      He heard grumbling muffled thumps far away, like thunder without   
reverberations.    As he stepped out on the sidewalk, binoculars to his eyes, a whistle shrieked.   
Down the street a little man in a white helmet and white arm.    band was waving angrily at him.   
He dropped back into the doorway, and found the planes with the glasses: black machines,   
bigger than the one that had wounded him, with a different thick shape but painted with the   
same crosses and swastikas. The fuselages were very long; in the rainbow-rimmed field of the   
glasses they looked a bit like small flying freight cars. 
 
Natalie was combing her hair by candlelight at a hallway mirror. 
 
The electricity was off.    "Well?    Is that bombing?"    "It's bombing. 
 
They're not headed this way, the planes I saw." 
 
"Well, I don't think I'd better get back in the tub." 
 
The thumps became louder. They sat on the sofa, smoking cigarettes and looking at each   
other. 
 
Natalie said in a shaky voice, "It's sort of like a summer electric storm coming toward you.    I   
didn't picture it like this." 
 
A distant whistling noise became louder, and a sudden crash jarred the room. Glass broke   
somewhere, a lot of glass.    The girl uttered a small shriek, but sat still and straight.    Two more   
close explosions came, one right after the other. Through the abutters harsh noises echoed   
from the street: shouts and screams, and the grumble of falling brick walls. 
 
"Briny, shall we run for the cellar?" 
 
"Better sit tight." 
 
"Okay." 
 
That was the worst of it.    The thumps went on for a while, some distant and faint, some closer;   
but there were no more explosions that could be felt in the air, in the floor, in the teeth.    They   
died off. 
 
In the street outside bells clanged, running feet trampled on the cobblestones, men yelled.   
Byron pulled aside curtains, opened a window, and blinked in the strong sunshine at the sight   
 
 
 
 
 
 
of two smashed burning houses down the street.    People were milling around scattered chunks   
of masonry and flaming wreckage, carrying pails of water into the tall thick red flames. 
 
Natalie stood beside him, gnawing her lips.    'Those horrible German bastards.    Oh my God,   
Briny, look.    Look!"    Men were starting to carry limp figures out of the clouds of smoke.    One   
tall man in a black rubber coat held a child dangling in each arm.    "Can't we help?    Can't we do   
something?" 
 
"There must be volunteer squads, Natalie, that neutrals can work in. Nursing, rescue, cleanup.   
I'll find out." 
 
"I can't watch this."    She turned away.    Barefoot, a couple of inches lower without her heels,   
wrapped in the oversize robe, the eyes in her upturned unpainted face shiny with tears, Natalie   
Jastrow looked younger and much less formidable than usual.    "It was so close.    They may kill   
both of us." 
 
"We probably should dive for the cellar next time we hear the siren. 
 
Now we know." 
 
"I got you into it.    That keeps eating at me.    Your parents in Berlin must be sick with worry   
about you, and-" 
 
"My people are Navy. 
 
It's all in the day's work.    As for me, I'm having fun."    "Fun?" 
 
She scowled at him- 'What the devil?    Don't talk like a child." 
 
"Natalie, I've never had a more exciting time, that's all.    I don't believe I'm going to get killed.   
I wouldn't have missed this for anything." 
 
"Byron, hundreds of people have probably died out there in the last half hour!    Didn't you see   
the kids they pulled out of the building?" 
 
"I saw them.    Look all I meant was-" Byron hesitated because what he had meant was that he   
was having fun. 
 
"it's just such a stupid, callous thing to say.    Something a German might say."    She hitched the   
robe around her closer.    "Fun Leslie thinks I'm screwy.    You're really peculiar." 
 
With an unfriendly headshake at him, she stalked to the bathroom. 
 
omiNG back to Washington from Berlin jolted Pug, as had his reC Turn in 1931 from Manila   
to a country sunk in the Great Depression. 
 
This time what struck him was not change, but the absence of it. 
 
After the blaring pageantry and war fevers of Nazi Germany, it was a bit like coming out of a   
theatre showing a technicolor movie into a gray quiet street.    Even Rotterdam and Lisbon had   
 126 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
been agog with war reverberations.      Here, where the Capitol dome and the Washington   
Monument shimmered in ninety-degree heat, people were plodding apathetically about their   
business.    The roaring invasion of Poland, already looking like one of the historic conquests of   
all time, was as remote from this city as a volcanic eruption on Mars. 
 
He sat in the dining room of the Arzny and Navy Club, breakfasting on Kippers and scrambled   
eggs. His arrival the day before had proved a puzzling letdown. The man in the German   
section of the State Department to whom he had reported-a very minor personage, to judge by   
his small office, shoddy furniture, and lack of a window-had told him to expect a call in the   
morning; nothing more. 
 
"Well, well, our cookie-pushing friend!"    "There's your striped pants, Pug?" 
 
Grinning down at him were three classmates: Digger Brown, Paul Munson, and Harry   
Warendorf.    Though Pug had not encountered any one of them for years, they joined him and   
began exchanging jokes and gossip as though they saw each other every day. He looked at   
them with interest, and they at him, for gain of fat and loss of hair.    Munson had learned to fly   
way back in 1921, and now he was air operations officer of the Saratoga.    Digger Brown, Pug's   
old room-mate, had an assured if pasty look.    Well he might, the first officer of the class to   
make exec    of a    battleship!      Warendorf,    the    brain    of the three,    was a    hard-luck    man   
like   
Tollever. 
 
Following orders of his commodore, he had piled a destroyer on the rocks off the California   
coast in a fog, with half a dozen others.    He had fallen into minesweepers, and there he was   
still. 
 
Under the rough banter about his pink-tea job, they were curious and respectful.    They asked   
remarkably naive questions about the European war.    All of them assumed that the Nazis were   
twice as strong in the field as they were and that the Allies were all but impotent. 
 
It struck Pug again how little Americans knew of Europe, for all the flood of lurid newspaper   
and magazine stories about the Nazis; and how little most men ever knew beyond their   
constricted specialties. 
 
'y the hell are the Germans running away with it in Poland, Pug, if all this is so?"    Warendorf   
said.    They had been listening, attentive but unconvinced, to his estimate of the opposed forces. 
 
"That's anybody's guess.    I'd say surprise, superior materiel on the spot, concentration of force,   
better field leadership, better political leadership, better training, a professional war plan, and   
probably a lot of interior rot, confusion, and treason behind the Polish lines. Also the French   
and British seem to be sitting on their dulls through the best strategic opportunity against Hitler   
they'll ever have.    You can't win a game if you don't get out on the field." 
 
A page boy called him to the telephone. 
 
"Commander Henry?    Welcome to these peaceful shores.    I'm Carton. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Captain Russell Carton.    I think we were briefly at the War College togather, fighting the japs   
on a linoleum checkerboard floor." 
 
'That's right, Captain, 1937. The japs beat hell out of us, as I recall." Pug did his best to   
suppress the astonishment in his voice. 
 
Russell Carton was the name of President Roosevelt's naval aide. 
 
The voice chuckled.    "I hope you've forgotten that I was the admiral who blew the engagement.   
When shall I pick you up?    Our appointment's at noon."    "How far do we have to go?" 
 
"Just around the corner. The White House. You're seeing the President.... Hello? Are you   
there?" 
 
"Yes, sir.    Seeing the President, you said.    Do I get a briefing on this?" 
 
"Not that I know of.    Wear, dress whites.    Suppose I pick you up at eleven-thirty."    "Aye aye,   
sir." 
 
He went back to his table and ordered more coffee.    The others asked no questions.    He kept   
his face blank but it was hard to fool these old friends.    They knew it was strange that he was   
back from Berlin so soon. 
 
They probably guessed that he had received a startling call.    That didn't matter.    Munson said,   
"Pug, don't you have a boy in Pensacola? 
 
I'm flying down there day after tomorrow to drop some pearls of wisdom about carrier   
landings.    Come along." 
 
"If I can, Paul.    I'll call you." 
 
Pug was sorry when they left.    The shoptalk about a combat exercise they were planning had   
brought back the smell of machinery, of sea air, of coffee on the bridge.    Their gossip of recent   
promotions and assignments, their excitement over the quickening world events and the   
improving chances for action and glory-this was his element, and he had been out of it too   
long.    He got a haircut, brilliantly shined his own shoes, put a fresh white cover on his cap,   
donned his whites and ribbons, and sat in the lobby for an eternally long forty-five minutes,   
puzzling over the imminent encounter with Franklin Roosevelt, and dreading it.    He had met   
him before. 
 
A sailor came through the revolving door and called his name.    He rode the few blocks to the   
White    House    in    a gray    Navy    Chevrolet, dazedly    trying to    keep    up    chitchat    with 
Captain   
Carton, a beefy man with a crushing handgrip on whose right shoulder blue-and-gold 'loafer's   
loops' blazed. This marked him as a presidential aide, to those who knew; otherwise staff   
aiguillettes belonged on the left shoulder. Pug kept step with the captain through the broad   
public rooms of the Mute House, along corridors, up staircases.    'Here we are," Carton said,   
leading him into a small room.    "Wait a moment." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The moment lasted twenty-seven minutes. 
 
Pug Henry looked at old sea-battle engravings on the wall, and out of the window; he paced,   
sat in a heavy brown leather chair, and paced again. 
 
He was wondering whether the President would remember him, and hoping he wouldn't.    In   
1918, as a very cocky Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Franklin Roosevelt had crossed to   
Europe on a destroyer.    The wardroom officers, including Ensign Henry, had snickered at the   
enormously tall, very handsome young man with the famous family name, who made a great   
show of using nautical terms and bounding up ladders like a seadog, while dressed in   
outlandish costumes that he kept changing. He was a charmer, the officers agreed, but a   
lightweight, almost a phony, spoiled by an easy rich man's life.    He wore pince-nez glasses in   
imitation of his great relative, President Teddy Roosevelt, and he also imitated his booming   
manly manner; but a prissy Harvard accent mac e t s ness somewhat ridiculous. 
 
One morning Ensign Henry had done his usual workout on the forecastle, churning up a good   
sweat.    Because there was a water shortage, he had hosed himself down from a saltwater riser   
on the well deck. Unfortunately the ship was pitching steeply.    The hose had gotten away from   
him and spouted down into the hatchway to the wardroom, just as Roosevelt was coming   
topside in a gold-buttoned blazer, white flannel trousers, and straw hat.    The costume had been   
wrecked, and Pug had endured a fierce chewing out by his captain and the dripping Assistant   
Secretary of the Navy. 
 
A door opened.    "All right.    Come on in, Pug," Captain Carton said. 
 
The President waved at him from behind the desk.    'Hello there! 
 
Glad    to see you!"    The    warm    commanding    aristocratic    voice,    so recognizable    from radio   
broadcasts, jarred Pug with its very familiarity. He got a confused impression of a grand   
beautiful curved yellow room cluttered with books and pictures.    A gray-faced man in a gray   
suit slouched in an armchair near the President. Franklin Roosevelt held out a hand: 'Dmp   
your bonnet on the desk, Commander, and have a chair. How about some lunch? I'm just   
having a bite." A tray with half-eaten scrambled eggs, toast, and coffee stood on a little   
serving table by the President's smivel chair.    He was in shirt-deeves and wore no tie.    Pug had   
not seen him, except in newsreels and photographs, in more than twenty years. His high   
coloring was unchanged, and he was the same towering man, gone gray-headed, much older   
and very much heavier; and though he had the unmistakable lordly look of a person in great   
office, a trace remained in the up-thrust big jaw of the youthful conceit that had made the   
ensigns on the Davey snicker.    His eyes were sunken, but very bright and keen. 
 
"Thank you, Mr.    President.    I've eaten." 
 
"By the way, this is the Secretary of Commerce, Harry Hopkins." 
 
The gray-faced man gave Henry a brief winnin smile, with a light tired gesture that made a   
handshake unnecessary.    9 
 129 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The President looked archly at Victor Henry, his big heavy head cocked to one side.    "Well,   
Pug, have you learned yet how to hang onto a saltwater hose at sea?" 
 
"Oh, gawd, sir."    Pug put a hand to his face in mock despair. 
 
"I've heard about your memory, but I hoped you'd forgotten that." 
 
"Ha, ha, ha!"    The President threw his head back.    'Harry, this young fellow absolutely ruined   
the best blue serge blazer and straw hat I ever owned, back in 1918.    Thought I'd forget that,   
did you?    Not on your life. 
 
Now that I'm commander-in-chief of the United States Navy, Pug Henry, what have you got to   
say for yourself?" 
 
"Mr.    President, the quality of mercy is mightiest in the mightiest." 
 
'Oh ho!    Very good.    Very good.    Quick thinking, Pug."    He glanced at Hopkins.    'Ha, ha, ha!   
I'm a Shakespeare lover myself.    Well said. 
 
You're forgiven.n Roosevelt's face turned serious. He glanced at Captain Carton, who still   
stood at attention near the desk. The aide made a smiling excuse and left the room. The   
President ate a forkful of eggs and poured himself coffee. "What's going on over there in   
Germany, Pug?" 
 
How to field such a facetious question?    Victor Henry took the Pr ident's tone.    'I guess there's   
a war on of sorts, sir." 
 
'Of sorts? Seems to me a fairly honest-to-goodness war. Tell me about it from your end."   
Victor Henry described as well as he could the peculiar atmosphere in Berlin, the playing down   
of the war by the Nazis, the taciturn calm of the Berliners.    He mentioned the blimp towing a   
toothpaste advertisement over the German capital on the first day of the war-the President   
grunted at that and glanced toward Hopkins-and the pictures in the latest Berliner Illustrierte   
Zeitung which he had picked up in Lisbon, showing happy German crowds basking at the   
seashore and frolicking in folk dances on village greens.      The President kept looking at   
Hopkins, who had what Victor Henry thought of as a banana face: long , meager, and curved.   
Hopkins appeared sick, possibly feverish, but his eyes were thoughtful and electrically alive. 
 
Roosevelt said, 'Do you suppose he'll offer peace when he finishes with Poland?    Especially if   
he's as unprepared as you say?"    What would he have to lose, Mr.    President?    The way things   
look now, it might work." The President shook his head.    "You don't know the British. 
 
Not that they're any better prepared." 
 
"I'll admit I don't, sir." 
 
For the first time, Hopkins spoke, in a soft voice.    "How well do you know the Germans?" 
 
"Not at all well, Mr.    Secretary.    They're hard people to make out. 
 130 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
But in the end there's only one thing you have to know about the Germans." 
 
"Yes?    What's that?"    'How to lick them."    The President laughed, the hearty guffaw of a man   
who loved life and welcomed any chance to laugh. "A warmonger, eh?    Are you suggesting,   
Pug, that we ought to get into it?"    'Negative in the strongest terms, Mr.    President.    Not unless   
and until we have to."    "Oh, we'll have to," Roosevelt said, hunching over to sip coffee. 
 
this struck Victor Henry as the most amazing indiscretion he had heard in his lifetime. He   
could hardly believe the big man in shirt-sleeves had said the words. The newspapers and   
magazines were full of the President's ringing declarations that America would stay out of the   
war. 
 
Roosevelt went blandly on with a compliment about Combat Readiness of Nazi Germany,   
which he said he had read with great interest.    His next questions showed that he had retained   
little of the analysis.    His grasp of the important strategic facts about Germany was not much   
better than Harry Warendorf's or Digger Brown's, and his queries were like theirs, even to the   
inevitable 'What's Hitler really like?    Have you talked to him?" 
 
Pug described Hitler's war speech in the Reichstag. Franklin Roosevelt exhibited a lively   
interest in this, asking how Hitler used his voice and hands, and what he did when he paused.  
 
"I'm told," Roosevelt said, "that they type his speeches on a special machine with perfectly   
enormous letters, so he won't have to wear glasses." 
 
"I wouldn't know about that, sir."    "Yes, I got that from a pretty reliable source.    'Fuhrer type,"   
they call it."    Roosevelt sighed, turned his chair away from the food, and lit a cigarette.    'There   
is no substitute for being in a place yourself, Pug, seeing it with your own eyes, getting the   
feel.    That's what's missing in this job." 
 
"Well, Mr. President, in the end it all boils down to cold facts and figures." 'True, but too   
often all that depends on who writes the reports.    Now that was a fine report of yours.    How did   
you really foresee he'd make a pact with Stalin?    Everybody here was stupefied." 
 
'I guess mathematically somebody somewhere was bound to make that wild guess, Mr.   
President.    It happened to be me." 
 
"No, no.    That was a well-reasoned report. Actually, we did have some seaming here, Pug.   
There was a leak in one Cernian embassynever mind where-and our State Department had   
predictions of that pact. 
 
Trouble was, nobody here was much inclined to believe them."    He looked at Hopkins, with a   
touch of mischief. 'That's always the problem with intelligence, isn't it, Pug? All kinds of   
strange information will come in, but then-' The President all of a sudden appeared to run out   
of conversation. 
 
He looked tired, bored, and withdrawn, puffing at a cigarette in a long holder.    Victor Henry   
would have been glad to leave, but he thought the President should dismiss him. He was   
 131 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
feeling a bit firmer about the meeting now.    Franklin Roosevelt had the manner, after all, of a   
fleet commander relaxing over lunch, and Pug was used to the imperious ways of admirals.   
Apparently he had crossed the Atlantic in wartime to kill an off-hour for the President. 
 
Hopkins glanced at his watch, "Mr.    President, the Secretary and Senator Pittman will be on   
their way over now."    'Already?    The embargo business?    Well, Pug."    Henry jumped up, and   
took his cap.    Thank you for coming by.    This has been grand.    Now if there's anything else   
you think I should know, just anything that strikes you as significant or interesting, how about   
dropping me a line?    I'll be glad to hear from you.    I mean that."    At this grotesque proposal for   
bypassing the chain of command, which ran counter to Henry's quarter century of naval   
training and experience, he could only blink and nod. The President caught his expression.   
"Nothing official, of course," he said quickly. 
 
"Whatever you do, don't send me more reports!    But now that we've gotten acquainted again,   
why not stay in touch? I liked that thing you wrote. I could just see that submarine base   
emptying out at five o'clock.    It said an awful lot about Nazi Germany. 
 
Sometimes    one little    thing like    that-or what a loaf of bread cost, or the jokes people    are   
repeating, or like that advertising blimp over Berlinsuch things can sometimes suggest more   
than a report umpteen pages long. Of course, one needs the official reports, too. But I get   
enough of those, heaven knows!"    Franklin Roosevelt gave Commander Henry the hard look of   
a boss who has issued an order and wants to know if it's understood. 
 
"Yes, Mr.    President," Henry said. 
 
'And, oh, by the way, here's a suggestion that's just come to my desk, Pug, for helping the   
Allies.    Of course we're absolutely neutral in this foreign war, but Still-" The President broke   
into a sly grin. 
 
His tired eyes sparkled as he glanced here and there on his cluttered desk, and took up a paper.   
'Here we are. We offer to buy the Queen Mary and the Normandie, and we use them for   
evacuating Americans from Europe.    There are thousands stranded, as you know. 
 
What do you think? 
 
It would give the Allies a pile of much needed dollars, and we'd have the ships.    Theyre fine   
luxury liners.    How about it?"    Victor Henry looked from Hopkins to the President.    Evidently   
this was a serious question.    They were both waiting for his answer.    "Mr. 
 
President I'd say those ships are major war assets and they'd be insane to sell them.    They're   
magnificent troop transports.    They're the fastest vessels for their tonnage of anything afloat,   
they can outrun any submarine at cruising speed, they hardly have the re las and strength to   
zigzag SO withe interiors stripped their carrying capacity is gigantic."    The President said dryly   
to Hopkins, 'Is that what the Navy replied?" 
 
"I'd have to check, Mr.    President.    I think their response went mainly to the question of where   
the money'd come from." Franklin Roosevelt cocked his head thoughtfully, and smiling at   
 132 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Victor Henry, held out a long arm for a handshake.    "Do you know why I didn't make more of   
a fuss about those clothes?    Because your skipper said you were one of the best ensigns he'd   
ever seen.    Keep in touch, now. 
 
"Aye aye, sir." 
 
"Well, how did it go?"    The President's aide was smoking a cigar in the anteroom.    He rose,   
knocking off the ash. 
 
'All right, I suppose."    "It must have.    You were scheduled for ten minutes.    You were in there   
almost forty."    "Forty!    It went fast. 
 
What now?" 
 
"How do you mean?" 
 
"I don't have very specific instructions.    Do I go straight back to Berlin, or what?" 
 
"What did the President say?" 
 
"It was a pretty definite good-bye, I thought." 
 
Captain Carton smiled.    "Well, I guess you're all through.    Maybe you should check in with   
C.N.O. You're not scheduled here again."    He reached into a breast pocket.    'One more thing.   
This came to my office a little while ago, from the State Department." 
 
It was an official dispatch envelope.    Henry ripped it open and read the flimsy pink message   
form:    FOr X BYRON HENRY SMM WIELL    WARSAW X AWMTING EVACUATION   
ALL NEUTRALS NOW UNDER NEGOTIATION GIERMAN GOVIE NT X Slote Vctor   
Henry disappointed Hugh Cleveland when he walked into the broadcaster's office; just a squat,   
broad-shouldered, ordinary-looking man of about fifty, in a brown suit and a red bow tie,   
standing at the receptionist's desk.    The genial, somewhat watchful look on his weathered face   
was not sophisticated at all. As Cleveland sized up people-having interviewed streams of   
them-this might be a professional ballplayer turned manager, a lumberman, maybe an engineer;   
apple-pie American, fairly intelligent, far from formidable.    But he knew Madeline feared and   
admired her father, and day by day he was thinking more highly of the young girl's judgmen so   
he took a respectful tone. 
 
"Commander Henry?    It's a pleasure.    I'm Hugh Cleveland."    " Hello. 
 
Hope I'm not busting in on anything.    I thought I'd just drop by and have a look-see." 
 
"Glad you did.    Madeline's timing the script.    Come this way." 
 
They ked along the cork floor of a corridor walled with green soundproofing slabs.    'She was   
amazed.    Thought you were in Germany." 
 
'For the moment I'm here." 
 133 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
In a swishing charcoal pleated skirt and gray blouse, Madeline came scampering out of a door   
marked zqo ADmrrrANcm, and kissed him. 
 
"Gosh, Dad, what a surprise.    Is everything all right?" 
 
'Everything's    dandy."    He    narrowed his eyes at    her.    She looked    a    lot    more    mature,   
and   
brilliantly excited.    He said, "If you're busy, I can leave, and talk to you later."    Cleveland put   
in, "No, no, Commander. 
 
Please come in and watch. 
 
I'm about to interview Edna May Pelham." 
 
"Oh? The Getwal's Lady? I read it on the plane. Pretty good yarn." In the small studio,   
decorated like a library with fake wood panelling and fake books, Cleveland said to the sharp- 
faced, white-haired authoress, 'Here's another admirer of the book, Miss Pelham.    Commander   
Henry is the American naval attache in Berlin." 
 
'You don't say!    Hi there."    The woman waved her pince-nez at him. 
 
"Are we going to stay out of this idiotic war, Commander?" 
 
"I hope so." 
 
'So do I. My hopes would be considerably higher if that man in the White House would drop   
dead."    Pug sat to one side in an armchair while they read through the script. 
 
The authoress, passing vinegary judgments on current literature, said that one famous author   
was obscene, another sloppy, a third superficial. His mind wandered to his meeting yesterday   
with 'that man in the White House." It seemed to him that he had been summoned on a   
haphazard impulse; that he had spent a couple of thousand dollars of public money on a round   
trip from Germany for pointless small talk over scrambled eggs.    The morning paper showed   
that yesterday had been a crowded, portentous day for the President.    The leading story, spread   
over many columns, was Roosevelt Proclaims Limited National Emagency. 
 
Three other headlines on the front page began FDR or President; he had reorganized two major   
government boards; he had lifted the sugar quota; he had met with congressional leaders on   
revision of the Neutrality Act. 
 
all these things had been done by the ruddy man in shirt-sleeves who never moved from behind   
his desk, but whose manner was so bouncy you forgot he was helpless in his chair. Pug   
wanted to believe that he himself might have said one thing, made one comment, that by   
illuminating the President's mind had justified the whole trip.    But he could not. 
 
His comments on Germany, like his original report, had rolled off the President, who mainly   
had sparked at details of Hitler's oratorical techmque and touches of local Berlin color.    The   
President's request for gossipy letters still struck him as devious, if not pointless.    In the first   
few minutes Victor Henry had been attracted by President Roosevelt's warmth and good   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
humor, by his remarkable memory and his ready laughter.      But thinking back on it all,   
Commander Henry wasn't sure the President would have behaved much differently to a man   
who had come to the office to shine his shoes. 
 
"Fourteen minutes and twenty seconds, Mr.    Cleveland."    Madeline's speaker-distorted voice   
roused him. 
 
'That's fine.    Ready to record, Miss Pelham?" 
 
'No. All this about Hemingway is far too kind. I'd like about half an hour with this script.   
And I'd like some strong tea, with lemon." 
 
"Yes, ma'am.    Hear that, Madeline?    Get it." 
 
Cleveland invited the naval officer to his office, where Pug accepted a cigar. The young   
broadcaster displeased him by hitching a leg over the arm of his chair.      Pug had used   
considerable severity to cure Byron of that habit.    'Sir, you can be proud of Madeline.    She's an   
unusual girl." 
 
"Unusual in what way?" 
 
"Well, let's see.    She understands things the first time you tell them to her.    Or if she doesn't,   
she asks questions.    If you send her to fetch something or do something, she fetches it or she   
does it.    She never his a long story about it.    I haven't heard her whine yet.    She isn't afraid of   
people. 
 
She    can    talk    straight to anybody    without    being    fresh. She's    reliable.    Are    reliagle   
people   
common in the Navy?    In this business they're about as common as g[ant pandas.    Especially   
girls.    I've had my share of lemons here.    I understand that you want her to go back to school,   
and that she'll have to quit next week.    I'm very sorry about that."    The girl's nineteen." 
 
"She's better than women of twenty-five and thirty who've worked for me."    Cleveland smiled.   
This easy-mannered fellow had an infectious grin and an automatic warmth, Pug thought, that   
in a trivial way was like the President's.    Some people had it, some didn't.    He himself had none   
of it.    In the Navy the quality was not overly admired.    The name for it was 'grease."    Men who   
posed it had a way of climbing fast; they also had a way of relying upon it, till they got too   
greasy and slipped. 
 
"I wish she'd show some of these 4.o qualities at school. I don't appreciate the idea of a   
nineteen-year-old girl loose in New York." 
 
"Well, sir, I don't mean to argue with you, but Washington's no convent either.    it's a question   
of upbringing and character.      Madeline is a superior, trustworthy girl."      Pug uttered a   
nonconnnittal grunt. 
 
'Sir, how about coming on our show?    We'd be honored to have you." 
 
'As a guest? You're kidding. I'm nobody." "America's naval attache in Nazi Germany is   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
certainly somebody. 
 
You could strike a blow for preparedness, or a two-ocean Navy.    We just had Admiral Preble   
on the show."    'Yes, I know.    That's how I found out what my little girl's doing these days." 
 
"Would you consider it, sir?"    'Not on your life."    The sudden frost in Pug's tone rose not only   
from the desire to be final, but the suspicion that the praise of Madeline had been a way of   
greasing him. 
 
"No harm in asking, I hope," Cleveland grinned, running a hand through his heavy blond hair.   
He had a pink harborshop sunburn and looked well in a collegiate jacket and slacks, though   
Victor Henry thought his argyle socks were too much.    He did not like Cleveland, but he could   
see that Madeline would relish working for such a Broadwayish fellow. 
 
Later Madeline showed her father around the studios.    Certain corridors were like passageways   
in the bowels of a ship, all jammed with electronic gear and thousands of bunched colored   
wires.    These interested Pug. 
 
He would have enjoyed seeing the controlling diagrams and learning how radio amusement   
was pumped out of this nerve center all over the country. 
 
The performing studios, with their giant cardboard settings of aspirin bottles, toothpaste tubes,   
and gasoline pumps, their blinking red lights, posturing singers, giggling audiences, grimacing   
and prancing funny men, not only seemed tawdry and silly in themselves, but doubly so with   
Poland under attack.    Here, at the hart of the American communications machine, the Hitler   
war seemed to mean little more than a skim-dsh among Zulus. 
 
"Madeline, what attracts you in all this balderdash?" 
 
They were leaving the rehearsal of a comedy program, where the star, wearing a fireman's ha   
was spraying the handleader, the girl singer, and the audiences with seltzer bottles. 
 
"That man may not amuse you, Dad, but millions of people are mad for him.    He makes fifteen   
thousand dollars a week."    "That's kind of obscene right there.    It's more than a rear admiral   
makes in a year." 
 
"Dad, in two weeks I've met the most Marvelous people. I met Gary Cooper. just today I   
spent two hours with Miss Pelham.    Do you know that I had lunch with the Chief of Naval   
Operations?    Me?" 
 
'So I heard.    What's this fellow Cleveland like?" 
 
"He's brilliant."    "Is he married?" 
 
'He has a wife and three children."    'when does your school start?" 
 
"Dad, do I have to go back?" 
 
'When did we discuss any other plan?" 
 
  805 
 
   
 136 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"I'll be so miserable.    I feel as though I've joined the Navy.    I want to stay in."    He cut her off   
with a cold look. 
 
They went back to her little partitioned    cubicle outside C'Ieveland's office. Smoking one   
cigarette and then another, Pug silently sat in an annchair and watched her work.    He noted her   
neat files, her checkoff lists, her crisp manner on the telephone, her little handmade wall chart   
of guests invited or scheduled in September, and of celebrities due in New York.    He noted   
how absorbed she was.    In their walk around CBS she had asked only perfunctory questions   
about the family and none on Germany; she hadn't even asked him what Hitler was really like.  
 
He cleared his throat.    'Say, incidentally, Madeline, I'm going out to the Brooklyn Navy Yard   
to have dinner aboard the Colorado. 
 
Digger Brown's the executive officer.    You know, Freddy Brown's father. 
 
Like to come along?    What's the matter?    Why the face?"    Madeline sighed.    'Oh, I'll come,   
Dad.    After all, I see you so seldom. 
 
I'll meet you at five or so-" 'Got something else planned?" 
 
"Well, I didn't know you were about to fall out of the sky. I was going to dinner and the   
theatre with the kids." 
 
"What kids?" 
 
"You know.    just kids I've met at CBS.    A couple of writers, musicians, an actress, some other   
new girls like me.    There are eight of us, sort of a gang. 
 
"I daresay there'll be some bright-eyed ensigns in the junior mess." "Yes, exactly.    Ensigns." 
 
"Ok, I don't want to drag you anywhere." 
 
"it's just that you'll end up talking to Commander Brown, Dad, and I'll spend another evening   
with ensigns.    Can't we have breakfast tomorrow? I'll come to your hotel." 
 
"That'll be fine.    These kids of yours, I'd think the young men would be these show business   
fellows, pretty flimsy characters." 
 
"Honestly, you're wrong. They're serious and intelligent." "I think it's damn peculiar that   
you've fallen into this.    It's the furthest thing from your mother's interests or mine." 
 
Madeline looked aslant at him. 'Oh? Didn't Mother ever tell you that she wanted to be an   
actress?    That she spent a whole summer as a dancer in a travelling musical show?" 
 
"Sure.    She was seventeen.    It was an escapade." 
 
"Yes?    Well, once when we were up in an attic, it must have been at the Nag's Head house, she   
came on the parasol she had used in her solo dance. An old crinkled orange paper parasol.   
Well, right there in that dirty attic Mama kicked off her shoes, opened the parasol, picked up   
 137 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
her skirt, and did the whole dance for me.    And she sang a song. 'Ching-chingchalla-wa China   
Girl."    I must have been twelve, but I still remember.    She kicked clear to the ceiling, Mama   
did.    God, was I ever shocked." 
 
"Oh, yes, 'Ching-ching-challa-wa China Girl'!"    said Pug. "She did it for me too, long long   
ago.    Before we were married, in fact. 
 
Well,    I'm off to the Colorado. Tomorrow    after breakfast I fly down to Pensacola to see   
Warren.    Next day I return to Berlin, if I can firm up my air tickets."    She left her desk and put   
her arms around him. She smelled sweet and alluring, and her face shone with youth, health,   
and happiness. 
 
"Please, Dad.    Let me work.    Please." 
 
'I'll write or cable you from Berlin. I'll have to discuss it with Chingching-challa-wa China   
Girl."    The harbor smell in the Brooklyn Navy Yard, the destroyers nesting in a row with red   
truck lights burning, the Colorado lit up from stem to stern, its great main battery guns askew   
for boresighting-these things gave Victor Henry the sense of peace that other men    get by   
retiring to their dens with a cigar and a drink. 
 
If he had a home in the world, it was a battleship.    Put together at different times and places of   
different steel plates and machines, embodied in many forms under many names, a battleship   
was always one thing: the strongest kind of warship afloat.      This meant a thousand   
everchanging specifications of size, design, propulsion, armor, armament, interior   
communication, interior supply systems; a thousand rituals and disciplines binding the crew,   
from the captain to the youngest striker, into one dependable corporate will and intelligence. 
 
In this sense there had been battleships in the days of Phoenicia and Rome, and there would   
always    be battleships-a living    peak of human    knowledge and craft, a floating    enginearing   
structure dedicated to one aim: the control of the sea.    It was the only thing to which Victor   
Henry had ever given himself whole; more than to his family, much more than to the sprawling   
abstraction called the Navy.    He was a battleship man. 
 
With other top men, he had gone to a battleship straight from the Academy in 1913.    He had   
served time in smaller ships, too.    But he was marked battleship, and he had kept coming back   
to them.      His shining service achievement was winning the "meatball pennant," the fleet   
gunnery competition, two years in a row as gunnery officer of the West Virginia.      His   
improvised    system    for    speeding sixteen-inch    shells from    the magazines to    the turrets    had   
become standard Navy doctrine. All he wanted in this life was to be executive officer of a   
battleship, then a captain, then an admiral with a BatDiv flag.    He could see no further.  
 
He thought a BatDiv flag was as fine a thing as being a president, a king, or a pope.    And he   
reflected, as he followed the erect quick-marching gangway messenger down the spotless white   
passageway to the senior officers' mess, that every month he spent in Berlin was cutting the   
ground from under his hopes. 
 
Digger Brown had been exec of the Colorado only six weeks. 
 138 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sitting at the head of the table, Digger was making too many jokes, Pug thought, so as to put   
himself at ease with the ship's lieutenant commanders and two-stripers. That was all right.   
Digger was a big fellow and could Turn on impressive anger at will.    Pug's style was more of a   
monotone.    His own sense of humor, such as it was, went to jabbing ironies.    As an executive   
officer-if he ever achieved it-he planned to be taciturn and short.    They would call him a dull   
sour son of a bitch. 
 
One had plenty of time to warm up and make friends, but the job had to be done right from the   
hour one reported aboard.    It was a sad fact of life that everybody, himself included, jumped to   
it when the boss was a son of a bitch, especially a knowledgeable son of a bitch. 
 
In the West Virginia he had been a hated man until that first meatball pennant had broken out   
at the yardarm.    Hereafter he had been the ship's most popular officer. 
 
The immediate    target    of Digger's raillery was    his    communications    officer, a lean    morose- 
looking Southerner.      Recently the Colorado had received a new powerful voice radio   
transmitter which bounced waves off the Heaviside layer at a shallow angle.    If atmospheric   
conditions were right, one could talk directly to a ship in European waters.    Digger had chatted   
with his brother, the engineering officer in the Marblehead, now anchored off Lisbon. The   
communications officer had since been romancing an old girlfriend in Barcelona via the   
Marblehead radio room. 
 
Digger had found this out three days ago, and was still trying it for jokes. 
 
Pug said, 'Say, how well did this thing work, Digger?    Could you understand Tom?" 
 
"Oh, five by five.    Amazing." 
 
"Do you suppose I could talk to Rhoda in Berlin?"    it occurred to Pug that this was a chance to   
tell her about Madeline, and perhaps reach a decision. 
 
The communications officer, glad of an opportunity to stop the baiting, said at once, "Captain,   
I know we can raise Marblehead tonight.    It ought to be simple to patch in the long-distance   
line from Lisbon to Berlin." 
 
"Tell be what-two or three o'clock in the morning there?"    Brown said. 
 
"TWO, sir."    'Want to break in on Rhoda's beauty sleep, Pug?"    'I think so."    The lieutenant   
carefully rolled his napkin in a monogrammed ring, and left. 
 
The talk turned to Germany and the war. These battleship officers, like most people, were   
callowly inclined to admire and overestimate the Nazi war machine.      One fresh-faced   
lieutenant said that he hoped the Navy was doing more work on landing craft than he'd been   
able to read about.    If we got into the war, he said, landing would be almost the whole Navy   
problem, because Germany would probably control the entire coastline of Europe by then. 
 
Digger Brown brought his guest to the executive officer's quarters for coffee, ordering around   
his Filipino steward and lolling on the handsome blue leather couch with casual pride of office.   
 139 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
They gossiped about their classmates: a couple of juicy divorces, a premature death, a brilliant   
leader turned alcoholic.    Digger bemoaned his burdens as a battleship exec.    His captain had   
gotten where he was with sheer luck, charm, and a Marvelous wife-that was all; his ship- 
handling was going to give Digger a heart attack.    The ship was slack from top to bottom; he   
had made himself unpopular by instituting a stiff program of drills; and so forth.    Pug thought   
that for an old friend Digger was showing off too much.    He mentioned that he had come back   
from Berlin to talk to the President. Digger's face changed. 'I'm not surprised," he said.   
"Remember that phone call you had at the Army and Navy Club?    I told the fellows, I bet that's   
from the White House.    You're flying high, fella." Having taken the wind out of Digger's sails,   
Victor Henry was content to say nothing more.    Digger waited, stuffed his pipe, lit it, then said,   
'What's Roosevelt really like, Pug?" 
 
Henry said something banal about the President's charm and magnetism. 
 
There    was    a knock on the door and the communications    officer came    in. "We raised the   
Marblehead, no strain, sir.    It took all this time to get through to Berlin.    What was that number   
again?"    Pug told him. 
 
"Yes, sir, that checks. The number doesn't answer.The eyes of Digger Brown and Victor   
Henry met for a moment. 
 
Brown said, "At two in the morning?    Better try again.    Sounds like a foul-up." 
 
"We put it through three times, sir." 
 
"She might    have    gone out of town," Henry said.    "Don't bother    anymore.    Thanks." The   
lieutenant left.    Digger puffed thoughtfully at his pipe. 
 
'Also, she cuts off the phone in the bedroom at night," Henry said. 
 
'I forgot that.    She may not hear the ringing in the library if the door's closed."    'Oh, I see,"   
Digger said.    He puffed again, and neither said anything for a while. 
 
"Well.    Guess I'll make tracks."    Victor Henry stood up. 
 
The executive officer accompanied him to the gangway, looking proudly around at the vast   
main deck, the towering guns, the flawlessly uniformed watch.    'Shipshape enough topside," he   
said.    "That's the least I demand.    Well, good luck on the firing line, Pug.    Give my love to   
Rhoda." 
 
"If she's still there, I will." 
 
They both laughed. 
 
Hello, Dad!"    Men Paul Munson's plane landed, Warren was waiting at the Pensacola airfield   
in a helmet and flying jacket.    The son's handgrip, quick and firm, expressed all Warren's pride   
in what he was doing.    His deeply tanned face radiated exaltation. 
 
"Say, where do you get this outdoors glow?"    Pug said.    He deliberately ignored the scar on his   
 140 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
son's forehead.    'I thought theyd make you sweat in ground school here.    I expected you to look   
like something from under a rock."    Warren laughed.    "Well, I had a couple of chances to go   
deep-sea fishing out in the Gulf.    I tan fast." 
 
Driving his father to the b.O.Q, he never stopped talking.    The flight school was in a buzz, he   
said. The day after Hitler invaded Poland, Washington had ordered the number of students   
tripled, and the year-long course cut to six months.    The school was 'telescoping the syllabus."   
In the old course a man qualified in big slow patrol planes, then in scout planes, and then, if he   
were good enough, went on into Squadron Five for fighter training.    Now the pilots would be   
put on patrol, scout, or fighter tracks at once, and would stay in them. 
 
The lists would be posted in the morning.    He was dying to make Squadron Five.    Warren got   
all this out before he remembered to ask his father about the family. 
 
"Ye gods, Brinys in Warsaw?    Why, the Germans are bombing the 
 
hell out of that town." 
 
"I know," Pug said.    "I stopped worrying about Byron long ago. 
 
He'll crawl out of the rubble with somebody's gold watch." 
 
'What's he doing there?" 
 
"Chased a girl there."    "Really?    Bully for him.    What kind of girl?" 
 
"A Jewish Phi beta from Radcliffe." 
 
"You're kidding.    Briny?" 
 
"That's right."    With an eloquent look, surprised and ruefully impressed, Warren changed the   
subject. really big. There The audience at Paul Munson's lecture was surpnsing must have   
been more than two hundred student aviators in khaki, youngsters with crew cuts and rugged   
clever faces, jammed into a small lecture hall. Ijke most naval men, Paul was a bumbling   
speaker, but the students sat on the edges of their chairs, because he was telling them how to   
avoid killing themselves. 
 
With slides and diagrams, with much technical jargon and an occasional heavy bloodthirsty   
joke, he described the worst hazards of carrier landings, the LIFE-or-death last moments of the   
approach, the procedure after cracking up, and such cheerful matters.    The students laughed at   
the jokes about their own possible deaths.    The strong male smell of a locker room rose from   
the packed bodies.    Pug's eye fell on Warren, sitting in a row across the aisle from him, erect   
and attentive, just one more close-cropped head in the crowd.    He thought of Byron in Warsaw   
under the German bombs. It was going to be a tough ten years, he thought, for men with   
grown sons. 
 
Warren told him after the lecture that Congressman Isaac Lacouture, the man who had taken   
him deep-sea fishing, had invited them to dinner at the beach club.    Lacouture was president of   
 141 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
the club, and before running for Congress had been chairman of the Gulf Lumber and Paper   
Company, the biggest firm in Pensacola. 'He's anxious to meet you," Warren said as they   
walked back to the b.O.Q. 
 
ctmy?)y 'He's very interested in the war and in Germany.    His opinions are kind of strong." 
 
"why has he taken such a shine to you?)t "Well, sir, this daughter of his, Janice, and I have sort   
of bit it off With an easy knowing grin, Warren parted from him in the lobby. 
 
At his first sight of Janice Lacouture, Victor Henry decided against talking to Warren about   
Pamela Tudsbury. What chance'had the slight English girl in her mousy suits against this   
magnetic blonde whose long legs dazzled at every Turn and flip of her skirt, this assured   
radiant tall American girl with the princess-like air, and the lovely face only slightly marred by   
crooked teeth?    She was another, early Rhoda, swathed in cloudy pink, all composed of sweet   
scent, sexual allure, and girlish grace. 
 
The slang was changed, the skirt hem higher.    This girl looked and acted brainier.    She greeted   
Pug with just enough deference to acknowledge that he was Warren's father, and just enough   
sparkle to hint that he was no old fud for all that, but an attractive man himself.    A girl who   
could do that in half a minute of talk, with a flash of the eyes and a smile, was a powerhouse,   
and so much ' thought Pug, for his inept matchmaking notions. 
 
A stiff wind was blowing from the water.    Waves broke over the club terrace and splattered   
heavy spray on the glass wall of the dining room, making the candlelit Lacouture dinner seem   
the cosier.    Victor Henry never did get it clear who all the ten people at table were, though one   
was the beribboned commandant of the naval air station. 
 
The person who mattered, it was soon obvious, was Congressman Isaac L-acouture, a small   
man with thick white hair, a florid face, and a way of half sticking out his tongue when he   
smiled, with an air of sly profundity. 
 
-How long are you going to be here, Commander Henry?" Lacouture called down the long   
table, as green-coated waiters passed two large baked fish on silver platters.    'You might like to   
come out and spend a day fishing, if the weatherman will Turn off this willawa. Your boy   
caught these two kingfish with me." 
 
Pug said that he had to return to New York in the morning to get his plane for Lisbon. 
 
Lacouture said, "Well, at that I suppose I'll be hurrying up to Washington myself for this   
special session.    Say, how about that?    What do you think of revising the Neutrality Act?    How   
bad is the situation, actually? 
 
You should know." 
 
"Congressman, I think Poland's going to fall fast, if you call that bad." 
 
"Oh, hell, the Allies are counting on that! The European mind works in subtle ways. The   
President has sort of a European mind himself, you know.    That mixture of Dutch and English   
 142 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
is really the key to understanding him."    Lacouture smiled, protruding his tongue.    'I've done a   
lot of business with the Dutch, they're very big in the hardwoods trade, and I tell you they are   
tricky boys. The gloomier things look in the next few weeks, why, the easier it'll be fOr   
Roosevelt to jam anything he wants through Congress. Right?" 'Have you talked to Hitler,   
Commander Henry?    What is he really like?"    said Mrs. 
 
Lacouture, a thin faded woman, with a placating smile and a sweet tone that suggested her   
social life consisted mainly of softening her husband's impact, or trying to. 
 
Lacouture said as though she had addressed him, "Oh, this Hitler is some kind of moonstruck   
demagogue.    We all know that.    But for years the Allies could have cleaned up him and his   
Nazis with ease, yet they just sat there.    So it's their mess, not ours.    Any day now we'll be   
hearing about the Germans raping nuns and boiling soldiers' corpses down for soap.    British   
intelligence started both those yarns in 1916, you know. We've got the documentary evidence   
on that.    How about it, Commander Henry? 
 
You've been living among the Germans. Are they really these savage Huns the New York   
papers make them out to be?" 
 
All the faces at the table turned to Pug. "The Germans aren't easy to understand," he said   
slowly.    "My wife likes them more than I do.    I don't admire their treatment of Jews." 
 
Congressman Lacouture held up two large hands.    "Unpardonable! 
 
The New York press is quite understandable on that basis." Warren said firmly from the   
middle of the table, "I don't see how the President's revision would weaken our neutra lity, sir.   
Cash and carry simply means anybody can come and buy stuff who has the ships to haul it off   
and the money to pay for it.    Anybody, Hitler included." 
 
Lacouture smiled at him.    "The administration would be proud of you, my boy.    That's the line.   
Except we all know that the Allies have the ships and the money,    and the Germans have   
neither.    So this would put our factories into the war on the Allied side." 'But nobody ever   
stopped Hitler from building a merchant marine," Warren promptly came back. 'Piling up   
tanks, subs, and dive bombers instead was his idea. 
 
all aggressive weapons.    Isn't that his tough luck?" 
 
'Warren's absolutely right," Janice said. 
 
Lacouture sat back in his chair, staring at his daughter, who smiled back impudently. 
 
What both of you kids don't or won't understand," Lacouture said, is that this proposal is the   
camel's nose under the tent flap.    Of course it seems fair.    Of wurse it dens.    That's the beauty   
of the package. 
 
That's the Roosevelt mind at work.    But let's not be children.    He isn't calling a special session   
to help Nazi Germany!    He thinks he's got a mission to save the world from Hitler.    He's been   
talking    way since 1937- He's cracked on the subject.    Now I say Adolf Hitler's neither the foul   
 143 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
fiend nor the Antichrist.    That's all poppycock.    He's just another European politician, a little   
more dirty and extreme than the rest. This is just another European war, and it'll end up a lot   
dirtier than the rest. The way for us to save the world is to stay out of it. The citadel of   
sanity!" He rapped out the phrase and looked around the table, as though half expecting   
applause. 
 
"That's what we have to be.    The Atlantic and Pacific are our walls. 
 
Broad, stout walls.    The citadel of sanity!    If we get in it we'll go bankrupt like the others and   
lose a couple of million of our finest young men.    The whole world will sink into barbarism or   
Communism, which aren't so very different. 
 
The Russians will be the only winners." 
 
A small bald man with a hearing aid, seated across the table from Pug, said, 'Damn right." 
 
Lacouture inclined his head at him.    ' "You and I realize that, Ralph, but it's amazing how few   
intelligent people do, as yet.    The citadel of sanity.    Ready to pick up the pieces when it's over   
and rebuild a decent world. That's the goal.    I'm going back to Washington to fight like an   
alligator for it, believe you me.    I'll be marked mud among a lot of my Democratic colleagues,   
but on this one I go my own way." When dinner ended, Janice and Warren left the club   
together, not waiting for coffee, and not troubling to explain.    The girl smiled roguishly, waved   
a hand, and disappeared in a whirl of silky legs and pink chiffon.    Warren belted long enough   
to make an early morning tennis date with his father. Victor Henry found himself isolated with   
Lacouture over rich cigars, coffee, and brandy in a corner of a lounge, in red leather armchairs.   
The congressman rambled about the charms of life in Pensacola-the duck-hunting, the game- 
fishing, the year-round good weather, and the swiftly advancing prosperity. The war would   
make it a real boomtown, he said, between the expansion of the Navy air base and the spurt in   
the lumber trade. "Creosoted telephone poles. You take that one item, Commander. Our   
company's had some unbelievable orders, just in the last week, from North Africa, japan, and   
France. 
 
The whole world's stringing wires all of a sudden.    It's an indication." 
 
He tried to persuade Henry to stay over one day.    A ship carrying mahogany was due in from   
Duich Guiana at noon.    It would dump the logs in the harbor, and lumber mill workers would   
lash them into rafts and tow them up the bayou.    'It's quite a sight," he said. 
 
"Well, I've got this chance to fly back to New York with an old buddy. 
 
I'd better go." 
 
"And from there to Berlin, via Lisbon?" 
 
"That's the plan." 
 
"Not much chance of our paths crossing then, in the near future," Lacouture said.    "Your wife's   
a Grover, isn't she?    Hamilton Grover up in Washington is a friend of mine; we have lunch at   
 144 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
the Metropolitan Club about once a month."    Pug nodded.    Hamilton Grover was the wealthiest   
of the cousins, rather beyond Rhoda's orbit. 
 
'And you're a Henry.    Not one of those Virginia Henrys that go back to old Patrick?" 
 
Henry laughed, shaking his head.    "I doubt it.    I'm from California." 
 
"Yes, as Warren told me.    I mean originally." 
 
"Well, my great grandfather came west before the gold rush.    We're not sure from where.    My   
grandfather died young and we never got the story straight."    'You're probably Scotch-Irish." 
 
"Well, no, sort of mixed.    My grandmother was French and English." 
 
'That so?    We've got some French in our family ourselves.    Not a bad thing, hey?    Gives the   
men that certain touch in I'amour." 
 
Lacouture uttered a hearty coarse laugh, the get-together noise of American men. 
 
"Quite a boy, your Warren."    "Well, thanks.    Your girl is beyond words." 
 
Ucouture sighed deeply. 'A girl's a problem. Warren tells me you have one, so you know.   
They'll fool you every time.    We weren't as lucky as you, we have no boys.    All Warren wants   
to do is fly airplanes the rest of his life for the Navy, right?" 
 
"well, those wings of gold look awfully big to him now, Congressman.pr Lacouture puffed at   
his cigar.    'I liked the way he talked up at dinner. 
 
Of course he's naive about foreign affairs. You learn a lot about the outside world in the   
lumber business." Lacouture swirled the large brandy snifter. 'No doubt you're glad to see   
Warren carrying on the Navy tradition.    Wouldn't want to see him smft over into business, or   
anything like that."    The congressman smiled, showing his tongue, and good but crooked teeth   
like his daughter's. 
 
'Warren goes his own way, Congressman." 
 
"I'm not so sure.    He thinks the world of his dad." 
 
The talk was getting awkward for Victor Henry.    He had married a girl much better off than   
himself, and he had doubts about such a course in life. Nor did he especially like Janice   
Lacouture.    Once the incandessence died down, she would be as tough as her father, who was   
already and openly weighing the notion of swallowing Warren.    He said, "Well, until the war   
ends he's in, and that's that." 
 
"Of course.    But that may not be for long, you know.    If we can just stay out, it'll be over in a   
year or so.    Maybe less.    As soon as the Allies are positive they can't suck us in, theyll make   
the best deal they can get. 
 
They'd be nuts to try anything else.    Well, I've enjoyed visiting with you, Commander.    What   
 145 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
the hell?    No sense trying to anticipate what the kids nowadays will do anyway.    Is there?    It's a   
different world than when you and I grew up."    "That's for sure." 
 
Next morning, promptly at six-thirty, Warren appeared in his father's room.    Not saying much,   
and rubbing his bloodshot and baggy eyes, he drank the orange juice and coffee brought by the   
steward.    A strong wind still blew outside, and he and his father wore sweaters as they volleyed   
and began to play.    Pug ran up three games.    The mist soared erratically here and there. 
 
"Have a good time last night?"    Pug called, as Warren knocked one flying over the fence, and   
the wind bore it up on the roof of a nearby cottage. 
 
Warren laughed, stripped his sweater off, and won the next five games, regaining his fast drive   
and his mid-court smash.    The father was a plugging, solid player with an iron backhand, but   
he had to conserve his breath. 
 
"Goddamn it, Warren, if you've got a point won, win it," he gasped. 
 
The son had passed up an easy kill to hit the ball where Pug could reach it. 
 
"The wind took it, Dad."    "The hell it did."    Now Pug threw off his sweater, answered several   
of his son's smashes, caught his second wind, and drew even.    "Whew!    I've got to quit. 
 
Ground school," Warren called, mopping his face with a towel. 
 
"You've really kept your game up, Dad." 
 
When in Berlin we tucked into a house with a court.    You've played better."    Warren came to   
the net.    He was pouring sweat, his eyes were clear, and he looked eager and happy.    "You had   
more sleep." 
 
"Quite a girl, that Janice." 
 
"She's got a head on her shoulders, Dad.    She knows a hell of a lot of history."    The father gave   
him a quizzical look.    They both burst out laughing.    'All the same it's true.    She does know   
history." 
 
'What did you cover last night?    The Hundred Years' War?"    Warren guffawed, swishing his   
racquet sharply.    Pug said, "Her father figures to make a lumberman of you." 
 
"He's a kidder.    I'll ship out in March, and probably that'll be that." 
 
Outside the ground school building, a wooden bulletin board was almost hidden by students   
clustering around in noisy excitement. 
 
Warren said, 'Assignments," and dove among them.    In a moment his arm in a white sweater   
thrust above the heads. "Eeyowl' Warren exulted all the way back to the b.O.Q; he was in   
Squadron Five, and some of the hottest student pilots had not made it.    He had done thing right,   
despite his one ground loop!    His father listened, smiling and nodding, remembering the day at   
Annapolis when he had drawn his first battleship duty. 
 146 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
He said at last, 'You told your mother in Washington that it's just something else to qualify in."   
The son looked a bit abashed, then laughed.    "I hadn't flown then, Dad.    There's nothing like   
flying. 
 
it's hard to talk about, but there's absolutely nothing like it. 
 
Nothing!' "Well, we both have to get cleaned up.    Guess we'd better say goodbye here."    They   
stood in the square dingy lobby of the b.O.Q. 
 
Warren glanced at his watch.    "Gosh, already?    I guess so.    Say, write me about Briny from   
Berlin, will you?    As soon as you get some real dope." 
 
'Good enough." 'And don't worry about Madeline, Dad. She'll be fine in New York." 'I   
haven't decided to let her stay in New York." 
 
"Why sure, I know."    Warren's grin was disingenuous.    He obviously thought his father had   
already lost that point. 
 
They shook hands.    Then Warren did something that embarrassed them both. He threw an arm   
around his father's shoulder.    'I feel mixed up. 
 
I'm damn sorry to see you go, and I've never been happier in my life." 
 
"Take it easy," Pug said.    "That girl's fine, but the hell with the lumber business.    The Navy   
needs officers."    Paul Munson, recovering from a hard night's drinking with some old friends   
on the Pensacola staff, said little until his plane finished its climb and levelled off, heading   
northeast over Georgia. 'By the way," he shouted above the engine roar into his face mike,   
"how'd your boy do in those squadron assignments?"    Pug held up five fingers. 
 
Munson slapped his shoulder. "Outstanding. My boy washed out of there last year. It's a   
tough school.    Don't you have another boy? 
 
What about him?"    "Naval ROTC." 
 
"Oh?    Guess they'll call him up any day.    Think he'll fly?" 
 
Victor Henry looked out of the window at the green fields, and a wandering brown river far   
below. 
 
"He'll never work that hard."      Rom the German viewpoint, the invasion of Poland was   
proceeding merrily.    The arrows and the pins on the military maps were closing in day by day,   
from all directions, on Warsaw and Byron Henry. 
 
All over Poland, lines of helmeted dusty Germans, miles and miles of them, walked along or   
rode in trucks, cars, or on horses. Tanks and motorized guns clanked with them, or rattled   
nearby on railroad cars. 
 
It was all going slowly and tediously, and on the whole peacefully. 
 147 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
This outdoors mass adventure, though not precisely a picnic-ten thousand Germans were killed   
along the way-was far from wholly disagreeable. After each das advance the horde ate in the   
fields or on the roadside, and camped under the stars or tented in black rain, peeved at the   
discomforts but enjoying good simple things: hard exercise, fresh air, food, drink, grumbling,   
jokes, comradeship, and sweet sleep. 
 
The Poles, of course, kept shooting at them.    This had been planned for. The Germans returned   
the fire, laying down studied bombardments according to grids on maps. Howitzers flamed   
with satisfying roars and recoils, everybody moved fast and worked up a sweat, officers   
shouted orders and encouragement, some fellows got killed or hurt but most did not, trees   
burned, village houses crumbled, and after a while the shooting died off and the invasion   
trudged ahead. 
 
The front was a moving political edge; the Germans were forcing their national will on the   
Poles.    As at a weather front, the squall line of violence was at the edge of change.    The thin   
destructive squall churned across the flat green landscape, leaving a streaked mess behind.   
Even so, even in this combat zone there was mostly peace right there at the line. 
 
For every hour of firing there were many hours of camping, machine repairing, and trudging   
through green fields and scorched villages. 
 
But this ceased to be so when the wavering line of the front took the form of a circle shrinking   
in toward the city of Warsaw.    As the target narrowed, the firing grew hotter, more frequent,   
and more concentrated. 
 
The invaders were a new generation of German soldiers who had never faced hostile bullets,   
though some of their senior officers had fought in the last war.    At any one place where the   
invasion jumped off, there were only a few hundred scared young Germans crossing a border   
and expecting to get shot at.      But they were backed by swarms of more armed youths,   
marching along German roads toward Poland on a neat schedule, and that was reassuring to   
know.    Pulling down the Polish border barriers in the gray dawn fight, overpowering the few   
guards, setting foot on the foreign roads they had been watching through field glasses-all that   
was exhilarating. But once the Polish border garrisons opened fire there was much halting,   
panicking, running away, and stalled confusion.    Luckily for the Germans, the Poles were even   
more panicked and confused, with the added disability of acting on the spur of the moment.   
World War II started in a messy amateurish style. 
 
But the Germans, however terrorized each individual may have been, were at least moving   
according to Plan. 
 
They had more guns at key points, more ammunition, and a clearer idea of where and when to   
fire.    They had, in fact, achieved surprise. 
 
If two men are standing and amiably chatting, and one suddenly punches the other's belly and   
kicks his groin, the chances are that even if the other recovers to defend himself, he will be   
badly beaten up, because the first man has achieved surprise.    There is no book on the military   
 148 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
art that does not urge the advantage of this. It may not seem quite decent, but that is no   
concern of the military art. 
 
Possibly the Poles should not have been surprised, in view of the Germans' open threats and   
preparations, but they were.    Their political leaders probably hoped the German menaces were   
bluster.      Their generals probably thought their own armies were ready.      A lot of wrong   
guessing goes with the start of a war. 
 
The German plan for conquering Poland, Case White, provided the scenario for what ensued.   
They had many such plans, like Case Green, the invasion of Czechoslovakia (which they never   
had to use), and Case Yellow, the attack on France.    Color-coded master plans for smashing   
other countries, far in advance of any quarrel with them, were a modern military innovation of   
the Germans. all advanced nations    came    to imitate this doctrine.    The United States, for   
instance, by 1939 had a Plan Orange for fighting japan, and even a Plan Red for fighting   
England; and it finally entered the war under Plan Rainbow Five. 
 
Historians still argue, and will long argue, the genesis of the German General Staff, which   
originated this new line of conduct in human affairs.    Some say the German genius produced   
the General Staff as a reflex of the humiliations inflicted by Napoleon; others assert that a Hat   
country    with many hostile borders,    in an industrial age, had to develop such schemes to   
survive.    In any case, it was certainly the Germans who first mastered industrial warfare and   
taught it to the nations: total war -the advance marshalling    of railroads, factories, modern   
communications, and the entire population of a land into one centrally controlled system for   
destroying its neighbors, should the need or impulse arise. 
 
This German system was well tested in the First World War, in which, geographically, they   
quit while they were well ahead.    When they asked for an armistice, after four years of battling   
bigger forces on many fronts, they stood everywhere deep in foreign territory; only their big   
1918 
 
attack had failed, and their resources were running low. 
 
Thereafter, despite their surrender and through all political changes, they continued to work up   
their 'Cases." Twenty-one years later, Case White paid off, quickly frightening a nation of   
forty millions, with an army of a million and a half or more, into obeying the Germans.    That,   
according to Napoleon, is the whole of war-to frighten the foe into doing your will. 
 
The Germans invading Poland made mistakes, they sometimes broke and ran under fire, they   
disobeyed orders, they refused to advance against tough positions, they misreported gains, and   
exaggerated reports of the fire they were fating, to excuse retreat.    They were ordinary young   
men.      But    there    were    good    leaders and    stout ows among    them,    and the    Germans    are 
an   
obedient, strong-willed people. The Poles did all these wrong things too, and the weight of   
fire, surprise, numbers, and Case White was all with the Germans.    So the invasion went well. 
 
Soon the new companies of tanks-the panzers that became so famous-began to risk long trips   
into enemy ground far ahead of the front. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This was a classic military blunder.    The foe closes in behind a company that has ventured too   
far ahead of its line, pinches it off, and wipes it out. 
 
This was precisely what the Russians did several years later to the famous panzers, whereupon   
their fame    dimmed.    But    now    they were    a    surprise.      In their debut    against    a    scared,   
ill- 
organized, smaller and weaker foe, on level country in perfect weather, they shone. They   
proceeded slowly, at only five or ten miles an hour, more like moving lines of large iron bugs   
than the dashing red arrows of the maps in popular books and magazines.    But they looked    to   
the Polish soldiers and civilians, and indeed they were lethal enough, these green machines   
crawling down the roads, out of the forests, and over the ripe grain, firing big shells.    From the   
pellucid September sky, slow clumsy little planes called Stukas kept diving and shooting at   
soldiers, or children, or animals, or women, whoever happened to be on the roads, to add to the   
bloodshed and horrid noise. The tanks and Stukas killed many Poles and scared immense   
masses of them into quitting what looked like a useless fight. 
 
This was the blitzkrieg, the lightning war.    It was halted at Warsaw. 
 
The fact was not much stressed at the time.    The Germans had to inflict on the city an old- 
fashioned, horse-drawn, Napoleonic bombardment, while the panzer machines limped into the   
repair shops, low on gasoline and breaking down in large numbers.    They had done their work.   
The Polish armies had been sliced and frightened into fragments.      Allied and American   
newspapers were writing terrified accounts of blitzkrieg, "the new form of warfare."    But the   
panzers arrived at Warsaw on the ninth of September. On the tenth the German supreme   
commander was writing in his batdc diary that the war was over. 
 
On the seventeenth Warsaw still stood.      all available Luftwaffe airplanes were making   
unopposed runs over the city, dumping bombs and hurrying back to Germany for more bombs.   
Horses were dragging more and more howitzers from Prussia and Pomerania to ring the city   
and fire shells inside.    And still Radio Warsaw played the Polonaise. 
 
Leslie Slote,    heading    the American    embassy's    skeleton    staff    in    Warsaw,    was an able and   
exceptionally clever man, but at the moment he was in the wrong job, because he was a   
coward.    He did not look or act like one. 
 
At Yale he had been on the track team, and this token of manliness-which he had carefully   
selected, knowing the Rhodes requirements-together with his work on the college newspaper,   
his Phi Beta Kappa key, and his friendships with certain useful professors, had won him the   
scholarship hands down. He had been one of the few popular Americans at Oxford; in the   
Foreign Service they talked of him as an outstanding officer in his age group.    Well aware of   
his problem, he would never have gone knowingly into a situation requiring physical courage.   
He had thought much about this hole in his makeup, and he had theories about it, centered on   
an oversolicitous mother and some childhood accidents. 
 
The theories didn't change anything, but they served to contain the weakness in his own mind   
as a misfortune like a polio limp, rather than as a blight which could corrode his self-respect.   
Slote had a high regard for himself, his powers, and his future.    Bad luck had now put him in a   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
spot where all his broad political    knowledge, all his gifts    of analysis, humor, and foreign   
tongues were of little avail compared to the simple capacity to be brave.    That, he lacked. 
 
He hid the lack with an inner struggle that was showing at the surface only in   
absentmindedness, continuous headaches, irritability, and a tendency to laugh for no reason.   
when the ambassador had asked him to stay on, he had burst out laughing.    Since the first word   
that the Germans were coming, and especially since the first air bombs had fallen on Warsaw,   
he had been in a black panic, hungering for word that he and the other Americans could leave.   
He had bandages on several fingers where he had bitten his nails raw.      And then the   
ambassador had asked him to stay on in this horror!    The shrill laugh had welled up out of him.   
With a quizzical look the ambassador had let it pass. 
 
Most of the people in Warsaw had reacted well to the air attacks, swinging over to almost   
lighthearted determination and stoicism, once the first bombs failed to kill them.    But for Slote   
the hell went on and on.    Every sounding of an air raid alarm all but deprived him of the ability   
to think.    Down into the thickwalled embassy cellar he would dart with everybody else, ahead   
of most, and invariably he would stay down until the all clear sounded. In a way, being in   
charge was a help. It looked proper for him to move out of his apartment into the embassy, to   
stay there, and to set an example of strict compliance with air raid rules.    Nobody guessed his   
trouble. 
 
Dawn of September the seventeenth found him at the big desk, a smoking pipe clenched in his   
teeth, carefully redrafting his latest dispatch to the State department on the condition of the   
embassy and of the hundred or so Americans trapped in Warsaw.    He was trying to retain all   
the urgency and gravity of the message, while editing out traces of his private hysteria.    It was   
a hairline to walk, the more so as no replies were coming in to any of these dispatches, and he   
could not tell whether the American government had any idea of the plight of its nationals in   
the Polish capital. 
 
"Come in," he called to a knock at the door. 
 
"It's broad daylight outside," Byron Henry said hoarsely as he walked in. 'Shall I open the   
curtains?" 
 
"Anything going on out there?"    Slote rubbed his eyes. 
 
'Nothing unusual." 
 
"Okay,    let's    have some    daylight,"    Slote    laughed. They both pulled back the heavy black   
curtains, admitting pallid sunshine in broken patterns through the diagonally crossed timbers in   
the windows.    "What about the water, Byron?" 
 
"I brought it." 
 
With the curtains open, one could hear the dull far-off thumps of Gemian artillery.    Slote   
would have preferred to leave the curtains closed for a while longer, shutting out these daytime   
noises of gray, broken, burning Warsaw.    The quiet of the black-curtained room lit by a desk   
 151 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
lamp might be illusory, a false conjuring up of peaceful student days, but he found it   
comforting.    He peered between the timbers. 
 
"Such smoke!    Are there that many fires?" 
 
"God, yes.    The sky was terrific until the dawn came up.    Didn't you see it?    all red and smoky   
wherever you looked.    Dante's Inferno. 
 
And these big orange star shells popping all over, way high up, and slowly floating down.   
Quite a sight!    Over on Walewskaya they're still trying to put out two huge fires with shovels   
and sand.    It's the water problem that's going to lick them, more than anything."    "They should   
have accepted the German offer yesterday," Slote said. 
 
"They'd have had at least half a city left.    There's no future in this. How on earth did you fetch   
the water?    Did you manage to find some gasoline, after all?" 
 
Byron shook his head, yawned, and dropped on the long brown leather couch.    His sweater and   
slacks were covered with brick dust and soot, his long shaggy hair was in a tangle, and his eyes   
glowed dully in purple rings.    'Not a chance.    From now on we can forget about the truck. 
 
I saw fire engines stalled in the middle of the street. 
 
Gasoline's finished in this town.    I just scouted around OBI found a cart and a horse.    It took   
me most of the night." He grinned at Slote, his lower lip pulled in with exhaustion. 'The   
Government of the United States owes me one hundred seventy-five dollars.    The hardest part   
was getting the boiler off the truck and onto the cart. 
 
But this peasant who sold me the cart helped me.    It was part of the deal.    A little sa wed-off   
fellow with a beard, but strong. 
 
Jesus!" 'You'll get paid, of course. Talk to Ben." "Can I stretch out here for a minute?"   
"Don't you want breakfast?"    'I'm not sure I have the energy to chew.    I just need a half hour or   
so.    It's quiet in here. That cellar is a madhouse."    Byron put up his feet and collapsed on the   
leather cushions, a meager long dirty figure. 
 
'There's no water at the opera house corner anymore," he said, closing his eyes. 
 
"I had to go clear over to the pumping station.    it's a slow horse and it sure doesn't like pulling   
an iron boiler full of sloshing water." 
 
'Thank you, Byron.    You're being a great help."    The and Gunga Din. 
 
'You may talk of gin and beer,"' Byron mumbled into his elbow, "when you're quartered safe   
out 'ere'-where's Natalie?    At the hospital?"    'I daresay."    Byron fell asleep.    The telephone rang   
harshly, but he didn't stir.    The mayor's office was calling; Mayor Starzynski was on his way to   
the embassy to discuss with the American charge a sudden development of the highest   
urgency.    Excited, Slote phoned the marine sentry at the gate to admit the mayor.    This must be   
news: safe-conduct for foreigners out of Warsaw, or perhaps imminent surrender!    Nothing but   
 152 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
surrender made sense now.    He thought of waking Byron and asking him to leave the office,   
but decided to wait.    The mayor might not arrive for a while. This grimy kid needed sleep. 
 
Water had become a problem all through Warsaw; and in the embassy, with seventy people   
under one roof and more coming, it was-or might have been-an alarming, a disastrous problem.   
But from the day the water main had broken, Byron Henry had started supplying water, though   
nobody had asked him to.    While Slote had been on the telephone to the mayor's office-twenty   
times on that first wretched day-demanding immediate water delivery for the Americans in his   
charge and swift repair of the main, Byron had gone out in the embassy's Ford pickup truck,   
and had retrieved from the cellar of a bombed-out house a rusty broken little boiler.   
Somewhere he had obtained soldering tools to patch it up, and now he was using it as a   
makeshift tank to bring water to the embassy.    What would have happened otherwise there was   
no telling.    The main    was still broken, mains    were broken everywhere    now, and the city   
government was overburdened supplying    just the hospitals    and the fire fighters    from tank   
trucks. 
 
Day after day,    as a matter of course, Byron fetched water, through bombarchnent and air   
attack, joking about his own terror, and often arriving much filthier than he was now, having   
dived into some rubble pile at the "whiffling' sound of a howitzer shell sailing through the air.   
Slote had never heard this    'whiffling," as many people described it, and never wanted to.   
Despite these scares, Byron Henry actually seemed to be enjoying himself in the siege.    This   
state of mind Slote regarded as stupider than his own, and not particularly admirable.    His fear   
at least was rational. 
 
Natalie had told him of Byron's remark that he was having fun. 
 
The boy was a neurotic, Slote thought; the excessively bland good nature was a mask.    But his   
water-carrying was an undeniable blessing. 
 
Slote was also grateful to Henry, in an obscurer way, for keeping Natalie Jastrow occupied   
when she wasn't at the hospital.    Natalie was the one person in Warsaw capable of penetrating   
to his secret fear. So far he was sure she had not, simply through not being around him   
enough. 
 
The girl's presence in Warsaw, a haunting burden, gave him pangs of hatred for her.    As it was,   
she plagued him with guilt and aindety by existing, by not vanishing from the earth.    He had a   
wild physical craving for this dark-haired strong-willed jewess, but he didn't want to marry her.   
A snooth hand at managing romantic liaisons, he had never before come up against such an   
iron girl.    She had broken off their sexual relations in Paris and had never resumed them; she   
had told him half a dozen times to let her alone and forget her-the one thing he could not do.   
Why in the devil's name, then, had she thrust herself on him in this evil hour, in this holocaust,   
in a city shuddering under bombs and shells, where he was saddled with the heaviest   
responsibility of his life and yet felt befogged and castrated by fear?    He dreaded exposure of   
his fear to Natalie more than anything, except getting hurt. He thought now that if they escaped   
with their lives, he would summon his willpower to cut this dragging business off. 
 153 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
She might have the power to set him in a blaze, but she was impossibly obstinate and exotic,   
totally wrong for his career and for him. Meantime he owed this dirty slumbering youth thanks   
for keeping her out of his way. 
 
Mayor Starzynski arrived shortly in an old limousine, a thickset moustached man wearing a   
green knitted vest with his unpressed floppy black suit.    His shoes were caked with red mud.   
He had a flushed, excited, almost happy air, this man at the head of a perishing city, whose   
broadcasts were doing more than anything else to keep Warsaw fighting.    He could hardly be   
sleeping two hours a night.    The whole burden of the city was on him. 
 
Everybody from the diplomatic corps to the firemen on the streets and the hospital doctors   
were bypassing the slovenly municipal bureaucracy and appealing straight to the mayor for   
their needs.    Yet he looked fresh and combative, the hero of the hour, and also the target of all   
the bitter jokes. 
 
The new heavy bombs dropped by the German planes in recent days were 'Starzynski   
cabbages," the antitank steel spikes were "Starzynski toothpicks."    "Who is that?"    the mayor   
said, pointing a fat thumb at the couch. 
 
'Just a boy.    Dead to the world.    He doesn't understand Polish.    I can send him out." 
 
'Never mind, never mind." Starzynski waved both hands high and sat in the chair to which   
Slote gestured. He rested his thick hands on his knees and blew out a long breath, looked   
around at the large wellfurnished room, and ran his fingers along the polished desk. 
 
"Well. 
 
You seem in good condition here.    Is there anything we can do for you? 
 
Are your people all right?"    'We're fine.    We're consumed with admiration for the Varsovians."   
?    The Germans have a bone in their throat, eh?    We drove them back in the north last night.   
Berlin Radio says it's over.    We'll see."    The mayor was red with pride.    'Our forces are only   
twelve miles away this morning from a join-up with the Modlin garrison!    Then the world will   
see something! We'll have a battle line again, not a siege." "That's wonderful news, Your   
Honor." 
 
Slote ran his fingers caressingly over the warm bowl of his pipe, and tried to smile with a   
gladness he did not feel. 
 
'Yes, but the other news is not so good."    The mayor paused, looked Slote in the face, and said   
dramatically, 'the Russians have marched. The Soviet Union invaded our country at dawn.   
They are pouring over the border by the millions!    Their excuse is that they want to protect   
their nationals in Poland from the Germans. It's a crude disgusting lie, of course, but the   
Russians never change.    They have already taken Tamopol and Baranowicze, and Rowne will   
fall in an hour, if it hasn't already fallen. 
 
We have no forces in the east.    We have been sacrificing everything to hold off the Germans in   
 154 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
the west, waiting for the Allies to march. And now the Russians are coming.    There is nothing   
to oppose them between the border and Warsaw." 
 
Slote burst out laughing. 
 
The mayor stared at him, eyes bulging.    "What is the matter, sir? 
 
Don't you believe me?    I tell you the Russians have pounced on Poland from the rear in her   
agony.    It is a historic treachery.    I have a message for your President!"    He pulled a paper from   
his breast pocket, unfolded it, and slapped it on the desk before Slote.    'If you have suggestions   
on the phrasing they will be welcome, but the highest speed is now a matter of life and death." 
 
Slote could scarcely translate mentally the Polish words on the gray official paper. All he   
could think of was the Soviet tanks    and soldiers approaching Warsaw. He could see the   
crawling machines and the Slavic faces.    Perhaps they were coming to claim their part of the   
evil    bargain,    nothing more.    Perhaps    they    would engage the    Germans    in battle    and   
Turn   
Warsaw into Armageddon.    Perhaps they would bring up the famed Russian artillery and help   
the Germans pulverize the Polish capital twice as fast.    This news seemed to him the authentic   
end of the world, and he was not aware of laughing.    He peered at the paper swimming before   
his eyes. 
 
"I understand the situation is extraordinary," he managed to say, surprising himself with his   
own reasonable glibness, "but a communication from the head of a municipality to a head of   
government is awkward. An approach from President Moscicki, or Marshal Smidgly-Rydz,   
somebody in the national government, might prove more fruitful." "But Sir, Our national   
government has crossed the border into Rumania. They are probably under house arrest by   
now, and the Germans    will have them by the neck before the week is out. There's only   
Warsaw, but we are unafraid and we are fighting on.    We want to know what we an hope for." 
 
Slote got hold of himself and scanned the dispatch: familiar, pathetic rhetoric of appeal, like all   
the messages from Radio Warsaw to France and England during the past weeks.    In fact the   
mayor was talking very much in his broadcasting style.    "I'm not sure how fast I can get this   
out, sir.    Lately I've been encountering twelve-hour delays and more via Stock holm." 
 
'I guarantee you immediate transmission.    You can send this in plain language.    Let the whole   
world know," the mayor shouted, waving a fist, it that the people of Warsaw are fighting on   
despite the Russian treachery, and that we are calling on the great American President for a   
word of hope.    If he speaks the Allies will listen.    Theyll march before it's too late. 
 
The Germans can still be smashed from behind.    All their power is in Poland.    The Allies can   
roar to Berlin in two weeks.    Let the President only speak, and they will march!" 
 
'We can encode it very rapidly, Your Honor.    I think that's more prudent.    Well be ready to   
transmit in half an hour."    In a more businesslike tone Starzynsld said, "Call my office, and we   
wig arrange direct voice communication for you with Stockholm or Berne."    He stood up and   
glanced around the room.    "A peaceful oasis.    The Luftwaffe respects the American flag.    Very   
wise of them. How soundly the boy sleeps." 'He's exhausted. Mr. Mayor, how about the   
 
 
 
 
 
 
evacuation of neutrals? 
 
Did you discuss that with the Germans yesterday?" 
 
'It was not the moment.    They came under a flag of truce to ask for our surrender.    General   
Dzuma wouldn't accept the message.    The German officers wouldn't discuss any other sub ject.   
They said they would reduce us to rubble!" The mayor's voice rose to broadcasting pitch.   
"They're dropping leaflets all over the city this morning with the same threat, but where are the   
'swarms of airplanes' and the 'hurricanes of shells' they talk about? 
 
The Germans are already throwing at us everything they've got. 
 
They have nothing to add but words.    They've been doing their worst for two weeks, and here   
we are still! Let President Roosevelt only speak out, and civilization can still see a storic   
victory on the Vistula." 
 
His voice dropped; the exalted glow left his face.    "I did mention the problem of the neutrals.   
Their emissary indicated that something would be worked out soon."    The mayor gave Slote a   
cool look and added, with a smile that twisted his mustache, "We don't expect you to stay on   
and share our fate." 
 
"You understand that we have nineteen women here," Slote said, feeling under the weight of   
this smile a need to apologize. 
 
"Men, women, what's the difference?    You're neutral."    The mayor held out his hand.    'Tlease   
send the message.    I must broadcast it eventually. 
 
I want to give your great President the courtesy of a period for private consideration of his   
reply." 
 
Slote grasped his hand.    "We Americans here are awed by the stand of Warsaw, of that I can   
assure you.    We Will never forget it, and when we get home we will tell the story." 
 
The mayor seemed moved. "Yes? The Germans are not supermen, you see. Warsaw has   
already taught that to the world. Some Germans are personally fine people, but as a nation   
they are swine.    It is a matter of deep national immaturity and feelings of inferiority.    A very   
complex question.    They have the machines, the railroads, the factories, but we are not afraid   
of them.    All we ask is a chance to keep fighting them." 
 
"I will certainly convey that to my government."    "We need help. 
 
I am going from here to dig a trench."    The mayor theatrically showed his blistered palms, and   
left. 
 
Slote scrawled at his desk for several minutes, then summoned a coding clerk. 
 
"Byron, wake up!"    He shook Byron's shoulder, smearing his hand with brick dust.    "Come o n,   
get up.    All hell is breaking loose." 
 156 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Byron turned over and opened dull eyes.    "The Russians are coming. 
 
God knows when they'll be here.    They invaded Poland this morning. 
 
Go With an elastic movement, Byron came erect and awake. 
 
"The Russians?    Holy cow.    This thing's getting interesting." 
 
"Interesting?      Byron, look, Warsaw will probably become the no-man'sland between the   
German and Russian armies.    The city can be blown to atoms! Get Natalie and tell her she's to   
come here and stay here.    Working in a belligerent's hospital is damned questionable anyway,   
and now-" Slote walked to the door, putting a fist holcung the pipe distractedly to his head.   
'What a mess.    So much to do."    Byron yawned and rose.    "But what's the rush?    How far is the   
Russian border from here, two or three hundred kilometers?    Their army can't possibly get to   
Warsaw for a week." 
 
Slote laughed. It had not occurred to him that the Russian armies needed several days to   
advance three hundred kilometers, but it was true, and very obvious.    He took out his pouch   
and packed the pipe slowly to calm himself, saying, "Of course, but the point is, this   
development changes everything.      There's never any predicting what the Russians or the   
Germans will do next.    There may be dogfights over Warsaw today.    The Germans may decide   
on half an hour's notice to let the neutrals out of here." 
 
"Well, I'll try to get her, but you know Natalie." 
 
"Please tell Natalie it's not a message from me," Slote said in a tight ragged tone, his hand on   
the doorknob, his head pounding, "but an official notice from the United States Government.   
We can no longer be responsible for the safety of anybody outside the four walls of this   
building.    If we suddenly get packed out of here under a flag of truce-and it can happen any   
time-and she isn't around, I can't delay five minutes.    We'll go, and she'll be the only foreigner   
left in Warsaw, and if by some freak she survives the bombs and the Nazis she can write a   
book.    Tell her that, will you?"    He closed the door hard. 
 
By now Byron knew the route to the hospital well.    It went through a part of the town which   
the Germans had been pounding hard.    Sooty heaps of rubble pockmarked the way; there were   
craters in the streets, broken sewer pipes, torn cable conduits, downed telephone poles,   
uprooted trees, and endless piles of broken glass, masonry, wood, and rubbish. 
 
Children played on the heaps and in the ruined buildings.    Women were washing clothes in the   
open, or cooking over pale fires of splintered wood in the bright sunshine.    Work gangs were   
digging in the fallen houses, clearing twisted wires from the street, and shovelling and   
bulldozing debris.      Almost everybody appeared cheerful and matter-of-fact; that was the   
remarkable thing, though Byron was getting used to it.    He passed no funerals or other traces of   
the dead. 
 
Leaping, climbing, laughing in the destroyed houses, the children seemed to be finding war an   
amusing novelty, and school was evidently out. Here and there black-shawled women sat with   
 157 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
bowed heads on chairs or stones. Some bared breasts to sucking babies. Many people with   
blank faces wandered amid the rubble and stared, or fumbled to find things. No fires were   
burning.    The destruction was capricious.    One block would be undamaged; the next half razed,   
as though an airplane had dumped all its bombs at once. Over jagged slanting half-walls,   
rooms like stage settings hung in the air, their different wallpapers or paint colorfully and   
pathetically exposed.    Byron saw a broken piano hanging half out of one room. 
 
He made his way    through the entrance hall of the hospital.      Here Warsaw's surprisingly   
cheerful air gave way to a pitiful and disgusting scene. Wounded people were piled and   
crowded helter-skelter along the marble floor awaiting help; mostly in rags, all dirty, green- 
pale, groaning or crying or in a faint, men and women, Poles and Jews, blood-smeared,   
unbandaged, with clothing ripped, with faces torn open, with arms and legs gashed, with an   
occasional red stump of limb blown away and terrible white bone showing.    The children were   
piled separately in a big anteroom, where a sad chorus of wailing and screaming rose, mingled   
with some incongruous laughter.    Byron hurried past the open door and down the curving stone   
staircase, into a long low basement area much warmer than the floor above; here the stink of   
faultily burning oilstoves was even stronger than the smells of medicine. 
 
"Is he crazy?"    Natalie exclaimed.    "How can I leave?    I just came on duty.    Look!"    She swept   
her arm around at the women in the jammedtogether beds, moaning and shrieking in Polish, at   
others sitting up dolefully on beds or low stools, with fat white breasts and brown nipples bared   
to infants, at the three pallid sweating doctors moving from bed to bed, at the hastening nurses,   
some in soiled bloodstained white dresses like herself, with hair bound in white cloths, some in   
dark gray nun's habits. 
 
"There are five of us down here and we counted eighty-two women this morning!    it's the only   
maternity ward left in Warsaw now. The Germans bombed out Saint Catherine's last night.   
They say it was unspeakably horrible, pregnant women running around on fire, newborn babies   
burning u "The point is, Natalie, with the Russians coming-""I heard you! They're hundreds of   
miles away, aren't they?    Go away, Briny, I have to work."    A stoop-shouldered doctor with a   
big nose, a square red beard, and sad filmed eyes was walking past. He asked Natalie in   
German what the problem was, and she told him. 
 
"Go, by all means go," he said, in an exhausted voice.    "Don't be foolish, you must leave with   
the other Americans.    ll the embassy sends    for you,    you    must    obey."    'Oh, the embassy!   
Nobody says we're leaving yet.    This young man can come and fetch me in five minutes if they   
do." 
 
'No, no, that's a risk you can't take.    You're not a Pole, you're not supposed to risk your life.   
And you're Jewish, you're Jewish." 
 
The doctor put his hand to her head and pulled off the white cloth. 
 
Her loose hair fell thick, curling, dark.    'You must go home." 
 
Tears ran out of Natalie's eyes and down her face.      'The woman with the twins is   
 158 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
hemorrhaging.    Did you see her yet?    And the baby with the bad foot-' she gestured jerldly at a   
bed nearby. 
 
They're all on the list.    Go back to the embassy right away. 
 
Thank You.    You've helped us.    Have a safe journey."    The doctor shuffled away. 
 
She turned on Byron.    "Leslie Slote is a selfish bastard.    He just doesn't want to have me on his   
mind.    One thing less to think about." 
 
Suddenly she raised her skirt to her hips. The gesture gave Byron a shocking little thrill,   
though in point of fact the heavy gray bloomers coming down to her knees were considerably   
less sexy than the white skirt.    She must have gotten those gruesome bloomers from the nuns,   
he thought.    'Here," she said, pulling a thick wallet from her bloomers and dropping the skirt.   
"I'll go back to the goddamn embmv. 
 
But just in case, I want you to go and find Berel, and give him this. 
 
It's all my American money.    Will you do that for me?" 
 
"Sure."    "Tell me, Briny," Natalie said, 'are you still having fun?" 
 
He looked around at the noisy, crowded, evil-smelling ward, where the Polish women were   
helplessly bringing new life into a city which was being dynamited to death by the Germans,   
going through unpostponable birth pangs with the best care the dying city could give them.   
"More fun than a barrel of monkeys.    Be careful going back to the embassy, win you?  
 
There's a big burning church on Franzuski, and they've got the street blocked off.    Go around   
by the museum." 
 
'All right. You'll probably find Berel in that gray building, you    know, where the Jewish   
council works.    He's on the food committee or something." 
 
"I guess I'll find him." 
 
Byron came out in a back alley where two men were loading dead people from the hospital   
onto a two-wheeled cart, much like the one he had bought to carry the water.    Bodies lay on the   
cobblestones, and one man wearing a red-smeared white oilcloth apron was taking them up one   
by one in his arms and thrusting them at the other man, who stacked them in the cart-large rigid   
horrors with open mouths and fixed eyes-like dead fish in a market.    The man tossed up the   
light body of a scrawny old woman, whose gray pubic hair showed through the pink rag still   
hanging on her. 
 
Hurrying down Marshal Pilsudski Boulevard toward the Jewish section he heard the thumping   
of heavy guns, and nearby explosions like the blasting at a building site. Byron muttered   
routine curses at the Germans. 
 
He had spent a week in Germany after defecting from the University of Florence.    They had   
seemed odd, but no more so than the Italians; foreigners, but human enough, with a boisterous   
 159 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
sense of fun and very polite manners. Yet here they were, surrounding the Polish capital,   
pounding it with explosives and flying steel, breaking the water mains, killing the children,   
turning living people into stiff glassy-eyed dead stacked garbage to be carted away and   
disposed of.    It was really the most amazing outrage. 
 
To call it 'war' was not to make it any more understandable. 
 
This peculiar and horrible state of affairs in which he accidentally found himself was   
nevertheless far more colorful and interesting than peace," as Byron remembered it.   
Delivering water to the United States embassy was the most satisfying thing he had done in his   
life.    He loved the job.    He was willing to be killed doing it. 
 
But the odds were all with him. 
 
This was the novel thing he was finding out.    Most of the people in Warsaw were still alive and   
unhurt and going about their business. 
 
The city was far from destroyed or even half-destroyed.    As he made his way to Nareiskaya   
district he passed through many a block of brown three-story houses which stood undamaged,   
peaceful, and quiet, looking exactly as they had before the German attack. 
 
But in the Jewish quarter itself there were no such undamaged blocks. It was one broad smoky   
ruin. Clearly the Germans were raining extra shells and bombs on this district-a pointless   
course, since the Jews of Warsaw could not compel the surrender of the city.    Such a deluge of   
fire and explosion concentrated on the city's vitals-power, water, transport, bridges-instead of   
on the Jews, could break Warsaw much faster. 
 
The bombardment of the Nareiskaya was an irrational wastefia assault by a powerful army   
against sad unarmed paupers. 
 
The JUDEN VERB signs Byron had seen on park benches in Germany had been too bizarre to   
seem real.    His bombardment of the Nareiskaya district first drove home to him the queer fact   
that the Germans really had murder in their hearts for these people.    'Trolley cars lay on their   
sides, burned out. Swollen dead horses stank in the streets, in clouds of fat black flies that   
sometimes settled stickily on Byron's hands and face.    There were dead cats and dogs, too, and   
a lot of dead rats scattered in the gutter.    He saw only one human body, an old man crumpled in   
a doorway.    He had noticed before how quick the Jews were to remove their dead, and how   
they treated the corpses with respect, covering the loaded carts with cloths and following them   
in silent mournful straggles through the streets. 
 
But despite the smashing up of the houses, the continuing fires, the smoke, the rubble, this   
quarter still abounded in eager crowded life. On one corner, outside a ruined schoolhouse, boys   
in skullcaps sat with their bearded teacher on the sidewalk, chanting over enormous books;   
some of the boys    were not much larger than the books. Kiosks were still festooned with   
dozens of different newspapers and journals printed in heavy Hebrew lettering. He heard   
someone in a house practicing on a violin. The vendors of wilted vegetables and spotted   
stunted fruit, of tinned food and old clothes, stood along the sidewalks or pushed their creaky   
 160 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
handcarts amid crowds of people.    Work gangs were clearing rubble from bombed houses off   
the streets and the sidewalks.    There were plenty of hands for the work.    Byron wondered at   
this, for in the past weeks Jewish men and boys-perhaps because they were so recognizable- 
had seemed to erupt all over Warsaw, digging trenches, fighting fires, repairing mains.    One   
bent old graybeard in skullcap and kaftan, wielding a shovel in a trench, gave a Jewish look to   
a whole work force.    Nevertheless they did appear to be pitching in everywhere. Berel Jastrow   
was not in the council building.    Wandering through crowded, dark, dingy corridors lit only by   
flickering thick candles, Byron chanced on a man whom he had once seen conferring with   
Berel, a little, neat, bearded Jew with a glass eye that give him a walleyed stare. Talking a   
mishmash of German and Yiddish, the man conveyed that Berel was inspecting the community   
kitchens.    Byron set out to hunt him down, and came on him in a huge Romanesque synagogue   
of gray stone, undamaged except for a broken stone Star of David in a round glassless window.   
Jastrow stood in a low hot anteroom where people were lined up for a strongng women from   
tubs on smelling stew ladled out by kerchiefed perspire 
 
wood-burning stoves. 
 
S. 
 
"The Russians!"    Berel stroked his beard.    "This is definite?" 
 
"Your mayor came to the embassy with the new "Let us go outside." 
 
They talked out in the street, well away from the food queue.    The raggedly dressed people in   
line stared at them and tried to hear the conversation, even cupping hands to ears. "I must   
report this to the central committee," Berel said.    "it may be good news.    Who knows?  
 
Suppose the two robbers cut each other's throats?    Such things have happened.    The Russians   
could be messengers of He was taken aback when Byron offered him Natalie's wallet.    "But   
what is she thinking?" 
 
he said.    'I have money.    I have dollars.    She may need that herself. 
 
She it Out Of Warsaw yet." 
 
Byron was embarrassed.    It had not occurred to him that Jastrow might He said the Americans   
be offended, but now the reaction seemed natural. expected to leave Warsaw soon under a flag   
of truce. 
 
-so.    we won't see you or Natalie again?"    "Probably not." 
 
"Ah.    Well, if the Germans let all you Americans Out together, she should be safe.    She told me   
an American passport says nothing about religion.    Tell her I thank her, and I'll put the money   
in the food fund. Tell her-Voi-sichtf" A shell whistled down and exploded some distance   
away, making Byron's ears ache. Berel spoke hurriedly. "So, they are coming back to this   
neighborhood again.    They shell by a system, the Germans.    Yesterday was Yom Kippur, and   
all day the shells fell on us, they never stopped.    Now, you will be seeing Arele?"    He smiled   
 161 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
wryly at Byron's blank look.    "Dr. 
 
Aaron Jastrow," he said, mimicking English pronunciation. 
 
"I guess so." 
 
"Tell him," Berel said, "Lekh lekha,".    Can you remember that? 
 
It's two simple Hebrew words.    Lekh lekha." 
 
"Lekh lekha," Byron said. 
 
"Very good.    You're a fine Hebrew student.' "What does it mean?" 
 
"Get out."    Berel gave a worn white card to Byron.    "Now, will you do me a favor?    This is a   
man in New jersey, an importer. He sent a bank draft in August for a large shipment of   
mushrooms.    It came too late. I destroyed the draft, so there's no problem, but-what are you   
smiling at?" 
 
"Well, you have so much to worry about.    And yet you think of this." 
 
Jastrow shrugged. s is my bu ness. e ans, siTh germ they'll either come in, or they won't.   
After all, they're not lions and tigers. They're people.    They'll take our money So"-he held out   
'heY. 
 
It'll be a very bad time, but a war always ends. 
 
Listen, if the Russians come they'll take our money, too. 
 
his hand to Byron-"so, God bless you, and Byron heard the noise of a shell very close, the   
unmistakable sloppy whir and whistle.    It went splintering through the synagogue roof.    The   
stunning explosion came a second or two later, giving him a chance to clap his hands to his   
ears and fall to the ground.    Strangely, it did not blow out the front wall, and this was what   
saved the people on the line.    Fragments of the roof went flying through the air, raining in a   
clatter on the street and on nearby buildings.    Then, even as he and Jastrow stood, they saw the   
whole lamade of the synagogue come sliding down like a descending curtain, disintegrating as   
it went with a rumble and a gathering crash. 
 
By now the queue of people had run out of danger. White dust boiled up, and through this   
cloud, is the holy ark untouched see the marble pillars   
andwchaircvhedthweoobdreeenzedotohinonfed at once, Byron could on the far wall, looking   
naked and out of place in the pale smoky sunshine. 
 
Berel slapped him sharply on the shoulder.    "Go, go!    Don't stay here. 
 
Go now.    I have to help." 
 
Jewish men and boys were already groping into the new ruin, where many little fires were   
flickering.    Little as He knew of Judaism, Byron understood that they meant to save the scrolls. 
 162 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"All right, I'm going back to Natalie." 
 
'(Good. Thank you, thank you. A safe journey to both of you.Byron left at a trot. The   
uncovering of the holy ark to the sunshine had shocked him like a piece of powerful music.   
jogging back through the Jewish quarter of Warsaw, he saw these smashed rows of gray and   
blown houses, these cobbled streets and dirt alleys, these shabby courtyards and mews hung   
with drying laundry, these crowds of orderly Jews in bards and broad hats, these dark-eyed   
cheerful children playing under the bombs, these dogged tired street vendors with their carts   
and baskets, these kiosks laden with newspapers, magazines, feuilletons, and paperbound   
books, this smoke-filtered sunshine, these overturned trolleys, these dead horses-he saw all this   
in superbright detail, each picture printing itself on his mind as though he were a painter. 
 
Without surprise or fear, he noticed thick Vs of German planes coming out of the north.    The   
sight had grown ordinary.    He continued to trot, a little faster, through the emptying shell-pitted   
streets toward the embassy. 
 
People around him glanced at the sky and took shelter.    The first waves were Stukas, diving   
down and spitting out black smoke, and Byron heard the irritated answering rattle of the weak   
rooftop machine guns of the Poles.    One plane dove toward the street where he was running. 
 
He jumped into a doorway.    Bullets went chattering down along the cobblestones, with a great   
whing-whang of ricochets.    He watched the plane zoom away, then he trotted on, muttering the   
usual obscenities about the Germans. Byron was developing a sense of invulnerability to the   
worst the Germans could He was sure that the United States was going to rise in its wrath in   
short 
 
do.    To him they were contemptible bungling butchers. 
 
order, cross the Atlantic and knock the hell out of them, if the British and the French really   
proved too decayed or too scared to do it.    The events around him must be making gigantic   
headlines in America, he thought. 
 
He would have been stupefied to know that the Polish war, its outcome clear, was already   
slipping to the back pages of United States papers, and that people were ignoring even the   
supposed 'great debate" in the Senate over radifying the Neutrality Act, because of the tight   
National League pennant race. 
 
He loped through the embassy gate very much out of breath.    The marine sentry gave him a   
salute and a familiar grin. Inside, in the big dining room darkened by window braces and   
blackout curtains, some fifty or so Americans caught in Warsaw were lunching at long trestle   
tables lit by oil lamps, making a loud clatter.    Slote sat with Natalie, a small dark man named   
Mark Hartley, and some others at the ambassador's polished dining table. Panting from the   
long run, Byron told Natalie about his meeting with Berel.    He did not mention the destroyed   
synagogue. 
 
"'nanks, Briny!    God help them all.    Sit down and eat something. 
 163 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
We have Marvelous breaded veal cutlets, by some miracle."    Slote said, "Did you come here   
through the streets during this air attack?" 
 
'He has duck feathers for brains," Natalie said, giving Byron an affectionate look. 
 
"Byron is all right," Hartley said.    He was a fourth at bridge with Natalie, BYron, and Slote,   
when they whiled away long night hours in the cellar. Mark Hartley's name had once been   
Marvin    Horowitz,    and he liked    to    joke about    the change.    He was    a New    Yorker in    the   
importing business. 
 
Byron took an empty seat beside Natalie and helped himself to a cutlet. It had a rather gamy,   
sticky taste, but after a week of canned sprats and Sausages it seemed delicious, and he was   
famished.    He downed it and forked another onto his plate.    Slote smiled at him, and glanced   
around with satisfaction at the Americans happily consuming the cutlets. 
 
"By the way, does anybody here object to eating horsemeat?" 
 
"I most certainly do," said Natalie. 
 
"Well, that's too bad.    You've just ten it."    Natalie said, "Aagh!" and choked into her napkin.   
"My god.    Horse! 
 
I could kill you.    Why didn,t you warn me?"    "You need nourishment. 
 
We all do.    There's no telling what's going to become of us, and I had the chance to buy up this   
lot and I did.    You've been dining on one of the great breeds of Poland.    The mayor ordered the   
slaughter of a thousand of them yesterday.    We were lucky to get a share." 
 
Mark Hartley took another cutlet from the platter.    Natalie said, "Mark! How can you?    Horse!"   
He shrugged.    'We got to eat.    I've eaten worse meat in kosher restaurants." 
 
"Well, I'don't claim 
 
t- be re igious, but I draw the line at horses.    I'd as soon eat a dog." 
 
Byron pushed away his plate.    The awareness of horseflesh heavy i. 
 
his stomach, the gluey taste of horse in his mouth, the remembered sine Of fly-blown dead   
horses on the Jewish streets, blended in his consciousness as one thing-war. 
 
OUR days later, early in the morning Natalie came scampering out Finto the embassy back   
yard, hair and skirt flying, and pounced on Byron, who was burning passport blanks and visa   
application files.    The embassy had hundreds of the maroon passport booklets, which went up   
slowly and smoldly; in German hands they could be used for smuggling spies and saboteurs   
into the United States.    The stacks and stacks of visa requests, because they identified Jews,   
were also high on the burn-list. 
 
Byron had    given    up riffling through the files for the    American currency often    clipped to   
application forms. His job was to reduce the stuff to ashes p as fast as he could; he was   
 164 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
burning money and didn't care. 
 
"Hurry.    Come with me."    Natalie's voice had a cheerfw, excited ring. 
 
Where?" 
 
"Just come."    In a chauffeured black limousine at the front gate, Slote sat next to a plump, pink,   
gray-headed man.    "Hi there, Byron!" 
 
Slote too sounded surprisingly cheerful. This is the Swedish ambassador. Byron Henry's   
father is our naval attache in Berlin, Ambassador.    It might be well to take him along, don't you   
think?" 
 
The ambassador rubbed the side of his bulbous nose with a small neat hand, and gave Byron a   
wise look.    "Very much so.    Yes indeed. 
 
And he should perhaps take notes."    "Just what I thought.    Hop in, Byron." 
 
A blood transfusion could not have changed Slote more. Byron had talked to him an hour   
earlier; the familiar gray, dour, slumped Slote, who had been glooming around the embassy,   
taking medicines, snapping short answers, and spending hours locked in his office.    Ever since   
a bomb had fallen on the building next door, killing ten Poles, Slote had been like that.    Byron   
figured the responsibility was wearing the charge down. But now his face had color, his eyes   
were bright, and the very plume of blue smoke from As Byron go his pipe looked jaunty. 
 
t into the back seat, Natalie blurted to the ambassador, "Can I come along?    Byron and I are   
travelling together." 
 
With an annoyed grimace, Slote shook his head. The ambassador looked her up and down,   
with masculin amusement.      Natalie wore a green silk dress and an old pink sweater, an   
atrocious getup pulled from her suitcase without thought. It made her look vulgarly sexy.   
"Bat, my dear, wouldn't you be frightened?" 
 
"Of what?" 
 
"The sound of guns.    We're going to inspect the safe-conduct exit route."    The ambassador's   
slow British speech was almost perfect.    His small pink hand, resting on the open window, was   
manicured to a gleam, siege or no siege.    "We may come rather close to the front." 
 
"I've heard guns." 
 
The ambassador smiled at Byron. "Well, shall we have your friend along?" He moved to   
make room for her besid, him as he spoke. Slote said nothing, but gnawed his pipe in an   
annoyed way. 
 
The car started off on a rough, zigzag ride toward the river. 
 
Warsa'A, had been crumpling in the past four days. A strong wind was blowing away the   
smoke, and beautiful morning sunshine gave a mocking peaceful look to the streets. But   
 165 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
smashed buildings met the eye everywhere.    Thousands of windows had been blown out and   
patched with bright yellow plywood.      Warsaw was becoming a place of smoke, broken   
masonry, and yellow patches.    The sidew and gutters were broken and cratered, and spiky tank   
traps and barricades cluttered main intersections.      Glowering nervous soldiers at these   
intersections stopped the car with raised machine guns, their fingers at the triggers. Few other   
people were in sight.    Far off, cannon drummed and thumped. Each time that a soldier lowered   
his gun and waved them on, Slote laughed boisterously. 
 
"What I find so incredible," he said, as they came to a long stone bridge over the Vistula,   
crowded with carts, trucks, and bicycles, "is that this thing is still standing at all.    Haven)t the   
Germans been bombarding it for two weeks?" 
 
"Well You see, they are just not quite as devastating as they would have us believe," the   
Swedish ambassador said.    "Nor as accurate." 
 
The car drove out on the bridge, over the broad brown river serenely flowing between Warsaw   
and its eastern suburb, Praha, a place of low house' and green woods. Behind them in the   
sunshine, under a soft smoky blue sky, Warsaw at this distance looked surprisingly unharmed:   
a broad 'netrOPolis    with wide avenues, baroque church domes, tall factory chimneys,    and   
many climbing columns of black smoke.    It might almost have, lo C been a manufacturing city   
on a busy day in peacetime, except r the Yellow fires billowing up here and there, the flashes   
like summer lightning all around the horizon"and the distant whumping of the artillery.   
Several busloads of singing and joking soldiers went past the car.    Some waved at Natalie and   
shouted.    Many soldiers were heading the same way on bicycles. 
 
"Where are they all going?"    Natalie said. 
 
'Why, to the front," said the ambassador.    ,it's quite a war. 
 
They leave their guns and go home for lunch or dinner, or perhaps to sleep with their wives,   
and then they take a bus to the front again and shoot at the Germans.    Madrid was rather like   
this when I was there during the civil war." 
 
'How far do we go?"    Slote said.    Here over the river the gun booms from Praha were louder. 
 
The ambassador pursed his lips.    "I'm not sure.    We have to look for a schoolhouse with a stone   
goose in the front yard, a hundred yards or so past a wayside shrine." 
 
On the other side of the river, they found a scene of ruin. 
 
Broken houses, burned tree minks, and fallen trees lined the narrow tarred road, which was so   
torn up by shellfire that the car had to detour time and again on dirt tracks.    A camouflaged   
heavy Polish gun in the woods suddenly went off as the limousine bumped along one of these   
paths.    The driver swerved and brushed a tree, the passengers leaped in their seats.    "My God!"   
Slote said. The car steadied up and drove on through the wooded flat land of Praha.    They   
passed a house with its roof ablaze, and the family outside dolefully watching.      Loud   
explosions went off around them, two or three a minute.    Sometimes they saw flames from gun   
 166 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
mouths in the woods, though the guns themselves were invisible. Sometimes through the trees   
they could observe Polish gun crews feverishly moving about.    It was all novel and exciting, at   
least to Byron, and they seemed to be enjoying this wartime sightseeing in perfect safety,   
despite the unpleasant bumping along grass and dirt to avoid the shell holes. But then a   
German shell burst near the car, throwing up a geyser of dirt which rattled and tinkled on the   
limousine roof. 
 
owilp Slote said, "Christ Almighty!    Were at the front right and "Yes, the schoolhouse must be   
right past that next curve," the ambassador said. But past the curve they saw only four log   
houses around a dirt courtyard, where several pigs trotted here and there, bewildered by the   
gun noise.    Beyond, the straight tar road continued into leafy woods and smoke, and visibility   
ceased. 
 
Slote said, 'Please stop the car. 
 
The ambassador glanced over his shoulder at him, rubbed his nose with a pink hand, and spoke   
to the driver.    The car pulled to the side of the road. 
 
"I didn't in the least understand from you," Slote said, gesturing with the pipe clutched in a fist,   
"that we were going into the actual zone of fire. 
 
Are you sure that we haven't missed a Turn, and that we aren't behind the German lines right   
now?"    The ambassador pushed out his lips.    "I don't believe we've come more than three miles   
from the bridge." 
 
Slote burst out laughing, and jerked the pipe at Natalie and Byron. 
 
These young people are my responsibility.    I can't expose them in this way. 
 
Two loads Of soldiers    came    along in lumbering    old street    buses    with route numbers    still   
displayed in front and faded movie advertisements on their sides.    The Idlers were singing, and   
some waved out of the window at the halted limousine, or gave good-humored yells in Polish. 
 
"Clearly we're not yet behind the German lines," said the ambassador. 
 
"Nevertheless we'll have to take these civilians back to Warsaw," Slote said.    "I'm sorry, you   
and I misunderstood each other." 
 
Natalie exclaimed, "But why?    There's no reason on earth to take us back. I'm perfectly all   
right." 
 
"I'm afraid there isn't time."    The ambassador deliberately scratched his eyebrow-The cease-fire   
will probably come within the hour.    As soon as we get back, I'll have to start assembling my   
party." 
 
"So will I. But it's up to the Poles and the Germans, after all, to ensure that the neutrals cross   
the lines safely." 
 
The ambassador glanced at his watch. 
 167 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Colonel Rakowski asked that we come out and view the route ahead of time.    I really do think   
we'd better go on."    Two heavy guns went off in the woods-RRUMPH!    RRUMPH! 
 
-one to the left, one to the right.    The chauffeur whirred the ignition. 
 
"Just a moment!    The driver turned around and looked at Slote, who had gone dead pale, his   
mouth working.    "Ambassador, I must insist that you at least take us back to the bridge first.   
Perhaps there we can hitch a ride on a truck or bus." 
 
"But my dear sir, You should see the route, too. Our parties may get separated later in the   
woods." 
 
A Peculiar    feeling    knotted    Byron's stomach.    The ambassador's faultless    manners did    not   
obscure what was happening, and Slote represented the United States.    He said, "Leslie, I think   
you're dead right about Natalie. 
 
Why not take her into one of those log houses and wait I can go on with the ambassador and   
get the information if u like. 
 
The ambassador at once said cheerfully, "Excellent idea! We can go and return in ten or   
fifteen minutes, I'm sure." 
 
Slote opened the car door and got out.    "Come on, Natalie.    We'll wait in the one with the green   
blinds, Ambassador.    I saw a woman at the windows." 
 
Natalie    stayed    in her seat, looking from Slote to the ambassador, her mouth pulled down   
unpleasantly.    The ambassador said to her in a stiff European tone, "My dear, please do as you   
are told." 
 
jumping out, she slammed the door and ran toward the house.    Slote hurried after her, sho uting.   
The limousine shot forward in a rattle of pebbles.    The bare ahead thinned as they drove into it.   
About half a mile further along they came upon the shrine, a luridly colored wooden Jesus on a   
gilt cross in a sheltering frame; and not far beyond that was the schoolhouse.    Several soldiers,   
smoking and talking, lounged in front of it around a stone goose bordered with red flowers.   
Byron thought that if Leslie Slote could have held on only three or four more minutes, he   
would have been all right.    That one bad moment in the limousine, when the dirt hit the roof,   
had been unlucky for him. 
 
Colonel Rakowski hailed the Swedish ambassador with a shout and a hug. He seemed    in   
unrealistically good spirits, Byron thought, and indeed all the staff officers looked too chipper,   
considering the bad news that shrieked from the military map of the front on the wall: a crude   
thick red crayon circle, completely ringing Warsaw.    On the other walls of the sc hoolhouse,   
bright kindergarten pictures hung.      Rakowski, an enormous man with pointed blond   
moustaches, and a big nose empurpled by good living, led the visitors out a back door, and   
along a leaf-carpeted path to a concrete gun emplacement, where grimy, whiskered men   
stripped to the waist were piling shells. Motioning the visitors to come on up the colonel   
climbed the shallow cement slope and mounted the sandbags. Byron followed the ambassador.   
 168 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
A forested plain lay before them, dipping toward the east, with a scattering of houses and   
farms, and three widely separated church spires. Puffs of smoke out there, Byron realized,   
came from German artillery. 
 
Panting from the little climb, the ambassador and the officer talked volubly, gesturing at the   
church spires.    The ambassador scrawled notes and translated bits to Byron.    On the terms of   
the cease-fire, he said, the neutral refugees would cross unescorted from the Polish to the   
German lines, heading for the farthest church, where Wehrmacht trucks would meet them.   
Colonel Rakowski feared that some refugees might wander on the poorly marked dirt roads,   
head for the wrong church, and find themselves between two fires when the truce-for which the   
Germans were granting only two hours-was ended.    So he had asked the Swedish ambassador   
to come out and study the route beforehand. 
 
"He says," the ambassador observed to Byron, closing his notebook, "that the best view is from   
that observation tower.    You can make out the different roads, all the way to the Kantorovicz   
church." 
 
Byron looked at the spindly wooden tower erected close by in the school's play yard.    A narrow   
ladder led to a square metal-shielded platform, where he could see the helmet of a soldier.   
"Well, I'll go up, okay? 
 
Maybe I can make a sketch." 
 
"The colonel says the tower has been drawing quite a bit of fire." 
 
Byron managed a grin. 
 
With a paternal smile, the ambassador handed him the notebook and pen. Byron trotted to the   
ladder and went up, shaking the frail tower as he climbed. Here was a perfect view of the   
terrain.    He could see all the roads, and all the turnoffs of the brown zigzags across no-man's- 
land, to the far church.    The soldier on watch glanced away from his binoculars to gawk, as the   
young American in an open shirt and loose gray sweater sketched the roads in the ambassador's   
notebook, struggling With the pages as they flapped in the wind, marking all the wrong turns   
with X's, and crudely picturing the three churches in relation to the route.    The soldier nodded   
when Byron showed him the sketch, and slapped his shoulder. 
 
"Ho kay," he said, with a grin of pride at his mastery of Americanese. 
 
Natalie leaned in the open doorway of the cottage, arms folded, as the limousine drew up.    She   
hurried to the car, followed in a moment by Slote, who first said good-bye at the door to a   
kerchiefed old woman in heavy boots.    As the car drove back toward Warsaw, the ambassador   
recounted their visit to the front, including Byron's venture up the tower. 
 
Meantime Byron worked on the notebook in his lap. 
 
"Think four copies is enough?"    he said to the ambassador. 
 
"Plenty, I should think.    Thank you."    The ambassador took the notebook. "We may have time   
 169 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
to run off some mimeograph copies.    Very well done." 
 
Natalie clasped Byron's hand and pulled it to her lap.    She was sitting between him and Slote.   
She pressed his fingers, looking seriously at him, her dark eyes half-dosed.    Through her light   
green dress, he felt the flesh of her thigh on the back of his hand, and the ridge of a garter.   
Slote repeatedly glanced at the two hands clasped in the girl's lap as he calmly smoked, looked   
out of the window, and chatted with the ambassador about assembling and transporting the   
refugees.    A muscle in Slote's jaw kept Inoving under the sidn of his white face. 
 
In the embassy all was scurry and noise.    The mayor's office had just sent word that the cease- 
fire was definite now for one o'clock. 
 
Polish army trucks would take the Americans to the departure point, and each person could   
bring one suitcase. The rush was on. The Americans still living outside the embassy were   
being summoned by telephone.    A smell of burning paper filled the building, and fragments of   
black ash floated in the corridors. 
 
Mark Hartley occupied the cot next to Byron's in the cellar, and Byron found him sitting   
hunched beside a strapped-up suitcase, head in hands, a dead cigar protruding from his fingers.   
"Ready to go, Mark?" 
 
Hartley uncovered a drawn face, the eyes frightened and bulging. 
 
"Horowitz is the name, Byron. Marvin Horowitz." "Nonsense, how wig they know that?"   
Byron pulled from under the cot his old torn bag with the sprung hardware. 
 
Hartley shook his head.    "I don't know what's wrong with me.    I must be crazy.    I never once   
pictured    that    anything    like    this    would    happen. I don't know    what    I thought.    Maybe   
that   
Roosevelt would fly us out in Army planes.      Something like that.      I've never been so   
goddamned scared in my life.    We're going to the Germans.    The Germans." 
 
'Put that in your bag," Byron said, tossing a worn black book to him as he packed.    'And cheer   
up.    You're an American.    That's all.    An American named Hartley."    'With a Horowitz face and   
a Horowitz nose. 
 
What's this?    The New Testament?    What's this for?" 
 
Byron took the book, which had a gold cross stamped on the binding, and carefully tore out the   
flyleaf with his own name written on it. "Make a good Christian of you.    Here, put it away.   
Don't sit around and worry. 
 
GO help Rowlandson burn papers." 
 
'I wish I had my own Bible or prayer book," Hartley said dully, unstrapping his bag.    "I haven't   
been inside a synagogue since my bar mitzvah. An old smelly Hebrew teacher made me   
memorize a lot of gibberish. 
 
I did it to please my mother, but that was the end.    I never went back once. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Now I wish I remembered the prayers.    Any prayers."    He glanced around at the bustling cellar.   
'So help me, this hole looks to me now like home sweet home.    I'd give anything if I could just   
stay here.    Do you think we'll ever play bridge again one day, the four of us?    In New York,   
maybe?" 
 
"Sooner than you think." 'From your mouth in God's cars. That's what my mother used to   
say." 
 
The army trucks came snorting and rattling up to the embassy at half past eleven; loose wobbly   
old machines so caked with mud and rust that their gray paint was scarcely discernable.    At   
their arrival, more than a hundred Americans milling inside the fence on the lawn, set up a   
cheer and began singing "California Here I Come" and such ditties. The Poles of the staff,   
mostly girl secretaries, were sadly passing out coffee and cake. 
 
"They make me feel ashamed," Natalie said to Byron.    Two of the Polish girls bearing trays   
had just gone by with fixed forced smiles and glistening eyes. 
 
"What's the alternative?"    Byron, famished, bit into the coarse gray cake and made a face.    It   
tasted of raw dough and paper ashes. 
 
"There's no alternative." 
 
Byron said, "Mark Hartley is scared stiff of the Germans.    How about you?" 
 
Natalie's eyes flashed.    "What can they do to me?    I have an American passport.    They don't   
know I'm a Jew." 
 
"Well, don't tell them.    I mean don't become all brave or defiant or anything, okay?    The idea is   
just to get the hell out." 
 
"I'm not an imbecile, Byron." 
 
A Polish officer shouted, the gate opened, and the Americans began piling into the trucks.   
Some people were too old to climb up, some were trying to take extra luggage, the Polish   
drivers and officers were urgent and short-tempered, and nobody was in charge. Yelling,   
complaining, weeping, and fist-waving went on, but most of the people, hungry and   
uncomfortable though they were, felt so happy at starting out that they continued to sing and   
laugh. The trucks clanked off in single file. A black Chevrolet with American flags on its   
fenders brought up the rear, carrying Slote, his three highest-ranking assistants, and the wives   
of two of them. 
 
Outside the gate the Polish secretaries stood and waved, tears running down their faces.    Byron   
and Natalie jolted along in a truck, clasping each other's waists.    Slote had offered her a place   
in the Chevrolet. She had shaken her head without a word. 
 
The bombardment was going on as heavily as ever: the distant HRUMP! HRUMP!    HRUMP!   
of the artillery, the blasting explosions of bombs from three small Vs of German planes passing   
slowly in the hazy midday sky, and the popping and stuttering of the Polish antiaircraft guns. 
 171 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The convoy crawled, stopped, and crawled through the shattered streets, the canyons of   
yellow-patched structures, careening up on    sidewalks to avoid holes and    tank traps, once   
backing out of a boulevard blocked by a newly fallen building. 
 
At the bridge across the Vistula truck convoys flying various embassy flags were converging.   
The bridge was jammed to a standsde with refugee trucks.    There were more than two thousand   
neutral nationals in Warsaw, and every one of them evidently meant to get out. 
 
Byron kept glancing at his watch. The traffic started to move again, but so slowly that he   
feared they might not reach the departure point by one o'clock.    German shells kept whistling   
by, and splashes like geysers boiled up in the river, The Germans clearly sometimes showering   
the bridge and the trucks. 
 
thought it all in the game if they Uled nine-tenths of the neutrals on the bridge, fifteen minutes   
before the cease-fire. 
 
The convoys ended in a stupendous pileup at the schoolhouse with the stone goose.    Colonel   
Rakowski and the Swedish ambassador stood together in the road, shouting instructions to each   
truckload of descending passengers and handing out rrameographed instruction sheets. 
 
With some pride of authorship, Byron noticed that whoever had traced his sketch on the stencil   
had faithfully copied it, even to his crude pictures of the three churches. 
 
Guns in the woods all around the school were thundering away, but at five minutes to one the   
bombardment began to fade down.    At one o'clock the guns fell silent.    The loudest noise was   
the chattering of refugees in many languages along both sides of the road.    Byron could hear   
birds, too, and the strumming of grasshoppers.    It struck him that the noise of grasshoppers was   
the most peaceful sound on earth. A loudspeaker bawled final instructions in one language   
after another. 
 
Groups of neutrals, picking up their suitcases, began to walk down the sloping road. 
 
Finally came the English in a heavy Polish accent, "Please keep together. 
 
Do not make wrong turns.    The German command has stated it will accept no responsibility for   
anybody who is not at the Kantorovicz church by three o'clock.    Therefore the Polish command   
can accept no such responsibility.    It is an easy hour's walk even for an old person. 
 
The enemy will undoubtedly recommence hostilities at three. We will return the heaviest   
possible fire at the first shot. Please, therefore, hurry.    Good luck to you all. Long live   
America.    Long live Poland." At this, the Americans took up their luggage and walked into no   
man's-land. 
 
For two or three hundred yards it was no different than the rest of Praha, but then the asphalt   
road narrowed and trailed off into a dusty, rutted, one-lane cart track. They passed ruined   
houses.    The barnyards had no animals, except for an occasional abandoned chicken wandering   
and clucking, and some slinking jumpy cats.    The road entered woods where sunlight slanted   
 172 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
down in green-yellow bars through the leaves. The leader of the Americans, a tall gray   
Episcopalian minister in a black suit and turnaround collar, checked Byron's sketch at each   
crossroad. This strange slow walk between two silent enemy armies took a full hour by Byron   
Henry's watch.    As he remembered it later, it was like a stroll in company in peacetime through   
a fragrant autumnal forest.    Many fall flowers, blue and orange and white, dotted the dirt road   
and the woods; the birds chirped and twittered; and the wonderful song of the grassIL hoppers   
filled the air.    He also remembered becoming very dry-mouthed and thirsty from tension, so   
thirsty that his legs felt weak.    Two other memories stayed with him: the diplomats' black cars   
going by, honking the walkers out of the road, with Slote laughing in the front seat and waving   
at him and Natalie; and then, near the end of the trek, at the bend of the road where the   
Kantorovicz church appeared, Mark Hartley coming up beside him, slipping his hand through   
his elbow, and saying, "My name is Mark Hartley, and oy, am I a good Christian!"-smiling at   
Byron, his face dust-caked and terror-stricken. 
 
All at once, there were the German    guns and the German    gun crews in the woods. The   
howitzers were bigger than the Polish artillery pieces, with an appearance of better, newer   
engineering.    Watching the walkers, the soldiers stood quietly at their weapons, in their neat   
field gray and formidable Wehrmacht helmets. Byron peered at the German soldiers with   
immense curiosity. The helmets gave them a beetling warrior look, but most of them were   
young and had the same German faces he had seen in Munich and Frankfurt. Many wore   
glasses. 
 
It was hard to believe that these were the villains who had been pouring flying steel and fire on   
Warsaw, setting pregnant women aflame, blowing children's legs and hands off, and making a   
general shambles of a handsome metropolis.    They were just young men in soldier suits and   
stern    helmets,    standing around    in the shady woods    amid    the pleasant    noises    of birds    and   
grasshoppers. 
 
From the first, the Germans handled the refugees better than the Poles had. A mule-drawn   
water cart-a large olive-painted cylinder on wheels-stood by the road near the church, and   
soldiers waited with tin cups to herd the thirsty people into a queue.    From the water tank, other   
soldiers guided them toward new clean gray trucks, with thick black deeply treaded tires, so   
different from the Poles' dirty deteriorated machines. 
 
Wehrmacht officers in tailored long military coats and high peaked caps were talking amiably,   
though with marked condescension, to the arriving diplomats near a table by the roadside.    As   
each national group came to the trucks, its ambassador or charge gave a typed roster to a   
bespectacled soldier behind the desk.    He called off names, and one by one the people entered   
the vehicles, which unlike the Polish trucks had wooden seats. 
 
The Poles had not troubled with rosters. There was no bunching up, no disorder. Soldiers   
stood by with little stools to help up the elderly and to hand the few children to their mothers   
with a laugh and a playful little swing.    At a field ambulance marked with a red cross medical   
orderlies    gave restoratives. Two soldiers    with movie and still cameras    roamed the scene,   
recording all this good treatment of the neutrals. The loading was not quite over when the guns   
 173 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
near the church all at once shot off a salvo that made the ground shake.    Byron's watch read a   
minute past three o'clock. 
 
'Poor Warsaw," Natalie said. 
 
'Don't talk," Mark Hartley said in a low hoarse voice.    "Don't say a,Nothing till we're out of   
this."    They sat with Byron on the last bench of a truck, from which they could look out.  
 
Natalie said, 'Look at Slote, will you?    Taking a cigarette from a German, for crying out loud,   
and laughing It's just unbelievable.      All these German officers with their long coats and   
pushed-up caps.    There they are, just like their pictures."    "Are you afraid?"    Byron said. 
 
"Not any more, now that it's actually happening.    I don't know why. 
 
It's sort of dreamlike." 
 
'Some dream," Hartley said.    "It should only be a dream.    Jesus Christ. 
 
That officer with Slote is coming here."    Hartley gripped a hand on Byron's knee. 
 
The officer, a blond young man with a good-natured smile, came straight to Byron, speaking   
with a pleasant accent, slowly and precisely. 
 
"Your charge tells me that your father is American naval attache in Berlin."    'Yes, sir, he is." 
 
'I am a Berliner. My father is in the foreign ministry." The officer fingered the binoculars   
around his neck. His manner    seemed not very military and rather self-conscious. Byron   
thought he might be feeling compunction of a sort, and he liked the German better for that. 
 
"i believe I had the pleasure of meeting your parents in August at the Belgian embassy, and of   
dancing with your mother.      What on earth have you been doing in Warschau?"      'I was   
sightseeing." 
 
"Well, you saw some unusual sights." 
 
"That I did." 
 
The officer laughed, and offered his hand to Byron.    "Ernst Bayer," he said, putting his heels   
together. 
 
"Byron Henry.    Hi." 
 
'Ah, yes.    Henry.    I remember the name.    Well, you are comfortable? 
 
Can I offer you a ride in a staff car?"    'I'm fine.    Where are we going?" 
 
'Klovno.    It's the nearest working railroad junction, and there you will all transfer to a special   
train for Kenigsberg.      It's more than a threehour trip.      You might enjoy it more in an   
automobile." 
 174 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Well, I've been travelling with these folks, you know. I'll stay with them. Thanks a lot."   
Byron spoke cordially, though this polite chitchat with a German felt exceedingly strange after   
all his anger at them. 
 
Slote said to Natalie, "We can still make room for you in the Chevy. 
 
That wooden slat's going to get kind of hard." 
 
She shook her head, looking darkly at the German. 
 
"Give my best to your mother," said the officer, with a casual glance at the girl and back at   
Byron.    "She was really charming to me." 
 
"I sure will." 
 
Several guns fired in succession nearby, drowning out something the officer said.      He   
grimaced, and smiled.    "How are things in Warschau now?    Very distressing?" 
 
"Well, they seem to be hanging on pretty well." 
 
Half-addressing Natalie as well as Byron, Bayer said, "A bad business! The Polish government   
was completely irresponsible, running off into Rumania and leaving the country without   
leadership.    Warschau should have been declared an open city two weeks ago.    This destruction   
is pointless.    It will cost a lot to repair.    The mayor is very brave, and there is a lot of aration   
here for Iiim, hue,-he shrugged-"what is there to do but finish it off?    This will be over in a day   
or two." 
 
"It may take longer than that," Byron said. 
 
"You think so?"    Bayer's pleasant smile faded.    He bowed slightly and walked off, toying with   
the glasses.    Slote shook his head at Byron and followed the officer. 
 
"Why the hell did you get him mad?"    Hartley whispered. 
 
"Oh, Christ!    Blaming the Polish government for the siege!" 
 
"He meant it," Natalie said, in a wondering tone.    "The man was absolutely sincere." 
 
With some shouting in German, snorting of motors, honking of horns, waving by the soldiers,   
the convoy departed from Kantorovicz, a haet of half a dozen wooden houses around the   
church, intact but abandoned. Since leaving the schoolhouse, the refugees had not seen a living   
Pole, nor a dead one.    The trucks wound along one-lane dirt roads, passing burned-out barns,   
blown-apart houses, overturned windmills, broken churches, schoolhouses without windows or   
roofs, and much tornup, shell-plowed ground and charred tree stumps.    Still the scene was not   
at all like battlegrounds in movies and books of the last war: gray wastes of barren dead muck,   
tangles of barbed wire, dark zigzagging trenches. These fields and woods were green.    Crops   
were still standing. 
 
Only the inhabitants were eerily absent.    It was almost as though H G. 
 175 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wells's invaders from Mars had passed through in their perambulating metal tripods, atomizing   
or eating the people and leaving only slight trails of their transit.    The first Poles who came in   
sight, far behind the German lines, were an old man and his wife working in a field in late   
sunshine; they leaned on their implements and solemnly watched the trucks go by. 
 
As the trucks travelled farther from Warsaw, more peasants began to appear, going about their   
fieldwork or repairing damaged houses, either ignoring the trucks or watching their passage   
with blank faces. 
 
Nearly all were old people or children.    In this back country, Byron saw no young men, and   
only two or three kerchiefed, skirted figures that from their slimness and supple movements   
might have been girls. 
 
Yet more striking, he saw not one horse. The horse, and the vehicles it pulled, were the   
trademark, the very life, of rural Poland. 
 
On the way from Cracow to Warsaw, there had been thousands of horses, clogging the roads,   
working in the fields, carrying soldiers, dragging heavy loads in the cities.    Behind the German   
lines this animal seemed extinct. 
 
The ride was too bumpy for conversation, and the refugees were still tired, and perhaps   
frightened by the deepening awareness of being in the hands of the Germans.    Hardly a word   
was spoken in the first hour or so. They came out on a tarred road, narrow and primitive   
enough, but by comparison with the cart tracks of the back country, a glassy highway. 
 
The convoy stopped at a knoll of smooth green lawns and flower gardens topped by a brick- 
walled convent, and the word passed for women passengers to dismount and "refresh   
themselves."    The ladies happily went off, the men scattered among the trees or urinated by the   
roadside, and when the convoy rolled again everybody was much more cheerful. 
 
Talk sprang up.    Natalie brought back gossip from the ladies' room. 
 
All the neutrals, she said, would be offered a choice of flying to Stockholm, or else of taking   
German trains to Berlin, and thence going out via Belgium, Holland, or Switzerland. 
 
"You know," the girl said, with a mild glint in her eye, "I'd sort of like to see Berlin myself." 
 
"Are you crazy?"    said Hartley.    "Are you absolutely crazy?    You must be kidding.    You go to   
Stockholm, baby, and you just pray they let you go to Stockholm.    This girl has a screw loose,"   
Hartley said to Byron. 
 
Byron said, "Berel's message to A.J. goes for you, too. Lekh lekha." "Lekh lekha." She   
smiled.    Byron had told her about this. 
 
"Get out, eh?    Well, maybe." 
 
"In the name of God," Hartley muttered, "stop with the Hebrew." 
 
The ride stretched out to four and five hours of grinding through farmland and forests. All   
 176 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
traces of war faded from the landscape. 
 
Houses, churches, whole towns were untouched.    The inhabitants looked and acted as they had   
in the peacetime countryside.    There were few young people, no horses, and very little cattle   
and poultry.    In the towns a red swastika flag flew over the main square, either on a flagpole or   
from the town hall, and German soldiers stood sentry or patrolled on foot or on motorcycles. 
 
But the conquered land was at peace.    The absence of livestock and young folks gave it a dead   
look, the peasants seemed somewhat more dour and sullen, perhaps, but life was going on   
exactly as before, except that the Germans were in charge. 
 
The sun sank behind the distant Hat horizon in a brief glow of pale orange.    The trucks rolled   
on into the night.    The passengers quieted. Natalie Jastrow put her head on Byron's shoulder   
and took his hand in hers. 
 
They both dozed. 
 
Commands shouted in German woke them. Lights blazed. They were in a square before a   
wide railroad station, and people were streaming down out of the lined-up trucks.    The lower   
half-door of their truck was still closed, but two helmeted Germans came along and opened it   
with a clank.    'Bitte rausi Alle im Wartesaall" Their manner was brisk, not hostile, and they   
stood by to help down the women and old men.    It was a cool moonlit night and Byron was   
glad to see darkness and stars overhead once more, instead of a smoke pall and a fiery glow. 
 
The refugees    gathered in a confused mass    in the waiting room, still blinking at the light.   
Double doors opened at one end of the room, and soldiers shouting in German shepherded   
them through, bearing along Byron and Natalie. Byron carried their suitcases and Hartley   
clung like a child to His elbow.    They entered a dining hall full of long plank tables on trestles,   
laden with food. 
 
It was the most dazzling banquet that Byron had seen in his life-or so it seemed in the first   
thunderstruck seconds, famished as he was after the long ride and the three weeks of wretched   
food in besieged Warsaw. 
 
There were platters of smoking sausages and sauerkraut, there were many whole pink hams,   
there were mounds of boiled potatoes, piles of fried chicken, stacked loaves of fresh bread,   
pitchers of beer, immense whole yellow and orange cheeses.    But it seemed a mockery, a cruel   
Nazi trick, a Barmecide feast, because the soldiers herded the neutrals along the walls away   
from the tables. There they stood, hundreds of them, staring at the distant food, and in the   
space between stood a few alert German soldiers with lowered tommy guns. 
 
A voice spoke over a loudspeaker in clear conversational German: "Welcome/ The German   
people are your hosts.      We welcome the citizens Of the neutral countries in peace and   
friendship.    The German people seek peace with all nations.    Relations with Poland have now   
been normalized. The treacherous Smidgly-Rydz regime, having met its just punishment, Im   
ceased to exist.    A new Poland will rise from its ashes, cleaned up and abiding, wire everybody   
will work hard, and irresponsible politicians no longer provoke disastrous foreign adventures. 
 177 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Fuhrer can now seriously pursue a peaceful settlement of all outstanding questions with   
Great Britain and France and aafterward Europe u,-ill enter on a new order of unparallelled   
mutual prosperity. 
 
Nowwe ask you to sit down and eat. H appetite!" A dozen smiling blonde girls in white   
waitress uniforms made their entrance, almost like a theatre chorus, carrying jugs of coffee and   
stacks of plates. 
 
The soldiers smiled and walked out of the space in front of the tables, making inviting   
hospitable motions with their lowered guns. There was an awkward, shocked moment.    First   
one and then another refugee hesitantly stepped out of ranks to cross the space.      Others   
followed them, a few sat on the low benches reaching for food, and a noisy break and rush   
began. 
 
Like the rest, Byron,    Natalie, and Hartley dived for places and gorged themselves    on the   
richest, sweetest, most satisfying meal of their lives.    Almost the best of it was the coffee-ersatz   
though it was-hot, all they wanted, poured again and again by willing cheery buxom girls. Over   
the loudspeaker, while they stuffed, came a cascade of brass band musicStrauss waltzes,   
marches, and jolly drinking songs. 
 
Many of the neutrals began singing, and even the watching soldiers joined in. 
 
Du, du, liegst mir im Herren, Du, du, liegst 1wr im SinnByron himself, relaxed by the beer and   
carried away by the ecstasy of a full belly, the lift of the music, and the outburst of relieved   
high spirits all around him, swung his stein and sang: Du, du, mackst mir viel Schmerzen,   
Weisst night u7ie gut which dir bin ja, ia, ja, jal Weisst night uie gut which dir bin, and Mark   
Hartley sang right along too, though his eyes    never ceased rolling at the German soldiers.   
Natalie, silent, regarded them both with a satirical motherly look. Returning to the waiting   
room, stuffed and dizzy after this incredible, this visionary &wt, they saw crudely lettered   
placards around the brown 
 
E. They went and 
 
tile walls: BELT-MN, BULGAr-tMN, KANADA, NMD stood under the vEREiNIGTE   
STAATEN Sign. Laughing, chattering, the refugees sorted themselves out, gay as though   
returning from a picnic.    Men in black uniforms entered the waiting room.    Conversation died   
among the Americans and the cheery noise faded throughout the station. 
 
Slote said soberly, "Listen, please, everybody.    Those are the SS. 
 
I'll do any talking to them that has to be done." 
 
The men in black fanned out, one to each group of neutrals. The one who headed for the   
Americans    did not appear sinister.    Except    for the operatic    black    costume,    with its    silver   
double-lightning-flash insignia, he looked like an American himself, perhaps a young   
insurance salesman one might    sit next to on a train or plane. He carried a black leather   
portfolio.    Slote walked out to meet him.    'I'm Leslie Slote, first secretary of the United States   
 178 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
embassy and acting charge d'affaires." 
 
The SS man bowed, heels together, both hands on the case.    "You have a gentleman named   
Byron Henry in your party?"    His English was smooth. 
 
"This is Byron Henry," Slote said. 
 
Byron took a step forward. 
 
"Your father represents the American Navy in Berlin?" 
 
Byron nodded. 
 
"This message is forwarded to you via the foreign ministry." 
 
Byron put the yellow' envelope in his breast pocket.    "You may read it now, of cours'.  
 
"Thanks.    I'll look at it later." 
 
The SS man turned to Slote.    "I am to collect the American passports." 
 
His tone was brisk and cool, his blue eyes distant, almost unfocussed on the Foreign Service   
man.    "Let me have them, please." 
 
Slote was very pale.    'I'm reluctant to surrender them, for obvious reasons." 
 
"I assure you it is quite routine.    They are to be processed on the train. 
 
They will be returned to you before you arrive in Kenigsberg." 
 
"Very well." At a motion from Slote, an assistant gave him a thick red portfolio, which he   
handed to the man in black. 
 
"Thank you.    Now your roster, please."    The assistant held out three clipped sheets.    The SS   
man glanced through them, and then looked around.    "No Negroes in your party, I see. 
 
How many Jews?" 
 
Slote took a moment to reply.    "I'm sorry, but in our passports we make no record of religious   
affiliation." 
 
"But you do    have    Jews."    The man    spoke    off    handedly,    as    though    discussing    doctors 
or   
carpenters. 
 
"Even if there were Jews in the party, I would have to decline to answer.    The policy of my   
country on religious groups is one of absolute equality of treatment." 
 
"But nobody is suggesting that there will be inequality of treatment. 
 
Who are these Jews, please?"    Slote looked silently at him, touching his tongue to his lips.    The   
SS officer said, "You have mentioned your government's policy. We will respect it. The   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
policy of my government is simply to maintain separate records where Jews are concerned.   
Nothing else is involved." 
 
Byron, a couple of paces forward from the group, wanted to see how Natalie and Hartley were   
behaving, but he knew it would be disastrous to glance at them. 
 
Slote did look around at the whole party in a glance of caution, appeal, and great nervousness.   
But he produced a calm professional tone when he spoke. "I'm sorry. I just don't know if   
anybody here is Jewish. 
 
I'm not personally interested, I haven't asked, and I don't have the information." 
 
"My instructions are to separate out the Jews," said the officer, "and I must now do that."    He   
turned to the Americans and said, "Form a double line, alphabetically, please."      Nobody   
moved; they all looked to Slote. The SS man turned to him.    "Your party is in the custody of   
the Wehrmacht, in a combat zone under strict martial law.    I call this to your attention." 
 
Slote glanced out toward the waiting room, his face harried. In front of several parties-the   
Swiss, the Rumanian, the Hungarian, the Dutch -a few miserable Jews already stood separated,   
heads bowed, with their suitcases. "Look here, for your purposes you can assume we're all   
Jews." 
 
His voice was starting to shake.    "What next?" 
 
Byron heard a shrill woman's voice behind him.    "Now just a minute. 
 
What on earth do you mean by that, Mr. Slote? I'm certainly not a Jew and I won't be   
classified or treated as one." 
 
Slote turned and said angrily, "I mean that we all must be treated alike, Mrs.    Young, that's all.   
Please cooperate as I asked-" 
 
"Nobody's putting me down for a Jew," said a man's voice from a dill erent direction.    "I'm just   
not buying that either, Leslie.    Sorry." 
 
Byron recognized both voices.    He turned around as the SS officer addressed the woman: "Yes,   
madam.    Who are you, please?" 
 
"Clara Young of Chicago, Minois, and I'm not Jewish, you can be dam sure of that."    She was a   
dried-out little woman of sixty or so, a bookkeeper in the American movie distributor's office   
in Warsaw.    She giggled, glancing here and there. 
 
"Would you be kind enough to point out the Jews in your party, madam?" 
 
"Oh, no, thank you, mister.    that's your business, not mine." 
 
Byron expected that.    He was more worried by the man, a retired Army officer named Tom   
Stanley, who had been selling heavy machinery to the Polish government- Stanley was given to   
saying that Hitler was a great man and that the Jews had brought all their trouble on   
 180 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
themselves. 
 
The SS man asked for Stanley's name aind then said to him in a cordial man-to-man way,   
'"Who are the Jews here, please?    Your party can't leave until I know.    You seem to understand   
this matter better than your charge." 
 
Stanley, an old turkey-cock of a man with hanging jowls, a wattled throat, and a brush of gray   
hair, grew quite red and cleared his throat several times, thrusting his hands into the pockets of   
his loud green-andbrown sports jacket.    all the Americans were staring at him. 
 
"Well, I'll tell you, friend, I'd like to cooperate, but so far as I know there aren't any. 
 
Not in this party." 
 
The SS officer shrugged, ran his eyes over the group, and stopped at Mark Hartley.    He flicked   
two fingers forward.    "You.    Yes, you, the one with the blue bow tie, step this way."    Again he   
flicked the fingers. 
 
"Stay whvre you are,- Slote said to Hartley; then, to the officer, "I would like to have your   
name and rank. I protest this procedure, and I warn you that this incident will result in a   
written protest from my government    if it continues." The SS officer gestured around the   
waiting room, and said in a reasonable tone, 'The officials of all the other governments are   
cooperating. 
 
You see for yourself.    This is nothing to protest.    This is a simple matter of confomjing to local   
regulations.    X"at is your name, you there?"    'Mark Hartley."    The voice was steady enough,   
steadier than Slote's. 
 
"Mark Hartley, I see."    The SS man smiled a peculiar, chilling smile, his eyes wide and serious.   
It was the smile of the Polish soldier on the road to Warsaw, who had yanked the beard of the   
taxi driver. "Hartley," he repeated.    "And under what name were you born?" 
 
'That name." 
 
"Really!    What were your parents?"    'loth Americans." 
 
"Jews?"    Byron said, "I happen to know him, sir, we've been going to church together all the   
time in Warsaw.    He's a Methodist like me." 
 
The tall silver-haired minister, standing near Clara Young, ran his fingers inside his clerical   
collar.    "I can vouch for that.    I conducted services when Mr.    Hartley was present.    Mark is a   
devout Christian." 
 
The SS officer, with a disagreeable, puzzled grin, said to Slote, "This one is certainly Jewish.    I   
think a little physical examination would-" Slote broke in, "I would report that as personal   
violence.    In America circumcision at birth is routine." 
 
"I'm circumcised," said Byron. 
 181 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"So am I," said the old clergyman. 
 
In the rest of the waiting room the process of sorting out the Jews was over. People were   
glancing at the Americans, pointing and whispering. The SS men were gathered at the   
entrance, all except a stout bald one with gold leaf in his black lapels, who now approached the   
American party, pulled aside the officer, and murmured with him, glancing at Hartley. The   
officer, without a word, pushed through to Hartley, took his suitcase, and undid the straps. 
 
Slote said sharply, 'Hold on, sir.    This is not a customs point, and there's no reason to search   
personal belongings-"- But the officer, down on one knee, already had the bag open and was   
rummaging in it, spilling its contents on the floor.    He came on the New Testament, turned it   
over in his hands with an expression half-astounded, half-sneering, and brought it to his   
superior officer. The bald man examined it, handed it back, and threw his hands in the air.   
"So," he said in German, "in a hundred Americans, maybe not one.    Why not?    Any Jew would   
have been an idiot to come to Warsaw this summer.    Come.    The train is being delayed."    He   
walked off. 
 
The SS man tossed the black book with the gold cross in the open bag, and rudely gestured at   
Hartley to pick up his belongings, stepping over the pile as though it were garbage.    Scanning   
the other faces in the group, he stepped up to Natalie Jastrow and gave her a long amused   
scrutiny. 
 
"Well, what are you looking at?"    she said, and Byron's heart sank. 
 
'You're very pretty." 
 
"Thank you." 
 
"Rather dark.    Your ancestry?"    "I'm Italian." 
 
"What is your name?"    "Mona Lisa." 
 
"I see.    You step forward." 
 
Natalie did not move. 
 
The officer grunted and began turning the pages of the roster. 
 
eL 
 
Slote quickly said, "She's my fiancee.    We'll be married next month." 
 
The bald officer shouted from the entrance and waved at the SS man, who roughly handed the   
roster to Slote.    "Very well.    You love your Jews. Why do you refuse to take in ours?    We have   
swarms."    He turned to Byron.    "You're the son of a naval officer, and yet you lie about a Jew! 
 
That fellow is a Jew." 
 
"He's not, honestly," Byron said.    "I think Mark sort of looks like Dr. 
 182 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Goebbels.    You know short, dark, with a big nose." 
 
"Dr.    Goebbels?    So."    The SS man glared at Hartley and Natalie, broke into a nasty laugh, and   
walked off. 
 
A loudspeaker called out in German, "All Jews to the restaurant. 
 
Everybody else to trark seven and board the train." 
 
The refugees went crowding out to the dark tracks.    The Jews, a forlorn little group, straggled   
back to the dining room, with men in black surrounding them. 
 
Soldiers halted the crowd at the train to allow diplomats aboard first. 
 
Slote muttered to Byron, "I'll take a compartment.    You'll see me at the window.    Bring Natalie   
and Mark, and by all means Reverend Glenville and his wife." 
 
Soon, through billowing steam, Byron could see the charge waving from inside the dimly lit   
train.      Byron came aboard with the four others, in a suffocating crush, and found the   
compartment. 
 
'Thanks," Hartley whispered when they were all seated and Slote had slid shut the door.    "A   
million thanks.    Thanks to all of you.    God bless you. 
 
"Leslie Slote is the man," said the minister.    "You did nobly, Leslie." 
 
'Nobly," said Natalie. 
 
Slote looked at her with a hangdog smile, as though not sure she was serious.    "Well, I was on   
pretty good ground.    They tried to get that information from me at Kantorovicz, you know, and   
couldn't.    They got it from all the others.    That's why the separation went so fast here. But why   
the devil did you make that Mona Lisa joke?" 
 
'It was very risky," the minister said. 
 
'Idiotic," Hartley said.    They were talking in whispers, though the corridor was buzzing with   
loud talk, the stationary train was hissing and clanging, and a public address system outside   
was bellowing in German. 
 
'How about Byron and Dr.    Goebbels?"    Natalie said with a grin. 
 
"That was pretty neat, I thought." 
 
"Neither of you seems to understand," Hartley said, 'that these are murderers. Murderers.   
You're like kids, both of you." 
 
Reverend Glenville said, "I'm not willing to believe that, Mr. 
 
Hartley.    I know the German people.    They have had a cruel, unjust system imposed on them,   
and one day they'll throw it off.    At bottom they are good." 
 183 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Well, Stockholm ahoy," Natalie said.    "I admit one thing.    I've lost all curiosity about berlin." 
 
"You've got to get your part back first," Hartley said.    His jolly face was carved in a hundred   
lines and creases of tragic bitterness. 
 
He looked extraorcunarily old, inhumanly old: the Wandering Jew, in an American sports   
jacket. 
 
The train started with a wrenching clang. Byron now pulled out the yellow envelope. The   
message, on a Wehrmacht official form, had these few English words: GLAD You'RE OKAY.   
COME STRAIGHT TO BERLIN. 
 
DAD. 
 
The long string of cars squealed into the Friedrichstrasse terminal Tin clouds of white vapor,   
clanking, slowing.    Rhoda    clutched Victor    Henry's    arm    and jumped up and    down, to    the   
amusement of the uniformed foreign ministry man who had escorted them to meet the train   
from Kenigsberg. Pug observed his smile.    'We haven't seen our boy in over a year,"    he   
shouted above the train noise. 
 
"Ah?    Well, then this is a great moment." 
 
The train stopped, and people came swarming out. 
 
"My COD!"    exclaimed Rhoda.    "Is THAT him coming down those steps? 
 
It CAN'T be him.    He's a SKELIRTON." 
 
"Where?    Where?"    Pug said. 
 
"He disappeared.    Somewhere over there.    No, there he is!" 
 
Byron's chestnut hair was very long and curly, almost matted; the bones stood out in his pale   
face and his eyes looked bright and enormous. 
 
He was laughing and waving, but at first blink his father almost failed to recognize this long- 
jawed sharpnned young man with the shabby clothes and raffish air. 
 
"It's me.    This is me," he heard Byron yell.    "Don't you even know me, Dad?" 
 
Pug plunged toward Byron, holding Rhoda's hand.    Byron, smelling of wine, embraced him in   
a tight, fierce, long hug, scratching his father's face with a two-day growth of bristles.    Then he   
hugged and kissed his mother. 
 
"Gad, I'm reeling," he said, in a swooping note like Rhoda's but in a rough baritone voice.   
"they've been feeding us on this train like hogs going to market.    I just finished a lunch with   
three different wines. Mom, you look beautiful.    About twenty-five." 
 
"Well, you look ghastly.    Why the devil were you running around in Poland?"    The foreign stry   
man pulled at Byron's elbow. "You do feel you have been treated well, Mr. Henry? Dr.   
 184 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Neustiidter, foreign ministry," he said, with a click of heels and a crinkly smile. "Oh, hi. Oh,   
irreproachably, sir, irreproachably," Byron said, laughing wildly. "That is, once we got out of   
Warsaw.    In there it was kind of rough." "A", well, that's war.    We'd be pleased to have a little   
note from you 
 
about your treatment, at your convenience.    My card." 
 
Leslie Slote, ashen and distraught, came up with two hands full of documents and introduced   
himself to Victor Henry.    "I'd like to call on you at the embassy tomorrow, sir," he said, "once   
I've straightened things out a bit." 
 
'Come in any time," Pug Henry said. 
 
'But let me tell you right now," Slote sad over his shoulder as he left, "that Byron's been a real   
help."    Dr.    Neustiidter politely emphasized that Byron could go off in his father's custody now   
and pick up his documents some other time; or he himself could look after Byron's papers and   
drop them at Commander Henry's office.    "After all," Neustadter said, "when it's a question of   
a son rejoining his parents, red tape becomes inhumane." Rhoda sat beside her son as they   
drove to Grunewald, happily clutching his arm while complaining how awful he looked.    He   
was her secret favorite.    Rhoda had thought of the name Byron at her first glimpse of her baby   
in the hospital: a scrawny infant, blinking big blue eyes in a red triangular face; clearly a boy,   
even in the rolls of baby flesh. She thought the child had a manly romantic look. She had   
hoped he would be an author or an actor; she had even unclenched his tiny red fists to look for   
the 'writer's triangles' which, she had read somewhere, one could see at birth in a baby's palm   
wrinkles.    Byron hadn't turned out a writer, but he did actually have, she thought, a romantic   
streak.    Secretly she sympathized with his refusal to consider a naval career, and even with his   
lazy school habits.    She had never liked Pug's nickname for the boy, Briny, with its smell of the   
sea, and it was years before she would use it.    Byron's switch to fine arts at Columbia, which   
had thrown Pug into black despondency, she had silently welcomed.    Warren was a Henry: the   
plugger, the driver, the one who got things done, the A student, the one with his eye on flag   
rank and every step up toward it.    Byron was like her, she thought, a person of fine quality,   
haunted and somewhat disabled by an unfulfilled dream. 
 
She noticed the scar on his temple, touched it in alarm, and asked about it.    He began narrating   
his odyssey from Cracow to Warsaw, interrupting himself now and then to exclaim at things he   
saw in the streets: red vertical swastika banners massed around a statue of Frederick the Great,   
a band of Hitler Youth marching past in their brown shirts, black neckerchiefs, and short black   
pants, nuns bicycling down the Friedrichstrasse, a band concert in a park, a turning merry-go- 
round. "It's so peaceful, isn't it?    So goddamned peaceful! 
 
Dad, what's happening in the war? 
 
Has Warsaw surrendered?    Have the Allies gotten off their tails yet? The Germans are such   
liars, you never know." 
 
"Warsaw's still holding out, but the war there is really over. 
 185 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
There's a lot of talk about peace in the west, too." 
 
"Honestly?    Already?    God, will you look at that cafe?    Five hundred Berliners if there's one,   
eating pastry and drinking coffee, laughing, talking.    Ah, to be a Berliner!    Where was I?    Oh   
yes. Well, anyway, at this point, see, the water pump gave out and the fan belt broke. The   
German planes never stopped going by overhead.    The bride was having hysterics.    We were   
twenty miles from the nearest town. 
 
There was a cluster of farmhouses about a mile down the road, but they'd been bombed to   
pieces, so-" 
 
"Farmhouses?"    Pug broke in alertly. 
 
"But the Germans keep claiming loud and clear that the Luftwaffe is attacking only military   
targets.    That's a big boast of theirs." 
 
Byron roared with laughter.    "What?    Dad, the military targets of the Germans include anything   
that moves, from a pig on up.    I was a military target.    There I was, above the ground and alive.   
I saw a thousand houses blown apart out in the countryside, far behind the front.      The   
Luftwaffe is just practicing on them, getting ready for France and England." 
 
"You want to be careful how you talk here," Rhoda said. 
 
"We're in the car.    That's safe, isn't it?" 
 
it "Sure is.    Go on," Pug said. 
 
He was thinking that Byron's story might Turn into an intelligence report.    The Germans were   
indignantly complaining about Polish atrocities, and publishing revolting photographs of   
mutilated "ethnic Germans" and Wehrmacht officers.    By contrast, they offered photographic   
proof of happy captured Polish soldiers eating, drinking, and doing folk dances; pictures of   
Jews being fed at soup kitchens, waving at the cameras and smiling; and many photographs of   
German guns and trucks rolling past farmhouses and through untouched towns, with jovial   
Polish peasants cheering them.    Byron's tale cast an interesting light on all this. 
 
On and on Byron talked.    At the Grunewald house they went into the garden.    "Hey, a tennis   
court!    Great!"    he exclaimed in the same manic tone.    They sat in reclining chairs, drinks in   
their hands, as he described the siege of Warsaw with extraordinary clarity, picking out details   
that made them see and hear and even smell the whole thing-the dead horses on the streets, the   
tank traps and the menacing sentries at the corners, the unflushed toilets at the embassy when   
the water main broke, the gangs trying to put out roaring fires in a whole block of buildings   
with buckets of sand, the taste of horsemeat, the sound of artillery, the wounded piled in the   
hospital lobby, the farade of a synagogue slowly sliding down into the street, the embassy   
cellar with its rows of canvas cots, the eerie walk across no-man's-land on a quiet dirt road   
dotted with autumn wild flowers. 
 
The blue-gray Berlin evening drew on, and still Byron talked, getting hoarse, drinking steadily,   
 186 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
and losing no coherence or clarity. 
 
It was an astonishing performance.    Again and again the parents looked at each other.  
 
'I get famished just talking about it," Byron said.    He was describing the startling feast laid out   
by the Germans in the Klovno railroad station. 
 
"And there was another spread just like it when we got to Kenigsberg. 
 
They've been stuffing us ever since on the train.    I don't know where it all goes to.    I think in   
Warsaw I must have digested the marrow out of my bones.    They got hollow and they're just   
now filling up again. Anyway, when and where and how do we eat?" 
 
'You look like such a tramp, Byron," Rhoda said. "Don't you have any other clothes?" "A   
whole big bag full, Mom.    it's in Warsaw, neatly labelled with my name.    Probablyies ashes b y   
now." 
 
They went to a small dark little restaurant off the Kurt-iirstendamm. 
 
Byron laughed, pointing to the fly-specked curling cardboard sign in the window: Tens   
PXSTAUT DOFS NOT siERVE jvws.    "Are there any left in Berlin to serve?" 
 
"Well, you don't see them around much," Pug said.    "They're not allowed in the theatres and so   
forth.    I guess they're lying pretty low." 
 
"Ah, to be a Berliner," Byron said.    'Warsaw's alive with Jews." 
 
He stopped talking when the soup came. Apparently his own voice had been keeping him   
awake, because between the soup and the meat course his head nodded and dropped on his   
chest.    They had trouble rousing him. 
 
"Let's get him home," Pug said, signalling to the waiter.    "I was wondering how long he'd last." 
 
'Wha?    Less not go home," Byron said.    "Less go to the theatre. 
 
The opera.    Less have some civilized fun.    Less do the tovm.    Ah, to be a Berliner!" 
 
Pug said, after they had put Byron to sleep and were strolling in the garden, "Quite a change in   
him." 
 
"It's that girl," Rhoda said. 
 
"He didn't say much about her."    "That's my point.    He said nothing about her.    Yet he went to   
Poland because of her, and got caught in Cracow on account of her.    He lost his passport, for   
heaven's sake, protecting her relatives.    Why, he was talking to her uncle when that synagogue   
all but fell on top of him.    Seems to me he did almost everything in Poland but become a Jew."   
Pug looked coldly at her but she went on unbeedingly, "Maybe you can find out something   
more about her from this man Slote.    It's a strange business, and she must be some girl." 
 
Topping the pile of letters on Pug's desk the following morning was a pale green envelope,   
 187 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
almost square, engraved in one corner: TH.E whrrn HousE. de he found on a single sheet,   
similarly engraved, a slanted scrawl in heavy pencil. 
 
You were dead right again,    old top. Treasury just now    informs    me    the ambassadors    got   
hopping mad at the very idea of our offering to buy their ocean liners. Can I borrow your   
crystal ball?    Ha ha!    Write me a letter whenever You get a chance, about your life in Berlin- 
what you and your wife do for fun, who your German friends are, what the people and the   
newspapers are saying, how the food is in the restaurants, just anything and everything that   
occurs to you.      What does a loaf of bread cost in Germany today?      Washington is still   
incredibly hot and muggy, though the leaves have started turning. 
 
FDR 
 
Pug put all other mail aside, and stared at the curious communication from the curious man   
whom he had once soaked with salt water, who was now his Commander-inel, the creator of   
the New Deal (of which Pug disapproved), the man with perhaps the best-known name and   
face on earth except Hitler's. The cheerful banal scribble was out of key with Roosevelt's   
stature, but it very much fitted the cocky young man who had bounced around on the Davey in   
a blazer and straw hat.    He pulled a yellow pad toward him and listed points for an informal   
letter about his life in Berlin, for obedience and quick action were Navy habits soaked into his   
bones.    The yeoman's buzzer rang.    He flipped the key. "No calls, Mittle." 
 
"Aye aye, sir.    There's a Mister Slote asking to see you, but I can-" "Slote?    No, hold on.    I'll   
see Slote.    Let us have coffee." 
 
The Foreign Service man looked rested and fit, if a bit gaunt, in his freshly pressed tweed   
jacket and flannel    trousers. "Quite    a view," Slote said. "Is    that huge pink pile the new   
chancellery?" 
 
"Yes.    You can see them change the guard from here." 
 
'I don't know that I'm interested in armed Germans on the move.    I have the idea." 
 
Both men laughed.    Over the coffee the commander told Slote something of Byron's four-hour   
gush of narrative.    The diplomat listened with a wary look, running Ns fingers repeatedly over   
the rim of his lit pipe. "Did he mention anything about that unfortunate business in Praha?"   
Henry looked puzzled. 'When we had a girl in the car, and found ourselves under German   
shellfire?"    "I don't believe so. 
 
Was the girl Natalie Jastrow?"    'Yes.    The incident involved the Swedish ambassador and an   
auto trip to the front lines."    Pug thought a moment. 
 
Slote watched his face intently.    'No.    Not a word." 
 
With a heavy sigh, Slote brightened up.    "Well, he exposed himself to direct enemy fire, while   
I had to take the girl out of the car and find shelter for her."    Slote baldly narrated his version of   
the episode. Then he described Byron's water-hauling, his handiness in making repairs, his   
 188 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
disregard of enemy planes and artillery shelling. 
 
"I'd be glad to put all this in a letter, if you wish," Slote said. 
 
"Yes, I'd like that," Pug said with alacrity.    "Now, tell me something about this Jastrow girl."   
"What would you like to know?" 
 
Victor Henry shrugged. "Anything. My wife and I are slightly curious about this young   
female who got our boy into such a jam.    What the hell was she doing in Warsaw, with all of   
Europe mobilizing, and why was he with her?"    Slote laughed wryly.    "She came to see me. 
 
We're old friends.    I thought she was out of her mind to come.    I did my best to stop her.    This   
girl is a sort of lioness type, she does what she pleases and you just get out of the way.    Her   
unde didn't want her to travel alone, what with all the war talk.    Byron volunteered to go along.   
That's as I understand it."    'He went with her to Poland as a courtesy to Dr.    Jastrow?    Is that   
the size of it?"    "Maybe you'd better ask Byron."    'Is she beautiful?" 
 
Slote puffed thoughtfully, staring straight ahead.    "In a way. 
 
Quite a brain, very educated."    Abruptly he looked at his watch and stood up. 
 
"I'll write you that letter, and I'm going to mention your son in my official report." 
 
"Good. I'll ask him about that incident in Praha."Oh, no, there's no need. It was just an   
instance of how he cooperated." 
 
"You're not engaged to the Jastrow girl?" 
 
No, I'm not." 
 
"Well, I hate to get personal, but you're much older than Byron, and quite different, and I can't   
picture a girl who bridges that gap." 
 
Slote looked at him and said nothing.    Pug went on, "Where is she now?" 
 
"She went to Stockholm with most of our people. Good-bye, Commander Henry." Rhoda   
telephoned Pug around noon, breaking into his work on the letter to Roosevelt. 'That boys   
slept fourteen hours," she said. 'I got worried and went in there, but he's breathing like an   
infant, with a hand tucked under his cheek." 
 
"Well, let him sleep." 
 
'Doesn't he have to report somewhere?" 
 
"No.    Sleep's the best thing for him." 
 
Complying    with the President's orders to write chattily,    Pug closed his letter    with a short   
account of Byron's adventures in Poland. 
 
Plans were whirling in his mind for official use of his son's experiences. 
 189 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
He filed the growl letter for the diplomatic pouch, and went home uneasy at having bypassed   
the chain of command and wasted a work day. 
 
He did also feel vague pride in this direct contact with the President, but that was a human   
reaction.    In his professional judgment, this contact was most likely a bad thing. 
 
Byron was reclining in the garden, eating grapes from a bowl and reading a Superman comic   
book.    Scattered on the grass de him were perhaps two dozen more comic books, a patchwork   
of lurid covers.    "Hi, Dad," he said.    "How about this treasure?    Franz collects them." 
 
(Franz was the butler.) "He says he's been panhandling or buying them from tourists for years." 
 
Pug was stupefied at the sight.    Comic books had been a cause of war in their household until   
Byron had gone off to Columbia.    Pug had forbidden them, torn them up, burned them, fined   
Byron for possession of them. Nothing had helped.    The boy had been like a dope fiend.  
 
With difficulty Pug refrained from saying something harsh.    Byron was twenty-four.    "How do   
you feel?" 
 
'H "Go this is a great Superman.    It makes me ungry," Byron said. 
 
d, homesick, reading these things." 
 
Franz brought Pug a highball on a tray.    Pug sat silently with it waiting for the butler to go.    It   
took a while, because Franz wiped a glass-top table, cut some flowers, and fooled with a loose   
screen door to the tennis court.    He had a way of lingering within earshot. 
 
Meanwhile, Byron read the Superman through, put it on the pile, and looked idly at his father. 
 
Pug relaxed and sipped his drink.    Franz was reentering the house. 
 
"Briny, that was quite a tale you told us yesterday. 
 
The son laughed.    "I guess I got kind of carried away, seeing you and Mom again.    Also Berlin   
had a funny effect on m-. 
 
"You've had access to unusual information.    I don't know if there's another American who went   
from Cracow to Warsaw after the war broke out."    'Oh, I guess it's all been in the papers and   
magazines." 
 
"That's where you're wrong.    There's a lot of arguing between the Germans and the Poles-the   
few Poles who got away and can still argue -about who's committed what atrocities in Poland.   
An eyewitness account document."    like yours would be an important up another comic book.   
"Possibly."    Byron shrugged, picking "I want you to write it up. 
 
I'd like to forward your account to the Office of Naval Intelligence." 
 
'Gosh, Dad, aren't you overestimating it?" 
 
"No.    I'd like you to get at it tonight. 
 190 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"I don't have a typewriter," Byron said with a yawn. 
 
'There's one in the library," Pug said. 
 
'Oh, that's right, I saw it.    Well, okay." 
 
With such casual assents, Byron had often dodged his homework in the past.    But his father let   
it go.    He was clinging to a belief that Byron had matured under the German bombing. 
 
"That fellow Slote came by today.    Said you helped out a lot in Warsaw. Brought water to the   
embassy, and such."    "Well, yes.    I got stuck with the water job."    'Also there was an incident at   
the front line with the Swedish ambassador.    You climbed a tower under German fire, while   
Slote had to hide this Jastrow girl in a farmhouse.    It seems to be very much on his mind." 
 
Byron opened Horror Comics, with a cover picture of a grinning skeleton carrying a screaming   
half-naked girl up a stone staircase. 
 
"Oh, yes.    That was right before we crossed no-man's-land.    I made a sketch of the road." 
 
"Why does Slote dwell on it?" 
 
"Well, it's about the last thing that happened before we left Warsaw, so I guess it remained in   
his mind." 
 
"He intends to write me a letter of commendation about you." 
 
"He does?    That's fine.    Has he got any word on Natalie?" 
 
"Just that she's gone to Stockholm.    You'll start on that report tonight?" 
 
'Sure." 
 
Byron left the house after dinner and returned at two in the morning. Pug was awake, working   
in the library and worrying    about his son, who blithely told him he had gone with other   
Americans to the opera. 
 
Under his arm Byron carried a new copy of Mein Kampf in English. 
 
Next day when Pug left the house BYron was up and dressed, lounging on the back porch in   
slacks and a sweater, drinking coffee and reading Mein Kampf- At seven in the evening the   
father found Byron in the same place, in the same chair, drinking a highball.    He was well into   
the thick tome, which lay open on his lap.    Rubbing bleary eyes, he gave his father a listless   
wave. 
 
Pug said, 'Did you start on that report?" 
 
"I'll get to it, Dad.    Say, this is an interesting book.    Did you read it?" 
 
"I did, but I didn't find it interesting.    About fifty pages of those ravings give you the picture.    I   
thought I should finish it, so I did, but it was like wading through mud." 
 191 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Byron shook his head.    "Really amazing," 
 
and turned the page. 
 
He went out again at night, returned late, and fell asleep with his clothes on, an old habit that   
ground on Pug's nerves.    Byron woke around eleven, and found himself undressed and under   
the covers, his clothes draped on a chair, with a note propped on them: Write THAT   
GODDAMN REPORT. 
 
He was'idling along the Kurfilstendamm that afternoon, with Mein Kampf under his arm, when   
Leslie Slote went hung past him, halted, and turned. 
 
"Well, there you are!    That's luck.    I've been trying to get hold of you.    Are you coming back to   
the States with us or not?    Our transportation's set for Thursday." 
 
"I'm not sure. How about some coffee and pastry? Let's be a couple of berliners." Slote   
pursed his lips.    "To tell the truth, I skipped lunch.    All right. 
 
What the devil are you reading that monstrosity for?" 
 
"I think it's great."Great! That's an unusual comment." They sat at a table in an enormous   
sidewalk cafe, where potted flowering bushes broke up the expanse of tables and chairs, and a   
brass band played gay waltzes in the sunshine. 
 
"God, this is the life," Byron said, as they gave orders to a bowing, smiling waiter.    Look at   
these nice, Polite, cordial, jolting, happy Berliners, will you?    Did you ever see a nicer city?    So   
clean! 
 
All those fine statues and baroque buildings, like that Marvelous opera, and all the spanking   
new modern ones, and all the gardens and trees-why, I've never seen such a green, clean city! 
 
Berlin's almost like a city built in a forest. 
 
And all the canals, and the quaint little boats-&d you see that tug that sort of tips its   
smokestack to get under the bridges? 
 
Completely charming. 
 
The only thing is, these pleasant folks have just been blowing the hell out of Poland, machine- 
gunning people from the sky-I've got the scar to prove it-pounding a city just as nice as Berlin   
to a horrible pulp. It's a puzzle, you might say."    Slote shook his head and smiled. 
 
"The contrast between the war front and the back area is always startling.    No doubt Paris was   
as charming as ever while Napoleon was out doing his butcheries."    'Slote, you can't tell me the   
Germans aren't strange." 'Oh, yes, the Germans are strange." "Well, diaes why I've been   
reading this book, to try to figure them out.    It's their leader's book.    Now, it turns out this is the   
writing of an absolute nut.    The Jews are secretly running the world, he says.    That's his whole   
message. 
 192 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
They're the capitalists, but they're the Bolsheviks too, and they're conspiring to destroy the   
German people, who by rights should really be running the world.    Well, he's going to become   
dictator, see, mipe out the Jews, crush France, and carve off half of Bolshevist Russia for more   
German living space.    Have I got it right so far?" 
 
'A bit simplified, but yes-pretty much." Slote sounded amused but uneasy, glancing at the   
tables nearby. 
 
'Okay.    Now, all these nice Berliners like this guy.    Right?    They voted for him.    They fonow   
him.    They salute him.    They cheer him. 
 
Don't they? 
 
How is that?    Isn't that very strange?    How come he's their leader? Haven't they read this book?   
How come they didn't put him in a padded cell?    Don't they have insane asylums?    And who do   
they put in there, if not this guy?" 
 
Slote, while stuffing his pipe, kept looking here and there at the people around them.    Satisfied   
that nobody was eavesdropping, he said in a low tone, "Are you just discovering the   
phenomenon of Adolf Hitler?" 
 
'I just got shot in the head by a German.    That sort of called my attention to it." 
 
'well, you won't learn much from Mein Katnpf.    That's just froth on top of the kettle."    "Do you   
understand Hitler and the Germans?" 
 
Slote lit his pipe and stared at the air for several seconds. 
 
Then he spoke, with a wry little smile of academic condescension. 
 
'I have an opinion, the result of a lot of study." 
 
"Can I hear it? I'm interested. "It's a terribly long story, Byron, and quite involved." Slote   
glanced around again.    'Some other time and place I'll be glad to, but" 
 
"Would you give me the names of books to read, then?,) "Are you serious? You'd let yourself   
in for some dull plodding." 
 
"I'll read anything you tell me to. 
 
"Well, let me have your book." 
 
On the Hyleaf of Mein Kampf, Slote listed authors and tides all the way down the page, in a   
neat slanted hand, in purple Polish ink. 
 
Running his eye down the list, Byron felt his heart sink at the unfamiliar array of Teutonic   
authors, each name followed by a heavy book tide, some by two:... Treitschke-Moe -van den   
Bnwk-Fries-Menzel-FichteSchlegeArndt-jahn-Riihs-Lagarde-Langbehn-Spengi if... 
 
Among them, like black raisins in much gray dough, a few names from his contemporary   
 193 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
civilization course at Columbia caught his eye: Luther-Kant-Hegel-Schopenhauer-Nietzsche.   
He remembered that course as a nuisance and a nightmare.    He had Passed with a D minus,   
after frantic all-night cramming of smudgy lecture notes from the fraternity files. Slote drew a   
heavy line, and added more books with equally forbidding authors' names:... 
 
Santayana-Mann-Veblen-Renan-Heine-Kolnai-Rauschning..... 
 
"Below the line are critics and analysts," he remarked as he wrote. 
 
"Above are some German antecedents of Hitler.    I think you must grasp these to grasp him." 
 
Byron said dolefully, "Really?    The philosophers too?    Hegel and Schopenhauer?    Why?    And   
Martin Luther, for pity sake." Contemplating the list with a certain and satisfaction, Slote   
added a name or two as he pulled hard at his pipe, making the bowl hiss.    "My view is that   
Hitler and the Nazis have grown out of the heart of German culture-a cancer, maybe, but a,   
uniquely German phenomenon. Some very clever men have given me hell for holding this   
opinion.      They insist the same thing could have happened anywhere, given the same   
conditions: defeat in a major war, a harsh peace treaty, ruinous inflation, mass unemployment,   
Communism on the march, anarchy in the streets-all leading to the rise of a demagogue, and a   
reign of terror.    But I-" The waiter was approaching.    Slote shut up and said not a word while   
they were being served.    Watching the waiter until he went out of sight, the Foreign Service   
man drank coffee and ate cake.    Then he started again, almost in an undertone. 
 
"But I don't believe it.    To me Nazism is unthinkable without its roots in German nineteenth- 
century thought: romanticism, idealism, nationalism, the whole outpouring.    It's in those books.   
If you're not prepared to read every word of Hegel's Philosophy of History, for instance, give   
up. 
 
It's basic."    He shoved the book back to Byron, open at the flyleaf. "Well, there you are, for a   
starter." 
 
"Tacitus?"    Byron said.    "Why Tacitus?    Isn't he a Roman historian?" 
 
"Yes.    Do you know about Arrninius, and the Battle of the Teutoburger Forest?" 
 
"No, I don't."    "Okay.    In the year 9 A.D Byron, a German war leader named Arminius stopped   
the Romans at the Rhine, once and for all, and so secured the barbarian sanctuary in the heart   
of Europe. 
 
It's a key event in world history.    It led eventually to the fall of Rome. 
 
It's affected all European politics and war to this hour.    So I believe, and therefore I think you   
should read Tacitus's account of the campaign. Either you go into these things, or you don't." 
 
Byron kept nodding and nodding, his eyes narrowed and attentive. 
 
"You've read all these books? Every one?" Slote regarded the younger man quizzically,   
gnawing his pipe.    "I haven't retained them as well as I should, but, yes, I have."    'What you're   
 194 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
actually trying to tell me, I imagine, is to go peddle my papers, that this is a subject for Rhodes   
Scholars." 
 
"Not at all, but it is a hard subject.    Now, Byron, I'm really overdue at the embassy.    Are you or   
aren't you coming with us?    We fly to Oslo Thursday, and from there to London.    Then we just   
take our chancesdestroyer, freighter, ocean liner, maybe an airplane trip via Lisbon-whatever   
turns up." 
 
Byron said, 'I"at are Natalie's plans?    She got kind of snappish with me toward the end, and   
wouldn't talk much."    Slote looked at his watch. 'She was disagreeable and vague with me, too.   
I really don't know." He hesitated.    "I'll tell you something else.    You may not like it. You may   
not believe it.    But it's so, and possibly you'd be better off knowing it." 
 
"Go ahead."    'I asked her about you, whether you planned to return to Siena.    Her answer was,   
"Well, I hope not. I sincerely hope I never see Byron Henry again, and if you ever get a   
chance, please tell him so with my compliments."-You look surprised. Didn't you have an   
argument before she left? 
 
I was positive you had." 
 
Byron, trying to compose his face, said, "Not exactly.    She just seemed grouchy as hell." 
 
Slote said, "She was in a gruesome mood. Said she had a bad backache from all the train   
riding, for one thing.    Very likely she meant nothing by it.    I know she felt grateful to you.    As   
indeed I do." Byron shook his head.    "I can't say I've ever understood her." 
 
Slote glanced at the check and said, tucking bright-colored marks under a saucer, 'well, look,   
Byron, there's no time to discuss Natalie Jastrow.    I'll tell you this.    I've had no peace of mind   
since the day I first met her two years ago, at a very stupid cocktail party on the Quai Voltaire." 
 
"Why don't you marry her?"    Byron said, as Slote started to rise. 
 
The older man fell back in his chair, and looked at him for several seconds.    "All right.    I'm not   
at all sure I won' Byron, if she'll have me." 
 
"Oh, she'll have you.    I'll tell you what.    I guess I'll stay on here with my folks for a while.    I   
won't go to Oslo." 
 
Slote stood, holding out his hand.    "I'll give your passport and so forth to your father's yeoman.   
Good luck." 
 
Byron said, shaking hands and gesturing at Mein Kampf, "I appreciate the lecture and the list." 
 
'Small return," Slote said, 'for services rendered."    'Will you let me know," Byron said, "if you   
get word before you leave Berlin about where Natalie went?"    Knocking out his pipe against   
his palm, Slote said, "Certainly," and hurried off into the sidewalk crowd. 
 
Byron ordered more ersatz coffee and opened Mein Kampf, as the cafe band struck up a merry   
Austrian folk dance. 
 195 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
uG Victor Henry's absence in the States, his wife had tangled Dherself in a romance;   
something she had not done in his much longer absences through almost twenty-five years.   
There was something liberating for her in the start of a war.    She was forty-five. 
 
Suddenly the rules she had lived by so long seemed slightly out of date. The whole world was   
shaking itself loose from the past; why shouldn't she, just a wee bit? 
 
Rhoda Henry did not articulate this argument.    She felt it in her bones and acted on it. 
 
Being an ex-beauty, and remaining pretty, she had always drawn and enjoyed the attention of   
men, so she had not lacked opportunities for affairs.    But she had been as faithful to Pug Henry   
as he had been to her. 
 
She liked to go to church, her hymn-singing and prayers were heartfelt, she believed in God,   
she thought Jesus Christ was her Savior-if she had never gone deeply into the matter-and she   
was convinced in her soul that a married woman ought to be true and good. 
 
In the old Navy-wife pastime of ripping apart ladies who had not been true and good, she   
wielded well-honed claws. 
 
Setting aside a trivial kiss here and there, only one episode in the dim past somewhat marred   
Rhoda's otherwise perfect record. After an officers' club dance in Manila, where she had   
soaked up too much    champagnePug    being    out at sea in a fleet exercise-Kip Tollever    had   
brought her home and had managed to get her dress off.    Madeline, then a child troubled by   
bad dreams, had saved the situation by waking and starting to cry.    By the time Madeline was   
comforted, Rhoda had sobered up. Relieved to be back from the brink, yet bearing Kip no   
malice, she had donned a proper housecoat and had amiably shooed him out of the house. 
 
That had been the end of it. No doubt Kip the next morning had been just as grateful to   
Madeline.    Victor Henry was practically the last man in the Navy he wanted to risk angering.  
 
Thereafter, Rhoda was always somewhat kittenish toward Tollever. 
 
Now and then she wondered what would have happened had Madeline not awakened.    Would   
she really have gone through with it?    How would she have felt?    But she would never know;   
she did not intend to get that close to trouble again; the wine had been to blame.    Still, there   
had been something titillating about being undressed by a man other than old Pug. 
 
Rhoda preserved the memory, though she buried it deep. 
 
Dr.    Palmer Kirby was a shy, serious, ugly man in his middle-fifties. 
 
After the dinner party for him, discussing the guests with Sally Forrest, Rhoda had dismissed   
him as "one of these ghastly B s."    just to be sociable, she had vainly tried her usual coquettish   
babble on Kirby over the cocktails.    "Well, since friend husband's away, Dr. 
 
Kirby, I've put you on my right, and we can make nAy while the sun shines."    "UnL On your   
right.    Thank you." 
 196 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
That had almost been the end of it.    Rhoda detested such heavy men. 
 
But he had happened to say at dinner that he was going next day to a factory in Brandenburg.   
Rhoda offered to drive him there, simply because she had long wanted to see the medieval   
town, and Kirby in a sense was her husband's guest. 
 
On the way they had a dull, decorous lunch at an inn.    Over a bottle of Moselle, Kirby warmed   
up and started to talk about himself and his work. At an alert question she asked him-living   
with Pug, Rhoda had learned to follow technical talk-Palmer Kirby suddenly smiled.    It seemed   
to her that she had not seen him smile before.    His teeth were big, and the smile showed his   
gums.    It was    a coarse male    smile    of knowledge and appetite,    far from disagreeable,    but   
startling in the saturnine engineer. 
 
'Do you'really care, Mrs.    Henry?"    said dr.    Kirby.    "I'd be glad to explain the whole business,   
but I have a horror of boring a beautiful woman." 
 
The smile, the words, the tone, all disclosed that the man had missed none of her coquetry; that   
on the contra , he dry like her. A bit flustered, she touched a hand to her hair, tucking the   
waves behind her small white ears.    'I assure you, it all sounds fascinating.    just use words of   
one syllable as much as possible."    "Okay, but you brought this on yourself." 
 
He told her all about magnetic amplifiers-!magamps," he called them-devices for precise   
control of voltages and currents, especially in high power. Asking one adroit question after   
another, Rhoda soon drew out the key facts about him.      At the California Institute of   
Technology he had written his doctoral thesis on electromagnetism.    At forty he had decided to   
manufacture magnetic amplifiers on his own, instead of settling for an executive post at   
General Electric or Westinghouse, and security for life.    The long struggle for financing had all   
but sunk him; it was just now paying off.    War industries demanded magamps in quantity, and   
he was first in the field.    He had come to Germany because the Germans were ahead of the   
United States in the quality of some components.    He was studying their techniques and buying   
their nickel-alloy cores. 
 
She also learned that he was a widower and a grandfather.    He talked about his dead wife, and   
then they exchanged long confidences about their children's faults and virtues.    Like most men,   
Kirby loved to talk about himself, once over his shyness.    His story of back-breaking money   
troubles and final success so enthralled her that she forgot to be coy, and spoke pleasantly and   
to the point. 
 
Rhoda was most attractive, in fact, when she made the least effort to be.    She was the kind of   
woman who can dazzle a man at first acquaintance by piling everything into the shop window:   
none of it forced or faked, but in sum nearly all she has to offer.    Victor Henry had long since   
found that out.    He had no complaints, though he had once imagined there must be much more.   
Palmer Kirby was hit hard by this maximum first impact. He ordered a second bottle of   
Moselle, and they got to Brandenburg almost an hour late.    While he went about his business   
Rhoda strolled through the picturesque old town, guidebook in hand; and her mind   
unaccountably kept wandering to her little misconduct long ago with Kip Tollever.    She was a   
 197 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
bit dizzy from the Moselle, and it wore off slowly. 
 
When they returned to Berlin toward evening, Kirby offered to take her to dinner and to the   
opera.    It seemed quite natural to accept. 
 
Rhoda rushed home and began raking through her dresses and shoes, pushing her hair this way   
and that, wishing she could have gone to the hairdresser, hesitating over her perfumes.    She   
was still at it when Kirby came to call for her.    She kept him waiting for an hour.    In girlhood   
she had always kept boys waiting.    Pug had harshly cured her of the habit, for Navy social life   
began and ended by the clock, and he would not tolerate embarrassment by Rhoda.    Keeping   
Palmer Kirby waiting while she fussed over herself was a delicious little nostalgic folly, a   
lovely childish self-indulgence, like eating a banana split. 
 
It almost made Rhoda feel nineteen again. 
 
The mirror told her a different story, but even it seemed friendly to her that night: it showed   
shiny eyes, a pretty face, a firm figure in the sheer slip, and arms that were round and thin all   
the way up, instead of bagging above the elbow as so many women's did.    She sailed into the   
living room wearing the pink suit with gold buttons that she had bought to please Hitler.    Kirby   
sat reading one of Pug's technical journals.    He took off big black-rimmed glasses and rose,   
exclaiming, "Well, don't you look grand!" 
 
"I'm awful," she said, taking Kirby's arm, "dawdling so long, but you brought it on yourself,   
asking the old girl out after a hard day." 
 
The opera was La Traviata, and they enjoyed discovering that they both had always loved it.   
Afterward, he proposed a glimpse of the notorious Berlin night life.    It was nothing he'd ever   
do by himself, he said; still, Berlin night life was the talk of the world, and if it wouldn't offend   
Mrs.    Henry, she might enjoy a peek at it. 
 
Rhoda giggled at the notion.    "Well, this seems to be my night to howl, doesn't it?    Thank you   
very much for a disreputable suggestion, which I hasten to accept.    Let's hope we don't run into   
any of my friends."    So it happened that when the telephone rang in the Henrys' home at two in   
the morning-the long-distance call from New York, via the U.S.S. Marbleh in Lisbon-there was   
nobody to answer.    Rhoda was sipping champagne, watching a hefty blonde German girl fling   
her naked breasts about in blue smoky gloom, and glancing every now and then at Dr.    Palmer   
Kirby's long solemn face in thick-rimmed glasses, as he smoked a long pipe and observed the   
hard-working sweaty dancer with faint distaste.    Rhoda was aroused and deliciously shocked.   
She had never before seen a nude dancing woman, except in paintings. 
 
After that until her husband returned, she spent a lot of time with Kirby.    They went to the less   
frequented restaurants.    In her own vocabulary, she never "did anything."    When Pug returned,   
the adventure stopped. 
 
A farewell lunch at Wannsee for Palmer Kirby was Rhoda's idea, but she got Sally Forrest to   
give the lunch, saying she had already sufficiently entertained this civilian visitor. If Sally   
Forrest detected an oddity in this she said nothing.    With the end of the Polish war at hand-only   
 198 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Warsaw was still holding out-the two attaches felt able to take off some midday hours.    Berlin   
wore a peactime air, and there was even talk that rationing would soon be over.    Byron drove   
them all out to the resort in an embassy car.    Along the broad sandy beach on the Havel river,   
people strolled in the sun or sat under broad gaily colored umbrellas, and a number of   
gymnasts braved the fall breezes to exercise in skimpy costumes. 
 
in the luncheon the Forrests ordered, rationing was not much in evidence.    The pasty margarine   
tasted as usual like axle grease, but they ate excellent turbot and good leg of lamb.    Midway   
during the lunch a loudspeaker crackled and whined, and a voice spoke in firm clear German:   
"Attentioni In the next few minutes you u?ill hear a report of the highest 'InVortance to the   
Fatherland." 
 
The identical words boomed all over the river resort. People stopped on the promenade to   
listen. On the beach the small figures of the gymnasts halted briefly in their tumbling or   
running.    An excited murmur rose all through the elegant Kaiserpavillon restaurant. 
 
"What do you suppose?" Sally Forrest said, as the music resumed, thin gentle Schubert on   
strings. 
 
'Warsaw, I'd guess," said her husband.    "It must be over." 
 
Dr.    Kirby said, "You don't suppose there's an armistice coming up? 
 
I've been hearing armistice talk all week." 
 
"Oh, wouldn't that be Marvelous," Rhoda said, "and put an end to this stupid war before it   
really gets going!" 
 
Byron said, "It's been going." 
 
Oh, of course," said Rhoda with an apologetic smile, "they'd have to make some decent   
settlement of that hideous Polish business." 
 
"There'll be no armistice," said Pug. 
 
The buzz of talk rose higher on the crowded terrace and in the dining room.    The Germans,   
eyes bright and gestures animated, argued with each other, laughed, struck the table, and called   
from all sides for champagne.    When the loudspeaker played the few bars of Liszt's music that   
preceded big news, the noise began to die. 
 
"Sondermeldungl' (Special bulletin!) At this announcement, an immediate total stillness   
blanketed the restaurant, except for a clink here and there.      The loudspeaker randomly   
crackled; then a baritone voice spoke solemn brief words.    "From Supreme Headquarters of the   
Fuhrer. 
 
Warsaw hen fallen.The whole restaurant rang with applause and cheers. Women jumped to   
their feet and danced.    Men shook hands and hugged and kissed each other.    Brass band music- 
first "Deutschland Ober Alles," then the "Horst Wessel Lied"-came pouring out of the   
 199 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
loudspeakers.    To a man the diners in the Kaiserpavillon rose, all except the American party.   
On the beach, on the promenade, wherever the eye turned, the Germans stood still, most of   
them with arms thrust forward in the Nazi salute.    In the dining room, about half were saluting   
and singing, a discordant swell of voices in the vulgar beery National Socialist anthem.    Victor   
Henry's skin prickled as he looked around, and he felt at this moment that the Germans under   
Adolf Hitler would take some beating.    He then noticed something he had not seen for many,   
many years.    His son sat , face frozen, lips pressed in a line, white-knuckled hands clasped on   
the table.    Byron had almost always taken pain and punishment dry-eyed since the age of five,   
but now he was crying. 
 
The American party, sitting in a restaurant full of people on their feet, was getting hostile   
glares. 
 
"Do they expect us to stand?"    Sally Forrest said. 
 
"I'm not standing," Rhoda said. 
 
Their waiter, a roly-poly man in black with very long straight blond hair, hitherto all genial   
expert service, stood bellowing with arm outstretched, visibly sneering at the Americans. 
 
Byron saw none of this.    Byron was seeing dead swollen horses in the gutter, yellow plywood   
patches on rows of broken buildings, a stone goose bordered with red flowers in a schoolyard,   
a little girl in a lilac dress taking a pen from him, orange starshells bursting in the night over   
church domes. 
 
The song ended. The Germans applauded and cheered some more, and began toasting each   
other.    The string orchestra switched to drinking songs, and the whole KaiserpaviUon went into   
a gay roar of Du, du, liegst mir im Herren, Du, du, liegst mir im SinnByron cringed to hear it,   
and to recall that a full belly and a glass of beer had brought him to join German soldiers in this   
song, not six hours after he had escaped from burning Warsaw. 
 
la, ia, ia, jal Weisst night u7ie gut which dir bin... 
 
At the Americans' table the waiter started removing plates with a jerky clatter, spilling gravy   
and wine and jostling them with his elbows. 
 
'Watch what you're doing, please," Colonel Forrest said. 
 
The waiter went on with his brusque sloppy clearing. Sally Forrest gave a little yelp as he   
struck her head with a plate. 
 
Pug said to him, 'Look.    CaR your headwaiter, please." 
 
"Headwaiter?    I am the headwaiter.    I am your head."    The man laughed and walked off.    Dirty   
dishes remained scattered on the table. 
 
Wet purple and brown messes stained the cloth. 
 
Forrest said to Henry, 'It might be smart to leave." 
 
  805 
 200 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Oh, by all means," Sally Forrest said.    'Just pay, Bill, and we'll go." 
 
She Picked up her purse. 
 
'We haven't had our dessert," Pug Henry said. 
 
"It might be an idea to knock that waiter on his behind," Dr. 
 
Kirby said, his face disagreeably contorted. 
 
"I volunteer," said Byron, and he started to get up. 
 
"For God's sake, boy!"    Colonel Forrest pulled him back.    "An incident is just what he wants,   
and what we can't have." 
 
T'be waiter was striding past them to another table.    Henry called, "I asked you to bring your   
headwaiter." 
 
"You're in a hurry, honorable sir?"    the waiter jeered.    "Then you'd better leave.    We're very   
busy in this restaurant."    He turned a stout back on Henry and walked away. 
 
"Stop!    Turn around."    Pug did not shout or bark.    He used a dry sharp tone of command that   
cut through the restaurant gabble.    The waiter stopped and turned. 
 
"Go call your headwaiter.    Do it immediately."    He looked straight into the waiter's eyes, his   
face serious and hard.    The waiter's glance shifted, and he walked off in another direction.    The   
nearby diners were staring and muttering. 
 
'I think we should go," Sally Forrest said. "This isn't worth the trouble." The waiter soon   
approached, followed by a tall, bald, long-faced man in a frock coat, who said with a busy,   
unfriendly air, "Yes?    You have a complaint?" 
 
'We're a party of Americans, military attaches," Pug said. "We didn't rise for your anthem.   
We're neutrals.    This waiter chose to take offense." 
 
He gestured at the table.    "He's been deliberately clumsy and dirty. He's talked rudely.    He's   
jostled the ladies. His conduct has been swinish. Tell him to behave himself, and be good   
enough to let us have a clean cloth for our dessert." 
 
The expression of the headwaiter kept changing as Victor Henry rapped the sentences out.    He   
hesitated under Henry's direct gaze, looked around at the other diners, and all at once burst out   
in a howl of abuse at the waiter, flinging both arms in the air, his face purpling. After a short   
fierce tantrum, he turned to Pug Henry, bowed from the waist, and said coldly, 'You will be   
properly served.    My apologies." And he bustled off. 
 
Now a peculiar thing happened.    The waiter reverted to his former manner without turning a   
hair, without a trace of surliness, resentment, or regret. The episode was obliterated; it had   
never happened.    He cleared the dishes and spread a new cloth with deft speed.    He smiled, he   
bowed, he made little jokes and considerate little noises.    His face was blood red, otherwise he   
 201 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
was in every respect the same charming, gemutlich German waiter who had first greeted them.   
He    took their    dessert orders with    chuckles and    nods,    with    arch    jests about    calories,   
with   
solicitous suggestions of wine and liqueurs.      He backed away smiling and bowing, and   
hastened out of sight. 
 
"I'll be damned," said Colonel Forrest. 
 
"We hadn't had our dessert," Pug said. 
 
"Well done," Kirby said to Pug Henry, with an odd glance at Rhoda. 
 
"Beautifully done." 
 
9fOb, Pug has a way about him," Rhoda said, smiling brightly. 
 
"Okay, Dad," Byron said. Victor Henry shot him a quick look. It was the one remark that   
gratified him. 
 
The Americans rushed uneasily through their desserts: all but Victor Henry, who was  very   
deliberate about eating his tart and drinking his coffee. He unwrapped a cigar. The waiter   
jumped to light it for him. 
 
"Well, I guess we can shove off," he said, puffing out a cloud of smoke. "Time's a'wasting, and   
the colonel and I are cheating the U.S. 
 
Government."    That night after a late dinner, as they were having coffee on the terrace, Rhoda   
said, 'I see you've brought home a pile of work. I thought we might see that new Emil Jennings   
movie.    But I can get one of the girls to come along."    'Go ahead.    I'm no fan of Emil jannings." 
 
Rhoda drank up her coffee and left the father and son sitting in the gloom. 
 
"Briny, what about that report?    How's it coming?" 
 
"The report?    Oh, yes, the report."    Byron leaned forward in his chair, legs apart, elbows on   
knees, hands clasped. "Dad, I'd like to ask you something. What would you think of my   
joining the British navy?    Or the marines. 
 
Victor Henry blinked, and took a while to answer.    "You want to fight the Germans, I take it?" 
 
"I enjoyed myself in Warsaw.    I felt useful."    "Well, this is one hell of a change, coming from   
you.    I thought a military career was o-u-t out." 
 
'This isn't a career." 
 
Pug sat smoking and looking at his hands, crouching forward in his chair. Byron usually   
slouched back and extended his long legs, but now he was imitating his father.    Their attitudes   
looked comically alike. 
 
"Briny, I don't think the Allies are going to make a deal with Hitler, but what if t do?    A peace   
offensive's coming up, that's for sure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Suppose you join the British, possibly lose your citizenship-certainly create a peck of problens- 
and then the war's off? 
 
There you'll be, up to your neck in futile red tape.    Why not hang on a while and see how the   
cat jumps?" 
 
"I guess so."    Byron sighed, and slouched back in his chair. 
 
Pug said, "I don't like to discourage an admirable impulse.    What might be a good idea right   
now is to ask for active duty in our Navy, and-" 
 
"No, thanks."    "Now hear me out, dammit.    You've got your commission. The reserves who go   
out to sea now will draw the best duty if and when the action starts.    You'll have the jump on   
ninety-nine percent of the otbersIn wartime you'll be the equal of any Academy man." 
 
'Meantime I'd be in for years.    And then suppose the war ends?" 
 
"You're not doing anything else." 
 
"I wrote to Dr.    Jastrow in Siena.    I'm waiting to hear from him." 
 
The father dropped the subject. 
 
Rhoda went to see the Emil jannings movie, but first she did something else.    She picked up   
Dr.    Palmer Kirby at his hotel and drove him to Tempelhof airport.    This was not necessary;   
cabs were available in Berlin.    But she had offered to do this and Kirby had accepted. 
 
Perhaps there would have been no harm in telling her husband that she was giving the visitor   
this last courtesy; but she didn't. 
 
They hardly spoke in the car.    She parked and went to the cafe lounge while he checked in.   
Had she encountered a friend, she would have needed an explanation on the spot and a story   
for her husband. 
 
But she had no such worry; she felt only a bittersweet excitement. 
 
What she was doing gave her not the slightest guilty feeling.    She had no wrong intent.  
 
She liked Palmer Kirby.    It was a long, long time since a man had seemed so attractive to her.   
He liked her, too. In fact, this was a genuine little wartime romance, so decorous as to be   
almost laughable; an unexpected flash of melancholy magic, which would soon be over   
forever. It was not in the least like her aborted drunken peccadillo with Kip Tollever. 
 
"Well, I guess this is it," Kirby said, falling in the chair opposite her in the gangling way which   
always struck her as boyish, for all his grizzled head and sharply lined face.    They sat looking   
at each other until the drinks came. 
 
"Your happiness," he said. 
 
'Oh, that.    I've had that.    it's all in the past."    She sipped. 
 203 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'Did they give you the connection to Lisbon that you wanted?" 
 
'Yes, but the Pan Am Clippers are jammed.    I may be hung up in lisbon for days."    "Well, I   
wish I had that in prospect.    I hear that's becoming the gayest city in Europe." 
 
"Come along." 
 
"Oh, Palmer, don't tease me.    Dear me, I was supposed to call you Fred, wasn't I?    And now I   
find I've been thinking of you all along as Palmer. Fred-well, there are so many Freds.    You   
don't strike me as Fred." 
 
"That's very strange."    He drank at his highball. 
 
What is?" 
 
"Anne called me Palmer.    She never would call me anything else." 
 
Rhoda twirled the stem of her daiquiri glass.    "I wish I had known your wife." 
 
"You'd have become good friends." 
 
"Palmer, what do you think of Pug?" 
 
"Hell.    That's a tough one."    The engineer pushed his lips out ruefully. 
 
"My first impression was that he was a misplaced and-frankly-rather narrow-minded sea dog.   
But I don't know.    He has a keen intellect. He's terrifically on the ball.    That was quite a job he   
did on that waiter. He's a hard man to know, really." 
 
Rhoda laughed.    "How right you are.    After all these years, I don't know him too well myself.   
But I suspect Pug's really something simple and almost obsolete, Palmer.    He's a patriot.    He's   
not the easiest person to live with.    He's so goldamed single-minded."    "Is he a patriot, or is he   
a Navy career man?    Those are two different things." 
 
Rhoda tilted her head and smiled.    "I'm not actually sure." 
 
"Well, I've come to admire him, that much I know."    Kirby frowned at his big hands, clasped   
around the drink on the table.    'See here, Rhoda, I'm really a proper fellow, all in all.    Let me   
just say this. 
 
You're a wonderful woman.    I've been a sad dull man since Anne died, but you've made me   
feel very much alive again, and I'm grateful to you. 
 
Does this offend you?" 
 
"Don't be a fool.    It pleases me very much, and you know it does." 
 
Rhoda took a handkerchief from her purse. "However, it's going to be a little hard on my   
contentment for a day or two.    Oh, damn."    "Why? 
 204 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
I should think it would, add to your contentment."    "Oh, shut up, Palmer.    Thanks for the drink.   
You'd better go to your plane." 
 
"Look, don't be upset." 
 
She smiled at him, her eyes tearful.    'y everything's fine, dear. 
 
You might write, just once in a while.    Just a friendly little scribble, so I'll know you're alive   
and well.    I'd like that." 
 
"Of course I will.    I'll write the day I get home." 
 
"Will you really?    That's fine."    She touched her eyes with her handkerchief and stood.    "good- 
bye." 
 
He said, getting to his feet, "They haven't called my plane." 
 
"No?    Well, my chauffeuring job is finished, and I'm leaving you here and now."    They walked   
out of the lounge and shook hands in the quiet terminal.    War had all but shut down the airport;   
most of the counters were dark. Rhoda squeezed Dr.    Kirby's hand, and standing on tiptoe,   
kissed him once on the lips.    This in a way was strangest of all, reaching up to kiss a man.    She   
opened her mouth.    After all, it was a farewell. 
 
'Good-bye. Have a wonderful trip." She hurried away and turned a corner without looking   
back.    She saw enough of the Emil jannings movie to be able to talk about it to Pug. 
 
Byron at last wrote the report on his adventures in Poland. 
 
Victor Henry, suppressing his annoyance over the five vapid pages, spent an afternoon   
dictating to his yeoman everything he remembered of Byron's tale.    His son read the seventeen- 
page result next day with astonishment. 
 
"Ye gods, Dad, what a memory you have."    'Take that and fix it any way you want.    Just make   
sure it's factually unchallengeable. Combine it with your thing and let me have it back by   
Friday." Victor Henry forwarded the patched report to the Office of Naval Intelligence, but   
forgot his idea of sending a copy to the President.    The cool autumn days went by and Berlin   
began taking on an almost peacetime look and mood.    Byron lounged around the Grunewald   
house, knotting his forehead by the hour over one book after another from Leslie Slote's list.  
 
Three or four times a week he played tennis with his father; he was much the better player, but   
Pug, a steely plodder at first, wore him down and beat him. With food, exercise, and sun,   
however, Byron lost his shed look, regained strength, and started winning, which pleased Pug   
as much as it did him. 
 
One morning he walked into his father's office at the embassy and saw sitting on the floor,   
carefully roped up and ticketed with a tag in his own handwriting, the large valise of suits,   
shoes, and shirts he had left behind in Warsaw.    It was a shocking little clue to the efficiency of   
the Germans. But he was glad to have the clothes, for American styles    were idolized in   
 205 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Germany.    He blossomed out as a dandy. 
 
The German girls in the embassy looked after the slender young man whenever he walked   
down the hall, casually A la mode, with heavy red-glinting brown hair, a lean face, and large   
blue eyes that widened when he wistfully smiled. 
 
But he ignored their inviting glances.    Byron pounced on the mail every morning, searching in   
vain for a letter from Siena. 
 
When the Fuhrer made his Reichstag speech offering peace to England and France, early in   
October, the propaganda ministry set aside a large block of seats in the Kroll Opera House for   
foreign diplomats, and Pug took his son along.    living through the siege of Warsaw, and then   
reading Mein Kampf, Byron had come to think of Adolf Hitler as a historic monster-a Caligula,   
a Genghis Khan, an Ivan the Terrible-and Hitler standing at the podium surprised him: just a   
medium-size pudgy individual in a plain gray coat and black trousers, carrying a red portfolio.  
 
The man seemed to Byron a diminutive actor, weakly impersonating the grandiose and   
gruesome history-maker. 
 
Hitler spoke this time in a reasonable, pedestrian tone, like an elderly politician.    In this sober   
style, the German leader began to utter such grotesque and laughable lies that Byron kept   
looking around for some amused reactions.    But the Germans sat listening with serious faces.   
Even the diplomats gave way only here and there to a mouth twitch that might have been   
ironic. 
 
A powerful Poland had attacked Germany, the little man in the gray coat said, and had   
attempted to destroy her.    The brave Wehrmacht had not been caught unawares and had justly   
punished this insolent aggression. A campaign strictly limited to attack of military targets had   
brought quick total victory.    The civilian population of Poland, on his personal orders, had not   
when molested, and had suffered no loss or injury, except in Warsaw. There again on his   
orders, the German commanders had pleaded with,the authorities to evacuate their civilians,   
offering them safeconduct The Poles with criminal folly had insisted on holding defenseless   
women and children within the city. 
 
To Byron, the brazenness of this assertion was stupefying.    All the neutral diplomats had made   
desperate efforts for weeks to negotiate the evacuation of Warsaw's women and children.    The   
Germans had never even replied.    It was not so much that Hitler was lying about this-Byron   
knew that the German nation was following a wild liar and had been for years, since Mein   
Kampf was full of obvious crazy lies-but that this lie was pointless, since the neutrals knew the   
facts and the world press had reported them. Why, then, was Hitler saying such vulnerable   
nonsense? The speech must be meant for the Germans; but in that case, he reflected-as Hitler   
went on to "offer an outstretched hand!"    to the British and the French-why was the speech so   
mild in style, and why were so many seats reserved for diplomats? 
 
"Surely if forty-six million Englishmen can claim to rule over forty million square kilometers   
of the earth, then it cannot be wrong," Hitler said in a docile, placating tone, holding up both   
 206 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
hands, pahns outward, "for eighty-two million Germans to ask to be allowed to till in peace   
eight hundred thousand kilometers of soil that are Mstorically their own." He was talking   
about his new order in central Europe, and the expanded Third Reich. The British and the   
French could have peace simply by accepting things as they now were, he said, adding a hint   
that it might be well if they also gave Germany back her old colonies. 
 
The Fuhrer at the end fell into his old style, howling and sneering, shaking both fists in front of   
his face, pointing a fist and a finger straight upward, snapping his hands to his hips, as he   
pictured the horrors of a full-scale war, which he said he dreaded and which nobody could   
really win. 
 
That night Pug Henry wrote in his intelligence report:... 
 
Hitler looks very well. He obviously has first-rate powers of recuperation. Maybe licking   
Poland toned up his system a bit.    Anyway, the haggardness is gone, his color is excellent, he   
isn't stooping, his voice is clear, not harsh, and-at least in this speech-very pleasant, and his   
walk is springy and quick.    It would be a grave mistake to hope for a physical breakdown in   
this min. 
 
The speech was a lot of the same old stuff, with some remarkable whoppers, even for the   
Fuhrer, about who started the Polish war and about the sterling conduct of the Germans toward   
civilians.      This tommyrot was certainly for internal consumption.      His German listeners   
appeared to be swallowing it, though it's very hard to discern what Germans really think. 
 
'The radio tonight is making a great to-do about the 'outstretched hand' peace proposal.    Well   
evidently be hearing 'outstretched hand" from now on, possibly to the end of the war, even if   
it's ten years hence. 
 
The offer may have been authentic.    If the Allies accept, Germany gets her half of Poland for   
the price of a quick cheap campaign, and her preWorld War colonies, no doubt as a reward for   
the faultless chivalry of her aimed forces.    Hitler has never been bashful about making the most   
outrageous proposals.    They've been accepted, too.    So why not try another one? 
 
At the very least, if he gets the truce and the conference he suggests, the British and French   
publics will undoubtedly relax and slack off. The Germans can use the breather to get their   
half-hearted industrial effort rolling for the showdown. On every count this was a clever   
speech by a leader who is riding high and seems to have the magic touch.    The only fault I can   
find is a dull and boring delivery, but that too may have been calculated.    Hitler today was the   
judicious European politician, not the roaring Aryan firebrand.    Among his other talents he is a   
gifted vaudevillian. 
 
Pug told Byron to write down his impressions of the speech.    Byron handed in half a written   
page: My outstanding impression was the way Adolf Hitler follows out what he wrote in Mein   
Kampf.    He says there, in his section on war propaganda, that the masses are 'feminine," acting   
on feeling and sentiment, and that whatever you tell them must be addressed to the dullest   
ignoramus among them, in order to reach and convince the broadest possible audience.    This   
 207 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
speech was full of lies that ought to annoy a halfeducated German boy of ten, and the peace   
proposals amounted to a total German grab.    Maybe Hitler judges other countries by his own;   
otherwise I can't understand the speech.    I only today what utter contempt Hitler has for the   
Germans.    He regards them as bottomlessly naive and stupid.    They follow him and love him.   
Who am I to say he's wrong? 
 
His father thought this was not bad, and included it in quotation marks as the comment of a   
youth American spectator. 
 
The din of the German radio and press in the next days was terrific. 
 
Italy and japan had hailed the Fuhrer as the greatest peacemaker of all time.    A mighty popular   
surge for peace was sweeping the West and the United States.    But "Churchillian" warmongers   
were trying to stamp out this warm response of the peoples to the Fuhrer's outstretched hand.   
If they succeeded, the most ghastly bloodbath of all time would follow, and history would   
know whom to blame.    Pug gathered from neutral intellience in Berlin that some Frenchmen   
wanted to make a deal and call off the war, but not because they took seriously anything Hitler   
had said. 
 
It was just a question of yielding to the facts or fighting on. 
 
Into this confusing noise came an electric shock of news. A U-boat had sneaked into the   
British fleet anchorage in Scapa Flow at the northern tip of Scotland, had sunk the battleship   
Royal Oak, and had returned home safely News pictures showed the solemn fat-faced Fuhrer   
shaking the hand of Lieutenant Commander Prien, a nervous stiff young man with receding   
hair.    The Nazi propaganda ministry foamed with ecstasy over the British Adn-,dralty's report   
that sadly praised Prien's skill and daring. The writer was Churchill himself. Goebbels' s   
broadcasters said the sinking of the Royal Oak would prove a great boon to peace, since the   
Fwuer's "outstretched hand" proposal would now receive more serious consideration. 
 
A small reception was laid on for neutral military attaches to meet Prien.    Victor Henry put his   
son's name on the list, with the rank Ensign, USNR, and Byron received a card.    The Henrys   
dined before the reception at the apartment of Commander Grohke, a small dark walk-up flat   
on the fourth floor of an old house with bay windows.    Heavy thick furniture so cluttered the   
rooms that there was hardly space to move. 
 
The meal was salt fish and potatoes, but it was well cooked and Byron enjoyed it.    He found   
the Grohkes disconcertingly normal, though he was prepared to detest them.    When the talk got   
around to Byron's experiences in Poland the woman listened with an unhappy, motherly look.   
'One never knows what to believe any more.    Thank God it's over, at least.    Let there only be   
peace, real peace.    We don't want war. 
 
The last war ruined Germany. 
 
Another war will be the absolute end of our country."    Rhoda said, 'It's so awful.    Nobody in   
the world wants war, yet here we are in this mess." Grohke said to Victor Henry, 'What do you   
think?    Are the Allies going to discuss the Fuhrer's very reasonable offer?" 
 208 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'Do you want me to be polite, or are you asking for information?" 
 
"Don't be polite, Henry. Not with me." 'Okay.    Germany can have peace if she gets rid of   
Hitler and his regime."    You could even hang on to a lot of your gains.    That gang has got to   
go. 
 
Grohke and his wife looked at each other in the candlelight. 
 
'Then it's hopeless," he said, playing with his empty wineglass. 
 
'If your people won't understand one thing about Germany, we have to fight it out.    You don't   
know what this country was like in the 1920's. 
 
I    do.    If the    system    had    gone    on another    few years there    would have    been    no    navy, 
no   
economy, nothing.    Germany would have fallen apart. 
 
This man stood up and put Germany back on the map. You have Roosevelt, we have him.   
Listen, Henry, I sat in a fancy club in New York and heard people call Roosevelt an insane   
socialist cripple. 
 
There are millions who hate him. 
 
Right?    Now I'm not a Nazi, I've never said the Fuhrer is a thousand percent right.    But he's a   
winner, damn it all.    He gets things done, like Roosevelt.    And you want us to get rid of him?   
First of all it isn't possible.    You know what the regime is.    And if it were possible we wouldn't   
do it.    And yet there can be peace.    It depends on one man, and he isn't our Fuhrer." 
 
'"Who then?"    "Your President.    The British and the French are beaten right now. 
 
Otherwise they'd have attacked in September.    When will they ever have such a chance again?   
They're holding out for only one reason-they feel America's behind them. If your President   
says one word to them tomorrow -'I'm not helping you against German-this world war will be   
over before it starts, and we'll all have a hundred years of prosperity. And I'll tell you one   
more thing.    That's the only way your President can make sure japan won't jump on your back."   
It occurred to Victor Henry, not for the first time, that his meeting with Grohke on the Bremen   
had probably not been accidental.    'I guess we'd better get on to that reception," he said. 
 
Lieutenant Commander Prien looked surprised and interested when Byron's Turn came in the   
reception line of floridly uniformed attaches. 
 
"You are young," he said in German, scrutinizing Byron's face and wellcut dark suit as they   
shook hands.    "Are you a submariner?" 
 
"No.    Maybe I should be." 
 
Prien said with a charming grin, and sudden wholehearted warmth, "Ach, it's the only service.   
But you have to be tough." 
 
Blue-uniformed sailors lined up the chairs for a lecture.    Pug Henry was flabbergasted by the   
 
 
 
 
 
 
candor of the U-boat captain's talk.    It was no revelation that Prien had gone in on the surface   
at slack water, in the dark of the moon.    That could be surmised.    But Prien had no business   
exhibiting the Luftwaffe's aerial photographs of the entrances and analyzing the obstacles.    It   
was handing the British their corrective measures on a silver platter.    It also disclosed technical   
news about German reconnaissance photography-scary news, to be sure. 
 
This was urgent stuff for the next pouch. 
 
Byron listened as intently as his father.    What fascinated him was the living detail.    Prien spoke   
a clear slow German.      He could follow every word.      He could see the northern lights   
shimmering in the black night, silhouetting the U-boat, reflecting in purple and green sparkles   
on the wet forecastle, and worrying the captain half to death.    He was mentally dazzled by the   
automobile headlights on the shore that suddenly flashed out of the gloom and caught the   
captain square in the face.    He saw the two dim gray battleships ahead, he heard the black chill   
waters of Scapa Flow lap on the U-boat hull as it slowed to fire four torpedoes.    He almost   
shared the German's disappointment when only one hit. 
 
The most amazing and inspiring part of the tale came after that. 
 
Instead of fleeing, Prien had made a big slow circle on the surface, inside the Royal Navy's   
main anchorage, to reload tubes; for the torpedo hit had failed to set off a general submarine   
alarm. It simply had not occurred to the British that there could be a U-boat inside Scapa   
Flow; on the Royal Oak they had taken the hit for an internal explosion.    And so, by daring all,   
Prien had succeeded in shooting a second salvo of four torpedoes. 
 
"We got three hits that time," Prien said.    "The rest you know. 
 
We blew up the magazines, and the Royal Oak went down almost at once." 
 
He did not gloat.    Nor did he express regret over the nine hundred drowned British sailors.    He   
had put his own life in hazard. The odds had been that he, and not they, would die in the   
night's work-tangled in the nets, impaled on rocks, or blown to bits by a mine. So Byron   
thought. 
 
He had sailed out, done his duty, and come home.      Here he was, a serious, clean-cut   
professional, alive to tell the tale.    This was not Warsaw, and this was not strafing horses and   
children on country roads. 
 
Pug Henry and his son drove slowly home through deserted streets in the blue-lit blackout.   
They did not talk.    Byron said as the car turned into their street, 'Dad, didn't you ever consider   
submarines?" 
 
The father shook his head.    "They're a strange breed, those fellows. 
 
And once you're in the pigboats, you have a hell of a job ever getting out. 
 
This Prien's a lot like our own Navy submariners.    Now and then I almost forgot there that he   
was talking German." "Well, that's what I'd have picked, I think," Byron said, "if I'd gone   
 210 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
in.p# The car drew up to the house.    Pug Henry leaned an elbow on the wheel, and looked at   
his son with an acid grin in the faint glow of the dashboard.    "You don't get to sink a battleship   
every day." 
 
Byron scowled, and said with unusual sharpness, "Is that what you think appeals to me?" 
 
'Look here," Pug said, "the physical on submariners is a damn rigorous one, and they put you   
through a rough graduate school, but if you're actually interested-" 
 
"No thanks, Dad." The young    man    laughed and tolerantly shook his    head at his father's   
persistence. 
 
Victor Henry often tried to start the topic of submarines again, but never drew another glint of   
interest. 
 
He spent a week with Byron touring shipyards and factories. The German attache in the   
United States had asked for such a tour, so a return of the courtesy was automatic.    Pug Henry   
enjoyed travelling with his son. Byron put up with inconvenience, he never got angry, he joked   
in annoying moments, and he rose to sudden emergencies: a plane overbooked, a train missed,   
luggage vanished, hotel reservations lost. 
 
Pug considered himself fast on his feet, but Byron, by using a certain easygoing charm, could   
get out of holes, track things down, and persuade desk clerks and ticket agents to exert   
themselves, better than his father.    During lunches with factory owners, plant managers, and   
yard superintendents, Byron could sit for two hours looking pleasant without talking, and reply   
when spoken to with something short and apt. 
 
"You seem to be enjoying this," Pug remarked to Byron, as they drove back to the hotel in dark   
rain from a long tiring visit to the Krupp works in Essen. 
 
"It's interesting.    Much more so than the cathedrals and the schlosses and the folk costumes,"   
Byron said.    'This is the Germany to worry about." 
 
Pug nodded.    'Right.    The German industrial plant is the pistol Hitler is pointing at the world's   
head.    It bears study."    "Pretty sizable pistol," Byron said. 
 
"Too sizable for comfort." 
 
"How does it compare to the Allies', and to ours, Dad?" 
 
A glass partition in the Krupp courtesy limousine separated them from the chauffeur, but Pug   
thought the man held his head at an attentive tilt. 
 
"That's the question.    We've got the biggest industrial plant in the world, no doubt of that, but   
Hitler isn't giving us a second thought right about now, because there's no national will to use it   
as a pistol. Germany with her industrial setup can run the world, if nobody argues. The means   
and the will exist.    Macedonia wasn't very big when Alexander conquered the world.    Brazil   
may be four times as big and have ten times the potential of Germany, but the payoff is on   
 211 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
present capacity and will.    On paper, as I keep insisting, the French and the British combined   
sfih have these people licked.    But on paper Primo Camera had Joe Louis licked.    Hitler's gone   
to bat because he thinks he can take them.    It's the ultimate way to match industrial systems,   
but a bit chancy." 
 
"Then maybe this is what war is all about nowadays," Byron said. 
 
"Industrial capacity." 
 
"Not entirely, but it's vital." 
 
"Well, I'm certainly learning a lot." 
 
Pug smiled.    Byron was spending his hotel evenings doggedly reading Beg--I, usually falling   
asleep in an hour or so over the open book. 
 
"How are you coming along on that Hegel fellow?" 
 
,it's just starting to clear up a bit. I can hardly believe it, but he seems crazier than Hitler.   
They taught me at Columbia that he's a great philosopher." 
 
"Possibly he's too deep for you." 
 
"Maybe so, but the trouble is, I think I understand him."    The gray, dignified chauffeur gave   
Byron a hideous look as he opened the door for them at the hotel.    Byron ran over in his mind   
what he had said, and decided to be more careful about calling Hitler crazy.    He didn't think the   
chauffeur was an offended Hegelian. 
 
Aletter arrived from Aaron Jastrow in a burst of airmail from the outside a few days after the   
British and French, to the great rage of the German radio, rejected the Fuhrer's outstretched   
hand. Mail to the embassy was supposed to be uncensored, but nobody believea ffial the   
letters came in sudden sackfuls two or three weeks apart. The red and green Italian airmail   
envelope was rubber-stamped all over, purple and black and red.    Dr.    Jastrow was still typing   
with a worn-out ribbon, perhaps even the same one. He was too absentminded and, Byron   
suspected, too inept mechanically to change a ribbon, and unless someone did it for him he   
would use the old one until the words on the page looked like spirit typing.    Byron had to put   
the letter under a strong light to make it out. 
 
October 5th Dear Byron: Natalie is not here.    I've had one letter from her, written in London.  
 
She'll try to come back to Siena, at least for a while.    I'm selfishly glad of that, for I'm very   
much tied down without her. 
 
Now about yourself.    I can't encourage you to come back.    I didn't discourage Natalie because I   
frankly need her.    In her fashion she feels a responsibility for her bumbling uncle, which is a   
matter of blood ties, and very sweet and comforting.    You have no such responsibility. 
 
If you came here and I suddenly decided to leave, or were forced to go (and I must live with   
that possibility), think of all the useless motion and expense you'd have put yourself to! I   
 212 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
would really like having you here, but I must husband my resources, so I couldn't pay for your   
trip from Berlin.    Of course if you happened to come to Italy, though I can't think why you   
should, I would always be glad to see you and talk to you. 
 
Meantime I must thank you for your inquiry.    just possibly it had some teeny connection with   
the other inquiry about Natalie's whereabouts, but I'm grateful for it anyway-and I must   
recommend that for your own sake you forget about Siena, Constantine, and the Jastrows. 
 
Thank you for all you did for my niece.    I gather from her letter-not from your far too modest   
and bare note-that you saved her from danger, perhaps from death.    How glad I am that you   
went!    My wannest regards to your parents.    I briefly talked with your father on the telephone.   
He sounded like a splendid man. 
 
Faithfully yours, Aaron Jastrow When Byron got home that evening he took one look at his   
father, sitting in a lounge chair on the porch facing the garden, and backed away. 
 
Pug's head was thrust forward and down, over a highball glass clenched in two hands.    Byron   
went to his room and plugged at Hegel and his baffling 'World Spirit" until dinner time. 
 
Rhoda endured Victor Henry's glowering silence at the table until the dessert came.    "All right,   
Pug," she said, digging into her ice cream, what's it all about?" 
 
Pug gave her a heavy-lidded look.    "Didn't you read the letter?" 
 
Byron thought his mother's reaction was exceedingly peculiar. Her face stiffened, her eyes   
widened, her back straightened. 
 
"Letter?    What letter?    From whom?" 
 
"Get the letter on my dressing table for your mother, please," Pug said to Byron. 
 
"Well, goodness me," Rhoda gasped, as she saw Byron trampling down the stairs with a pink   
envelope, "it's only from Madeline." 
 
"Who did you think it was from?" 
 
"Well, good lord, how was I to know?      The Gestapo or somebody, from your manner.   
Honestly, Pug."    She scanned the letter.    'So? 
 
What's wrong with this?    That's quite a raise, twenty dollars a week." 
 
"Read the last page." 
 
'I am.    Well!    I see what you mean." 
 
"Nineteen years    old," Pug said. "An apartment of her own in New York! And I was the   
fusspot, about letting her leave school." 
 
"Pug, I merely said when you got here that the thing was done. 
 213 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
She couldn't have enrolled any more." 
 
"She damn well could have tried." 
 
"Anyway, Madeline will be all right.    She's a good girl.    She's as straitlaced as you." 
 
"It's this war," Pug said.    "The world's coming apart at the seams by the day.    What can that girl   
do that's worth fifty-five dollars a week? That's what a senior, grade lieutenant makes, after ten   
years in the service.    It's absurd." 
 
Rhoda said, "You've always babied Madeline. I think she's showed you up, and that's what   
really annoys you." 
 
"I wish I were back there.    I'd have a damn good look around." 
 
Rhoda drummed the fingers of both hands on the table.    "Do you want me to go home and be   
with her?"      "That would cost a fortune.      It's one thing when you travel on government   
allowance, but-' Pug turned to Byron.    "You'll be going back, won't you?    Maybe you could   
find a job in New York." 
 
"As a matter of fact, I wanted to talk about that.    I got a letter too. 
 
From Dr.    Jastrow.    I'm going to Siena."    "You are?"    "Yes." 
 
'Who says so?" 
 
"I do." 
 
Silence. 
 
Rhoda said, "That's something we should all discuss, isn't it, Briny'r" 
 
"Is that girl there?"    Pug said. 
 
"No." 
 
'She's gone back to the States?" 
 
"No.    She's trying to get there from England."    'How do you propose to go?"    'Train.    They're   
running regularly to Nhlan and Florence." 'And what will you use for money'r 'I have enough   
to get there.    I saved nearly all I made." 
 
town 'And you'll do what?    literary research up in an Italian mountain 
 
"If I get called to active duty, I'll go."    nlat's damned bighearted, seeing that if you didn't, the   
Navy would track you down and put you in the brig for a few years.    Well, I'm proud of you,   
Briny. Do as you please." Victor Henry coughed, rolled up his napkin, and left the table.   
Byron sat with his head thrust down and forward, his face white, the muscles    in his jaw   
working. 
 with a war on?" 
 214 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rhoda saw that talking to her son would be useless.    She went upstairs to her dressing room,   
took out a letter she had put in a drawer beneath her underwear, read it once, then tore it into   
very small pieces. 
 
(from WORLD EMPIRE LOST) 
 
The "Phony" War The quiescent half year between the fall of Warsaw and the Norway episode   
became known in the West as the "phony" war, a phrase attributed to an American Senator.   
We called it the Sitzkrieg, or "sitting war," a play on Blitzkrieg.    On the British and French side   
the name was perhaps justified.    During this lull they in fact cad unbelievably little to improve   
their military posture, besides sit on their backsides and predict our collapse. 
 
Early in this strange twilight period, the Fuhrer delivered his "outstretched hand" peace speech   
to the Reichstag.    Like most of his political moves, it was cleverly concdived.    Had the Allies   
swallowed it, we might have achieved surprise in the west with a November attack, which   
Hitler had ordered when Warsaw fell, and which we were feverishly planning.    But by now the   
Western statesmen had developed a certain wariness toward our Fuhrer, and their response was   
disappointing.    In the event this did not matter.    A combination of bad weather and insoluble   
supply problems forced one postponement after another on the impatient Fuhrer.    The intent to   
attack France was never Ot issue, but the date and the strategy kept changing.    In all, the attack   
day was postponed twenty-nine times.      Meanwhile preparations went forward at an   
evermounting tempo. 
 
Our staff's favorite comic reading as we worked on Fall Gelb-"Cose Yellow," the attack on   
France-came to be the long, learned articles in French newspapers and military journals,   
proving that we were about to cave in under economic pressure.    In Point of fact, for the first   
time our economy was really getting moving.    Life in Paris, we gathered, was gayer and more   
relaxed than before the war.    The British Prime Minister Chamberlain epitomized the Western   
frame of mind by stating, "Hitler has missed the bus."    In this enforced half-year delay German   
industrial war production began to rise andespite the neverending confusion and interference in   
the Fuhrer's headquarters-a new and excellent strategy for the assault on France was at last   
hammered out. 
 
Distraction in Finland 
 
The sitzkrieg lull was temporarily enlivened when the Soviet Union attacked Finland. 
 
Stalin's unvarying policy after signing the Ribbentrop pact was to seize whatever territory he   
could, while we were at war with the democracies, to strengthen his position for an eventual   
showdown with us.    Hitler had already given him huge concessions in the Baltic states and in   
Poland, to buy a free hand against the West.    But like all Russian rulers, Czarist or Bolshevik,   
Stalin had a big appetite.    This was his chance to take over the Karelian Isthmus and dominate   
the Gulf of Finland.    When his emissaries failed to get these concessions from the proud Finns   
by threats, Stalin set out to take them by force. The rights of Finland were, as a matter of   
course, to be trampled upon. 
 215 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
But to the world's surprise, the Russian dictator got in trouble, for the attack went badly.    The   
vaunted Red Army covered itself with disgrace, revealing itself in Finland as an ill-equipped,   
ill-trained, miserably led rabble, unable to crush a small well-drilled foe. 
 
Whether    this    was    due to    Stalin's    purges    of his    officer    force in    the late    thirties,    or to 
the   
traditional Russian inefficiency added to the depressant effect of Bolshevism, or to the use of   
inferior    troops, remained    unclear. But from November    1939 to March 1940, Finland    did   
bravely fight off the Slav horde.    Nor did the Russians ever really defeat them militarily.    In the   
classic manner of Russian combat, the handful of Finnish defenders was finally drowned in a   
rain of artillery shells and a bath of Slav blood.    Thus Stalin's goal was achieved, at ruthless   
cost, of shaping up the Leningrad front by pushing back our Finnish friends on the Karelian   
Isthmus.    This move, it must be confessed, probably saved Leningrad in 1941. 
 
After the Finnish victory during Christmas-the classic battle of Suomussalmi in which nearly   
thirty thousand Russians were killed or frozen to death, at a cost of about nine hundred Finnish   
dead-it was impossible to regard the Soviet army as a competent modern adversary. 
 
Much later,    Hermann    Goering was    to call    the    Finnish campaign    "the    greatest   
camouflage   
action in history," implying that the Russians in Finland had pretended to be weak in order to   
mask their potential. 
 
This was just an absurd excuse for the failures of his Luftwaffe in the east.    In point of fact,   
Stalin's Russia in 1939 was militarily feeble. 
 
What happened between that time and our final debacle on the eastern front at Russian hands is   
the subject of a later    section,    but their    performance    in Finland certainly misled    us in our   
planning. 
 
Sitzkrieg Ends: Norway 
 
Much vociferous propaganda went on in the Western democracies about the attack on Finland,   
and about sending the Finns military aid. 
 
In the end they did nothing.    However, the opening of the Finnish front did force Hitler to face   
up to a genuine threat in the north: the British plot to seize Norway. 
 
Of this we had hard intelligence.    Unlike many of the "plots" and "conspiracies" of which our   
German armed forces were accused at the Nuremberg trials, this British plot certainly existed.   
Winston    Churchill    openly describes    it    in    his memoirs.    He    acknowledges    that    the 
British   
invasion was laid on for 0 date ahead of ours, and then put off, so that we beat the British into   
Norway by the merest luck, by a matter of days. 
 
The Russo-Finnish war made the problem of Norway acute, because England and France could   
use "aid to Finland" as a perfect pretext for landing in Norway and driving across Scandinavia.   
This would have been disastrous for us.    The North Sea, bracketed by British bases on both   
 
 
 
 
 
 
coast.    Deprived of that iron ore, we could not have gone on fighting for long. 
 
When the High Command convinced Hitler of these risks, he issued the order for "Weser   
Exercise," the occupation of Norway, and postponed Case Yellow once again. 
 
It is a sad commentary that Admiral Raeder, at the Nuremberg trials, was convicted of "a plot   
to occupy neutral Norway," when the British who sat in judgment had plotted the same thing   
themselves. 
 
Such paradoxes have enabled me to bear with honor my own experience at Nuremberg, and to   
regard it as not a disgrace at all, but rather as a political consequence of defeat.    Had the war   
gone the other way, and had we hanged Churchill for plotting to occupy Norway, what would   
the world have said?    Yet what is sauce for the goose should be sauce for the gander. 
 
Our occupation of Norway, a surprise overwater move virtually under the guns of a highly   
superior British fleet, was a great success; not, however, because of Hitler's readership, but in   
spite of it.    We took heavy losses at sea, especially of destroyers that we sorely missed when   
the invasion of England was later planned.    But the price was small compared to the gain.    We   
forestalled the British, opened up a much wider coastline to counter the blockade, and secured   
the Swedish iron ore supply for the rest of the war. 
 
Mistakes in Norway 
 
Hitler's amateurishness showed up badly in Norway.    It cropped up again cind again in every   
campaign, tending only to get grosser as time went on. 
 
The mark of the amateur in any field is to lose one's head when the going gets hard.    What   
marks the professional is his competence in an emergency, and almost the whole art of the   
soldier is to make sound judgments in the fog of war.    Hitler's propensity to lose his head took   
two forms: calling a panicky halt to operations when they were gathering momentum, and   
changing the objective in mid-campaign.    Both these failings appeared in Weser Exercise.    I   
give details in my Norway operational analysis, of his hysterical insistence day after day that   
we abandon Narvik, the real key to the position; his wild sudden scheme to capture the port of   
Trondheim with the luxury liner Bremen, and so forth. 
 
Why then was the occupation of Scandinavia a success?    Simply because General Falkenhorst,   
once in Norway, ignored the Fuhrer's interference, and did a fine professional job with good   
troops and a sound plan. 
 
This interference from above, incidentally, was to haunt operations to the end.    Adolf Hitler   
had used all his political shrewdness over many years to gain control of the armed forces, not   
stopping at strong-arm methods. There is no question that this man's    lust for power was   
insatiable, and it is certainly regrettable that the German people did not understand his true   
nature until it was too late. 
 
The background of this usurpation will be sketched here, as it significantly affected the whole   
course of the six-year war. 
 217 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
How Hitler Usurped Control of the Army 
 
In 1938, he and his Nazi minions did not scruple to frame grave charges of sexual misconduct   
against revered generals of the top command. Also, they took advantage of a few actual   
unfortunate lapses of this nature; the details need not be raked over in this account. 
 
Suffice it that the Nazis managed to topple the professional leadership in a bold underhanded   
coup based on such accusations. 
 
Hitler with sudden stunning arrogance then assumed    supreme command himself! And he   
exacted an oath of loyalty to himself throughout the Wehrmacht, from foot soldier to general.   
In this act he showed his knowledge of the German character, which is the soul of honor, and   
takes such an oath as binding to the death. 
 
Our staff, muted and disorganized by the disgusting revelations and pseudorevelations abovt   
our honored leaders, offered no coherent resistance to this usurpation.      So the strict   
independence of the German army from German politics, which for generations had kept the   
Wehrmacht a strong stabilizing force in the Fatherland, came to an end; and the drive wheel of   
the world's strongest military machine was grasped by an Austrian street agitator. 
 
In itself this was not a catastrophic turn.    Hitler was far from a military ignoramus.    He had had   
four years in the field as a foot soldier, and there are worse ways to learn war. He was a   
voracious    reader of history and of military writings. His memory for technical    facts was   
unusual.    Above all, he did have the ability to get to the root of a large problem.    He had almost   
a woman's intuition for the nub of a matter. This is a fine leadership trait in war, always   
providing that the politician listens to the soldiers for the execution of his ideas. 
 
The combination of a bold political adventurer, a Charles XII personality risen from the streets   
to weld Germany into a solid driving force, and our General Staff, the world's best military   
leadership, might well have brought us ultimate success. 
 
But Hitler was incapable of listening to anybody.    This undid him and ruined Germany.    Grand   
strategy and incredibly petty detail were equally his preoccupations.    The overruling axiom of   
our war effort was that Hitler gave the orders. 
 
In a brutal speech to our staff in November 1939, prompted by our efforts to discourage a   
premature attack    on    France, he    warned    us that he    would    ruthlessly    crush    any    of    us   
who   
opposed his will.    Like so many of his other threats, he made this one good.    By the end of the   
war most of our staff had been dismissed in disgrace.    Many had been shot. 
 
All of us would have been shot sooner or later, had he not lost his nerve and shot himself first. 
 
Thus it happened that the strength of the great German people, and the valor of the peerless   
German soldier, became passive tools in Hitler's amateur hands. 
 
Hitler and Churchill: A Comparison 
 
Winston Churchill, in a revealing passage of his memoirs on the functioning of his chiefs of   
 
 
 
 
 
 
staff, expresses his envy of Hitler, who could get his decisions acted upon without submitting   
them to the discouragement and pulling apart of hidebound professional soldiers. 
 
In fact, this was what saved England and won the war. 
 
Churchill was exactly the kind of brilliant amateur meddler in military affairs that Hitler was.   
Both rose to power from the depths of political rejection. Both relied chiefly on oratory to   
sway the multitude.    Both somehow expressed the spirit of their peoples, and so won loyalty   
that outlasted any number of mistakes, defeats, and disasters.    Both thought in grandiose terms,   
knew little about economic and logistical realities, and cared less. Both were iron men In   
defeat. 
 
Above all, both men had overwhelming personalities that could silence rational OPPosition   
while they talked.    Of this strange phenomenon, I had ample and bitter experience with Hitler.   
The crucial difference was that in the end Churchill had to listen to the professionals, whereas   
the German people had committed itself to the fatcil Fuhrerprinzip. 
 
Had Churchill possessed the power Adolf Hitler managed to arrogate to himself, the Allied   
armies    would    have bled    to death    in 1944,    invading the    "soft    underbelly    of    the Axis,"   
as   
Churchill called the fearful mountains and water obstacles of the Balkan peninsula.    There we   
would have slaughtered them.    The Italian campaign proved that. 
 
Only on the flat plains of Normandy did the Ford-production style of American warfare, using   
immense masses of inferior, cheaply made machinery, have a chance of working.    The Balkans   
would have been a colossal Thermopylae, won by the defenders.      It would have been a   
Churchill defeat compared to which Gailipoli would have been a schoolboy picnic. 
 
With a Fuhrer's authority, Churchill would also have frittered away the Allied landing craft,   
always a critical supply problem, in witless attempts to recapture the Greek islands and to   
storm Rhodes. 
 
In 1944 he nagged Eisenhower and Roosevelt to commit these wild follies until they both   
stopped talking to him. 
 
Churchill was a Hitler restrained by democracy.    If the German nation ever rises again, let it   
remember the different ends of these two men. I am not arguing for the goose gobble of   
parliamentarians. 
 
By conviction I have always been a conservative monarchist.      But whatever the civilian   
structure, let our people hereafter entrust military affairs to its trained generals, and insist that   
politicians keep hands off the war machine. 
 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTE: This very jarring and distorted comparison of Hitler and Churchill   
omits    the crucial    difference,    of    course.    By the common verdict of historians,    even    most   
German ones, Hitler was a ruthless adventurer bent on conquest and plunder, while Churchill   
was a great defender of human liberty, dignity, and law. it is true that Churchill tended to   
interfere in military matters.    Politicians find that temptation hard to resist. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roon's assertion about the British plan to land in Norway is correct. His conclusions, again, are   
a different matter, showing how slippery the issues at Nuremberg were.    England was the sole   
protector and hope of small neutral countries like Norway and Denmark. The purpose of a   
British landing would have been to defend Norway, not to occupy and dominate it.    In a war,   
both sides may well try to take the same neutral objective for strategic reasons, which does not   
prove that both sides are equally guilty of aggression.    That is the fallacy in Roon's argument.    I   
would not recommend trying to persuade a German staff officer of this.-V.H. 
 
N HENRY and his fiancee Janice were set straight about WRussia's invasion of Finland by an   
unexpected person: Madeline's new boyfriend, a trombone player and student of public affairs   
named Sewell Bozeman. 
 
Early in December the engaged couple came to New York and visited Madeline in her new   
apartment.    Finding the boyfriend there was a surprise. 
 
The news of her move to her own apartment had enraged Pug Henry, but had he known her   
reason, he would have been pleased.    Madeline had come to despise the two girls with whom   
she had shared a flat.    Both were having affairs-one with a joke writer, the other with an actor   
working as a bellhop.    Madeline had found herself being asked to skulk around, stay out late,   
or remain in her room while one or another pair copulated. The walls in the shabby apartment   
were thin.    She had no way of even pretending unawareness. 
 
She was disgusted. Both girls had good jobs, both dressed with taste, both were college   
graduates.    Yet they behaved like sluts, as Madeline understood the word.    She was a Henry,   
with her father's outlook.    Give or take a few details of Methodist doctrine, Madeline believed   
in what she had learned at home and at church.    Unmarried girls of good character didn't sleep   
with men; to her, that was almost a law of nature. Men had more leeway; she knew, for   
instance, that Warren had been something of a hellion before his engagement.    She liked Byron   
better because he seemed, in this respect, more like her upright father. To Madeline sex was a   
derightful matter of playing with fire, but enjoying the blaze from a safe distance, until she   
could leap into the hallowed white conflagration of a bridal night. She was a middle-class   
good girl, and not in the least ashamed of it.    She thought her room-mates were gross fools.    As   
soon as hugh Cleveland gave her a raise, she got out. 
 
"I don't know," she said, stirring a pot over a tiny stove behind a screen, "maybe this dinner   
was a mistake.    We all could have gone to a restaurant." 
 
She was addressing the boyfriend, Sewell Bozeman, called Bozey by y in September.    Bozey   
was a thin, long, the world.    They had met at a part hair and thoughtful brown pale, tractable   
fellow with thick straight brown s that bulged behind rimless glasses.    He always dressed in   
brown, to eye ties, and even brown shirts; he was always reading brown shoes, brown   
economics and politics and had a generally enormous brown books on doomed society, brown   
outlook on life, believing that America was a rapidly going under. 
 
Madeline found him a piquant and intriguing talking her small dining table, wearing novelty.   
At the moment, he was seti over his brown array the pink apron he had put on to peel onions   
 220 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
for the stew. 
 
e said.    "You can save the stew for another (Well, it's not too late,h night, and we can take your   
brother and his girl to Julio's." tNo, I told Warren I was cooking the dinner.    That girls rolling   
in idn't like an Italian dive. And they have to rush off to the money, she would theatre."   
Madeline came out, patting her hot face with a handkerchief, "That's fine. 
 
Thanks, Bozey.    I'm going to change." 
 
the table. and took out and looked at g white paint She opened a closet door crusted with   
yellowin -sided bay and the small room.    With a three a dress and slip, glancing arou as the   
whole window looking out on back yards and drying laundry, it w f blue the kitchenette and a   
tiny bath. Large pieces of apartment, exce for van under yellow PaPer Patterns- 'Dam it. Cloth   
jay on the threadbare finish cutting that t. Maybe I'll have time to That divan is such a rat's nes 
 
dress, if I hurry. 
 
"I can finish cutting it," Bozey said.    a dress.    Don't try."    A doorbell "Nonsense, Bomey, you   
can't cut ready.    That's good."    She went to wheezily rang.    iwell, the wine's here al seti the tall   
POPopen the door.    Warren and Janice walked in and surpri his pink apron, holding shears in   
one hand and a sleeve eyed man in ew, and Madeline pattern in the other.    What with the smell   
of the hot toast was a strikingly in a housecoat with a dress and a lacy slip on her arm, it   
domestic scene. "My gosh, Warren, you're tan!"    Madeline was "oh, hi. 
 
You're early.    M cur to her to be embarrassed. 
 
so sure of her own rectitude that it didn't oc ozeman, a friend of mine." 
 
"This is Sewell B ; he was embarrassed, and in Bozey waved the shears feebly at them his   
fluster be started to cut a ragged blue rayon sleeve. 
 
Madeline said, "Bozey, will you stop cutting that dress!"    She turned to Janice.    "Imagine, he   
actually thinks he can do it." 
 
"it's more than I can," Janice Lacouture said, staring incredulously at Bozeman.      Bozey   
dropped the shears and took off his apron with a giggle. 
 
Warren    said    just    to    say something and    cover    his    stupefaction, "Your dinner    smells   
great,   
Madeline." 
 
After completing introductions, Madeline went off into what she called her boudoir, a grimy   
toilet about four feet square.    "If you'd like to freshen up first-" she said to Janice as she opened   
the door, gesturing at the few cubic feet of yellow space crammed with rusty plumbing. "It's a   
bit cosy in there for two." 
 
"Oh, no, no I'm just fine," Janice exclaimed.    'Go ahead."    A halting conversation ensued while   
Bozey donned his jacket and tie. 
 
Soon Madeline put out her head and one naked shoulder and arm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Bozey, I don't want that beef stew to boil over.    Turn down the gas." 
 
"Sure thing." 
 
As he went behind the screen, Janice Lacouture and Warren exchanged appalled looks.    "Do   
you play with the New York Philharmonic, Mr. Bozeman?"    Janice raised her voice. 
 
'No, I'm with Ziggy Frechtel's orchestra.    We play the Feenamint Hour," he called back.    'I'm   
working on getting up my own band."    He returned and sat in an armchair, or rather lay in it,   
with his head propped against the back and the rest of him projecting forward and down,   
sloping to the floor.    Warren, something of a sloucher himself, regarded this spectacular slouch   
by the limp long brown bulging-eyed trombonist with incredulity.    In a way the strangest   
feature was his costume. Warren had never in his life seen a brown tic on a brown irt. 
 
a the issued from the bathroom smoothing her dress.    "Oh, come on, Bozey, mix some drinks,"   
she carolled. 
 
Bozey hauled himself erect and made drinks, talking on about the problems of assembling a   
band.    A shy, awkward fellow, he honestly believed that the best way to put other people at   
their ease was to keep talking, and the one subject that usually occurred to him was himself. He   
disclosed that he was the son of a minister in Montana; that the local doctor had cured him of   
religion at sixteen, by feeding him the works of IngersoU and Haeckel while treating him less   
successfully for thyroid trouble; and that in rebellion against his father he had taken up the   
trombone. 
 
Soon he was on the topic of the war, which, he explained, was nothing but an imperialist   
struggle for markets.    This was apropos of a remark by Warren that he was a naval fighter pilot   
in training.    Bozey proceeded to set forth the Marxist analysis of war, beginning with the labor   
theory of value.    Madeline meanwhile, finishing angi with d serving up the dinner, was glad to   
let him entertain her company.    She knew Bozey was talkative, but she found him interesting   
and she thought    Warren and Janice might,    too. They seemed    oddly silent. Perhaps, she   
thought, they had just had a little spat. 
 
Under capitalism, Bozey pointed out, workers never were paid what they really earned.    The   
capitalist merely gave them the lowest wages possible.      Since he owned the means of   
production, he had them at his mercy. 
 
Profit was the difference between what the worker produced and what he got.    This had to lead   
to war sooner or later. In each country the capitalists    piled up big surpluses because the   
workers weren't paid enough to buy back what they produced.    The capitalists, to realize their   
profits, had to sell off those surpluses in other countries. 
 
This struggle for foreign markets, when it got hot enough, inevitably turned into war.    That was   
what was happening now. 
 
"But Hitler has no surpluses," Janice Lacouture mildly observed. 
 222 
 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
An economics student, she knew these Marxist bromides, but was willing to let the boyfriend,   
or lover-she wasn't yet sure which-of Warren's sister run on for a while.    "Germany's a land of   
shortages." 
 
'The war is a struggle for foreign markets, all the same," Bozey insisted serenely, back in his   
deep slouch.    'How about cameras, just at random? 
 
Germany still exports cameras. 
 
Warren said, 'As I understand you, then, the Germans invaded Poland to sell Leicas." 
 
"Making jokes about economic laws is easy, but irrelevant."    Bozey smiled. 
 
"I'm fairly serious," Warren said.      "Obviously Hitler's reason for attacking Poland was   
conquest and loot, as in most wars." 
 
"Hitler is a figurehead," said Bozey comfortably.    "Have you ever heard of Fritz Thyssen?    He   
and the Krupps and a few other German capitalists put him in power.    They could put someone   
else in tomorrow if they chose, by making a few telephone calls.    Of course there's no reason   
why they should, He's a usem and obedient lackey in their struggle for foreign markets." 
 
'I"at you're saying is the straight Conununist line, you know," Janice said. 
 
"Oh, Bozey's a Communist," Madeline said, emerging from behind the screen with a wooden   
bowl of salad.    "Dinner's ready.    Will you dress the salad, Bozey?" 
 
"Sure thing."    Bozey took the bowl to a rickety little side table, and made expert motions with   
oil, vinegar, and condiments. 
 
"I'm not sure I've ever met a Communist before," Warren said, peering at the long brown man. 
 
"My gosh, you haven't?"    said Madeline.    "Why, the radio business swarms with them." 
 
"That's a slight xaggerafion," Bozey saidy rubbing garlic on the salad bowl, and filling the   
close, warm flat with the pungent aroma. 
 
"Oh, come on, Bozey.    Who isn't a Communist in our crowd?") "Well, Peter isn't.    I don't think   
Myra is.    Anyway, that's just our gang.- He added to Warren, "It dates from the Spanish Civil   
War days. 
 
We Put on all kinds of shows for the benefit of the LoYalists." 
 
Bozey brought the salad bowl to the table, where the others were already seated. 
 
"Of course there', just a few of us left now.    A lot of the crowd dropped away after Stalin made   
the pact with Hitler.    They had no fundamental convictions." 
 
"Didn't that pact bother YOu?"    Warren said. 
 
"Bother me?    Why?    It was a    move.    The capitalist powers want 
 223 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
to snuff out socii in the S 
 
a' sen oviet Union.    If they bleed themselves white beforehand, fighting each other, the final   
attack on socialism will be that much weaker. Stalin's peace policy is very wise."    Warren said,   
"Suppose Hitler polishes off England and France in a one-front war, and the tun n ms and   
smashes Russia?    That may well happen.    Stalin could have made a deal with the Allies, and all   
of them together would have had a far better chance of stopping the Nazis."    "But don't you   
see, there's no reason for a socialist country to take part in an imperialist struggle for foreign   
markets," 'Socialism doesn't need foreign Plained to the benighted naval aviator.      Bozey   
patiently e,markets, since the worker gets all he creates." 
 
"Bozey, will you bring the stew?"    Madeline said. 
 
'Sure thing." 
 
JaWce Lacouture said, speaking louder as he went behind the screen, "B,t surely you know that   
a Russian worker gets less than a worker in any capitalist country." 
 
"Of course- There are two reasons for that. Socialism triumphed first in a feudal country,"   
Bozey said, reappearing with the stew, 'and had a big industrial gap to close.    Also, because of   
the imperialist threat, socialmn had to divert a lot of Production to arms. When socialism   
triumphs everywhere, arms will become useless, and they'll all be thrown in the sea. 
 
"But even if that happens, which I doubt, it seems to me," said Janice, "that when the state   
owns the means Of Production, the workers will get less than if capitalists own them. You   
know how inefficient and tyannical government bureaucracies are." 
 
"Yes," interjected Madeline, ('but as soon as socialism triumphs everybody will need a central   
rywhere the state will wither away, because nobod e wine Then the workers will get it all.  
 
Pass the government any more, around) Bozey."- "Sure thing-2) mowing his eyes at her, "Do   
you believe Warren said to his sister, na that? 
 
"Me?"    Madeline said, giggling. 
 
"Well, that's how the argument goes ds with Communists?    For "Wouldn't Dad die if he knew   
I'd made frien heaven's sake don't write and tell him-' "that about Finland?" 
 
"Have no fear."    Warren turned to Bozey. country was then about a The Russian invasion of   
the tiny northern 
 
week old, and already looking like a disaster. 
 
"Okay.    What about it?" 
 
"Well,    you    know    Russia    claims    that    Finland    attacked    her,    the way Hitler    claimed   
Poland   
attacked Germany.    Do you believe that?" 
 
"It's ridiculous to think that Poland attacked Germany," Bozey said calmly, "but it's highly   
 
 
 
 
 
 
likely that Finland attacked the Soviet Union. It was probably a provocation engineered by   
others to embroil socialism 
 
the imperialist war." 
 
in "The Soviet Union is fifty times as big as Finland," Janice Lacou ture said. 
 
"I'm not saying the Finns did something wise," said Bozey- 'They were egged on into making a   
bad mistake.    Anyway, Finland just used to be a duchy of Czarist Russia.    It's not an invasion   
exactly, it's a rectification." 
 
"Oh, come    on, Bozey,    Madeline    said. "Stalin's    simply making    hay while    the sun shines,   
slamming his way in there to improve his strategic position against Germany. "Of course " ,   
Warren said and that's a damned prudent move in his situation, whatever the morality of it may   
be." Bozey smiled cunningly, his eyes starting from his head.    "Well, it's lift their hands in holy   
horror when a socialist government does something realistic.    They 
 
think that's their exclusive privilege." 
 
quite    true he    wasn't born    yesterday.    The imperialists liny    do    you    suppose    the invasion's   
flopping on its face?" Warren 
 
said. 
 
"Oh, do you believe the capitalist newspapers?"    said Bozey, with a broad wink "Yuu think the   
Russians are really winning?" 
 
"Why, all this nonsense about the Finnish sid troops in white unifomis makes me ill," Bozey   
said.    "Don't you suppose the Russians have 
 
I 
 
I - m Lskis and white uniforms too?    But catch the New York Times saying so." 
 
"This is a lovely stew," Janice said. 
 
"I used too many cloves," Madeline said.    'Don't bite into one." 
 
Warren and Janice left right after dinner to go to the theatre. 
 
He was on a seventy-two-hour pass from Pensacola, and Janice had come up from Washington   
to meet him; dinner with Madeline had been a lastminute arrangement by long-distance   
telephone. when they left, Madeline was cutting out her dress and Bozey was washing the   
dishes. 
 
'What do I do now?"    Warren said, out in the street.    The theatre was only a few blocks away.   
It was snowing and cabs were unobtainable , so they walked.    "Get myself a shotgun?  
 
"What for?    To put Bozey out of his misery?" 
 225 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"TO get him to marry her, was my idea." 
 
Janice laughed, a-d hugged his arm.    "There's nothing doing between those two, honey." 
 
"You don't think so? 
 
"Not a chance.    that's quite a gal, your little sister. 
 
note I say?" 
 
"Jesus Christ, Yes.    The Red Flame of Manhattan.    That's a hell of a And I Wrote my folks I   
was going to ('YOu just tell your parents that everything's cause it is."    v's' do They walked   
with heads bent, the snow whirling on the wind into their faces. 
 
"y are you so quiet?"    said Janice.    'Don't worry about your sister. Really, you don't have to." 
 
us 
 
vice family and "I'M thinking how this war's blown ourWfaem'rielyaaspeart- I mean, we 
 
we're used to that, but it's different no said 
 
ed to scatter here and there," Warrenw.    Id.don't feel there's a base any 
 
more- And we're a changin 
 
gether again."    11 9. I don't know if we'll ever pull back to-Sooner or later all la mil et change   
and scatter," said Janice Lacouture, "and out of the pieces new families t n fl ' She Put her face   
to his for a moment, a d snow akes fell on the two warm cheeks. 
 
and a very lovely arrangement it is, too start up.    That's how it goes, phat!    I hope she's rid of   
that one by t e time Dad gets back. 
 
"The imperialist struggle for foreign markets," said Warren. 
 
jehoe he'll lay waste to Radio City.- h therwise peachy with her. 
 
Be t her-Now hat YRON!"    ut the name and stared.    He sat as usual on the BDr, Jastrow gasped   
o his legs, the ay shawl around his shoulders, terrace, the blue blanket over grad on his lap.    A   
cold breeze blowing across the writing board an'd Yellow P s. In the translucent air the the   
valley from Siena fluttered Jastrow's Page d cathedral atop the vineack-and-white stripe Id red- 
walled town, with its bl like the medieval Siena in o hills, looked hauntingly yard-checkered   
frescoes. 
 
"Hello, A.J."    declare I'll be a week recovering from the start or me, Byron!    I about you only at   
breakfast.    We were you've given me! 
 
We were talking both absolutely certain you'd be in the State "She's here?" 
 
"of course.    She's up in the library." u 
 
 226 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Sir, will You eric se me?p 
 
onect myself-oh, and Byron, tell Maria I'd '-Yes, go ahead, let me c g tea right awaylike some   
stron a time and walked into the 00 three at Byron t k the center hall steps black skirt, pale and   
library.    She stood at the desk in a gray sweater, a It is you.    NobodY else galumphs up those   
wide-eyed.    -It is, by God! 
 
stairs like that." 
 
"It's me. 
 
"Why the devil did you come back?" 
 
"I have to make a living."    y didn't you let us know you were coming?" 
 
ni an tretched out a hand uncertai Y, d Put it She approached him, s you look rested, to his   
face.    The long fingers felt dry and cold. 
 
"AnYwaY, kwardly and weight She backed off aw you seem to have put on some beastly that   
day in K6rugs abruptlY.    it!    owe you an apology. 
 
I was feeling from him and l,m sDrry.- She walked away surprises like berg, and if I was rude   
to YOu we can use YOu here, but sank into her desk chair.    "Well s by now.)t "You're an little.   
Wi lveu, I thought I'd better just come-y# this are never pleasant.    Don't you know that yet?"   
As though he had returned from an errand in town, she resumed clattering at the typewriter. 
 
That was all his welcome. Jastrow put him back to work, and within a few days the old   
routines were restored.    It was as though the Polish experience had never occurred, as though   
neither of them had left the hilltop.    The traces of the war in these quiet hills were few. 
 
Only sporadic shortages of gasoline created any difficulty, The Milan and Florence newspapers   
that reached them played down the war. 
 
Even on the BBC broadcasts there was little combat news. The Russian attack on Finland   
seemed as remote as a Chinese earthquake. 
 
Because the buses had become unreliable, Dr.    Jastrow gave Byron a lodging on the third floor   
of the villa: a cramped little maid's room with cracking plaster walls, and a stained ceiling that   
leaked in hard rains. 
 
Natalie lived directly below Byron in a second-floor bedroom looking out on Siena. Her   
peculiar manner to him persisted.    At mealtimes, and generally in Jastrow's presence, she was   
distantly cordw. In the library she was almost uncivil, working away in long silences, and   
giving terse cool answers to questions.      Byron had a modest opinion of himself and his   
attractions, and he took his treatment as probably his due, though he missed the comradeship of   
their days    in Poland and wondered why she never talked about them. He thought he had   
probably annoyed her by following her here.    He was with her now and that was why he had   
come; so, for all the brusque treatment, he was as content as a dog reunited with an irritable   
 227 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
master. 
 
When Byron arrived in Siena, the Constantine book was on the shelf for the moment, in favor   
of an expanded magazine article, "The Last Palio." In describing the race, Jastrow had evoked   
a gloom-filled image of Europe plunging again toward war.    A piece startling in its foresight, it   
had arrived on the editor's    desk on the first of September,    the day of the invasion. The   
magazine printed it, and Jastrow's pubjisher cabled him a frantic request to work it up into a   
short book, preferably containing a note of optimism (however slight) on the outcome of the   
war.    The cable mentioned a large advance against royalties.    This was the task in hand. 
 
In this brief book, Jastrow was striking an Olympian, farseeing, forgiving note.    The Germans   
would probably be beaten to the ground again, he wrote; and even if they gained the rule of the   
earth, they would in the end be tamed and subdued by their subject peoples, as their ancestors,   
the Goths and Vandals, had been tamed to turn Christian. Fanatic or barbaric despotism had   
only its hour.    It was a recurring human fever fated to cool and pass.    Reason and freedom were   
what all human history eternally moved toward. The Germans were the bad children of Europe,   
Jastrow argued: egotistic, willful, romantic, always poised to break up faltering patterns of   
order.    Anninius had set the ax to the Par Romana; Martin Luther had broken the back of the   
universal Church; now Hitler was challenging Europe's unsteady regime of liberal capitalism,   
based on an obsolete 
 
patchwork structure of nations. 
 
The "PalioP of Europe, wrote Jastrow, the contest of hot little nationalisms in a tiny crowded   
cockpit of a continent, a larger Siena with the sea for three walls and Asia for a fourth, was   
worn out.    As Siena had y one water company and one power company, one telephone system   
only and one mayor, instead of seventeen of these in the seventeen make-believe sovereignties   
called Goose, Caterpillar, Giraffe, and so forth, so Europe was ripe for the same conunonsense   
unification. Hitler, a bad-boy genius, had perceived this.    He was going about the breakup of   
the old order cruelly, wrongly, with Teutonic fury, but what mattered was that he was t. The   
Second World War was the last Palio. Europe essentially correc would emerge less colorful but   
more of a rational and solid structure, whichever side won the idiotic and gory horse race.   
Perhaps this painful but healthy process would become global, and the whole earth would be   
unified at last.    As for Hitler, the villain of the melodrama, he would either be hunted down and   
bloodily destroyed like Macbeth, or he would have his triumph and then he would fall or die.   
The stars would remain, so would the earth, so would the human quest for freedom,   
understanding, and love among brothers. 
 
As he typed    repeated    drafts    of these ideas, Byron    wondered whether Jastrow would have   
written    such    a    tolerant and    hopeful book    had    he    spent    September under    bombardment   
in   
Warsaw, instead of in his villa overlooking Siena.    He thought "The Last Palio' was a lot of   
high-flown irrelevant gab.    But he didn't say so. 
 
Letters were coming to Natalie from Leslie Slote, one or two a week. 
 
She seemed less excited over them than she had been in the spring, when she would rush off to   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
her bedroom to read them, and return looking sometimes radiant, sometimes tearfw.    Now she   
casually skimmed the singlespace typed pages at her desk, then shoved them in a drawer.    One   
rainy day she was reading such a letter when Byron, typing away at the Palio book, heard her   
say, "Good God!"    He looked up.    'Something the matter?" 
 
"No, no," she said, very red in the face, waving an agitated hand and flipping over a page.   
"Sorry.    It's nothing at all." 
 
EL 
 
Byron resumed work, struggling with one of Jastrow's bad sentences. 
 
The Professor wrote in a spiky burned hand, often leaving out letters or words.    He seldom clod   
his s's an se d o's. It was anywy's guess what words some Of these strings of blue spikes   
represented. Natalie could puzzle 
 
them out, but Byron disked her pained condesc ding 
 
"Well!"    Natalie sat " en way of doing it. back in her chair with a thump, staring at the letter.   
"Briny-" 
 
"Yes?" 
 
She hesitated, chewing her full lower lip.    "Oh, hell, I can't help it. 
 
I've got to tell someone, and you're handy.    Guess what I hold here in my hot little hand?"    She   
rustled the pages. 
 
"I see what you're holding." 
 
"You 0 y think you do."    4 
 
n' She laughed in a wicked way. 'I'm going to tell you. it's a proposal of marriage from a   
gentleman named Leslie Manson Slote, Rhodes Scholar, rising diplomat, and elusive bachelor. 
 
And what do you think of that, Byron Henry?"    "Congratulations," Byron said. 
 
The buzzer on Natalieps desk rang.    "Oh, lord.    Briny, please go and see what A.J. wants.    I'm   
in a fog."    She tossed the letter on the desk and thrust long white hands in her hair. 
 
Dr.    Jastrow sat blanketed in the downstairs study on the chaise I.we by the fire, his usual place   
in rainy weather.    Facing him in an armchair, a fat pale Italian official, in a green and yellow   
uniform and black halfboots, was drinking coffee. Byron    had never seen the man or the   
uniform before. 
 
-Oh, Byron, a,k Natalie for my resident status file, will you? 
 
She knows where it is."    Jastrow turned to the official.    Will you want to see their papers toO?"   
-Not 'oday, PrOfessore- Only yours." 
 229 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Natalie looked up with an embarrassed grin from rearranging the letsse i fr di Byron told her.   
Her face sobering, she took a key from Iler purse and unlocked a small steel file by the desk.   
"Here."    She gave him a mnila folder tied with red tape.    "Does it look like trouble? 
 
Shall I come down?" "Better wait till you're asked." As he descended the stairs he heard   
laughter from the study, and rapid jovial talk. "Oh, that. Thank you, Byron," Jastrow said,   
breaking into English as he entered, 'just leave it here on the table."    He resumed his anecdote   
in Italian about the donkey that had gotten into the grounds the previous week, laid waste to a   
vegetable patch, and chewed up a whole ter- "oh, hi.    What's doing?" 
 
00 wier chapter of manuscript.    The official's belted belly sh k th aught In the library Natalie   
was typing again.    The Slote letter was out Of sight.    it seem to be much of a problem," Byron   
said. 
 
"There doesn "That's good," she said pladdlyAt dinner that night Dr. Jastrow hardly spoke, ate   
less than usual, and drank two extra glasses of wine.    in this household, where things were so   
monotonously the same day after day, night after night, the first extra glass was an event, the   
second a bombshell.    Natalie finally said, "Aaron, what was that visit about today?" 
 
Jastrow came out of an abstracted stare with a little headshake. 
 
Strangely enough, Giuseppe again." 
 
t gardener, whom he had recently disGiuseppe was the a charged: a scrawny, lazy, stupid old   
drunkard with wiry black hairs on e nose. 
 
Giuseppe had left open the gate through which the donkey ha, entered. 
 
He was always committing such misdemeanors.    Jastrow had lost his temper over the destroyed   
chapter and    the    ravaged    vegetable    beds,    had been    unable to write for two    days, and    had   
suffered bad indigestion. 
 
'How does that officer know Giuseppe?"    Byron said. 
 
That's the odd part. He's from the alien registration bureau in Florence, yet he mentioned   
Giuseppe's nine children, the difficulty of finding work nowadays, and so forth.    When I said   
I'd rehire him, that ended it.    He just handed me the registration papers with a victorious grin."   
Jastrow sighed and laid ws napkin on the table.    'I've put up with Giuseppe all these years, I   
really don't mind.    I'm rather tired. Tell Maria 
 
I'll have my fruit and cheese in the study." 
 
Natalie said when the professor was gone, Let's bring the coffee to my room." 
 
"Sure.    Great." 
 
Never before had she invited him there. Sometimes in his room above he could hear her   
moving about, a tantdwng, faint, lovely noise. 
 230 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
He followed her upstairs with a jumping pulse. 
 
"I live in a big candy box," she said with a self-conscious look, opening a heavy door.    'Aaron   
bought the place furnished, you know, and left it just the way the lady of the house had it.   
Ridiculous for me, but-' She snapped on a light.    It was an enormous room, painted pink, with   
pink and gilt furniture, pink painted cupids on a blue and gold ceiling, pink silk draperies, and   
a huge double bed covered in frilly pink satin. Dark Natalie, in the old brown wool dress she   
wore on chilly evenings, looked decidedly odd in this Watteau setting.    But Byron found the   
con his big knobby 
 
EL 
 
trast as exciting as everything else about her.    She lit the log fire in the marble fireplace carved   
with Roman figures, and they sat in facing armchairs, taking coffee from the low table been   
them. 
 
"Why do you suppose Aaron's so upset?"    Natalie said, settling comfortably in the large chair   
and pulling the long pleated skirt far down over her beautiful legs, 'Giuseppe's an old story.   
Actually it was a mistake to fire him. He knows all about the water connections and the   
electric lines, much more than Tomaso.    And he's really good at the topiary work, even if he is   
a dirty old drunk," 
 
"A.J. was coerced, Natalie."    She bit her lip, nodding.    Byron added, "We're at the mercy of   
these people, A.J, even more than you and me.    He ovens property, he's stuck here." 
 
"Oh, the Italians are all right.    They're not Germans." 
 
"Mussolini's no bargain.    Berel gave A.J. the right advice.    Get out!" 
 
Natalie smiled.    "Lekh lekha.    My God, how far off that all seems. 
 
I wonder how he is."    Her smile faded.    "I)ve shut Warsaw from my mind. 
 
Or tried to." 
 
"I don't blame you." 
 
"How about you, Briny?    Do you ever think about it?" 
 
"Some.    I keep dreaming about it." 
 
"Oh, God, so do I. That hospital-I go round and round in it, night after night-" 'When Warsaw   
fell," Byron    said,    "it    hit    me    hard."      He told    Natalie    about    the    Wannsee    episode.     
At his   
description of the waiter's sudden turnabout, she laughed bitterly.      "Your father sounds   
superb." 
 
"He's all right."He must think I'm a vampire who all but lured you to your death." 
 
"We haven't talked about you." Sudden gloom shadowed Natalie's face. She poured more   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coffee for both of them.    "Stir the fire, Briny. 
 
I'm cold.    Giuseppe's brought in green wood, as usual."    He made the fire flare, and threw on it   
a light log from a blighted tree, which quickly blazed.    'Ah, that's good!"    She j"-peti up, turned   
off the electric chandelier, and stood by the fire, looking at the flames. 
 
"That moment in the railroad station," she nervously burst out, "when they took away the Jews!   
I still can't face it.    That was one reason I was so nasty at K,5,igsberg.    I was in torture.    I kept   
thinking that I could have done some thing.    Sup rw pose I'd stepped lo and, ,aid I was Jewish,   
forced the issue? 
 
St'PPose we'd all created a scandal?    It might have made a difference. But we calmly went to   
the train, and they trudged off the other way." 
 
lost you and Mark Hartley.    The thing Byron said, "We might have was touch and go.    vented   
that.    He stood his ground, at least, "Yes, I know.    Leslie pre though he was shaking like a leaf.   
He did his plain duty.    But those other ambassadors and charges-well-"- e. "And my fan-dly in   
Medzicel When I Natalie had begun to pac picture those kind, good people in the clutches of   
the Germans-but what's the use?    It's futile, it's sickening, to dwell on that."    She threw up her   
hand in a despairing gesture and dropped in her chair, sitting on her legs with her skirt spread   
over them. 
 
Nothing of her was visible in the firelight but her face and her tensely clasped hands. She   
stared at the fire.    "Speaking of old Slote," she said after a long pause, in an entirely different   
tone, what do you think of his proposal to make an honest woman of me?" 
 
"I'm not surprised."    Y-P) "You're not?    I'm stunned.    I never thought I'd live to see the da "He   
told me in Berlin he might marry you.    He'd be crazy not to, if he could." 
 
"Well, he's had that option open to him for a hell of a long time, dear."    She poured coffee and   
sipped, looking darkly at him over the rim of the cup. "Had a big discussion about me in   
Berlin, you two gentlemen, did you?" 
 
"Not a big discussion. He mentioned that you    were just as surly to him that last day in   
Kenigsberg as you 'd been to me." 
 
"I was feeling absolutely horrible that day, Briny." -Well, that's all right. I thought I might   
have off 
 
how, so I asked him." 
 
ended you somese did Slote say about me?" 
 
'This is getting interesting.    What el The low, vibrant voice, the amused glinting of her eyes in   
the firelight, stirred Byron. That you were no girl for me to get involved with, and that he   
hadn't known an hour's peace of mind since he first laid eyes on you. 
 
She uttered a low gloating laugh.    "Two accurate statements, my pet. 
 232 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tell me more." 
 
"That's about it.    It was the same conversation in which he gave me the reading list." 
 
"Yes, and wasn't that pure Slote?    Coming it over you with his book learning!    An illuminating   
little incident, that.    Didn't he really tell you all about us?    About him and me?"    Byron shook   
his head. 
 
Natalie said, 'You wouldn't go and get us some brandy, would you? 
 
I think I'd like a little brandy." 
 
EL He raced down the stairs and up again, returning with a bottle and two shimmering snifters.   
Swirling the brandy round and round in her hands, looking into the balloon glass and rarely   
raising her eyes at him, Natalie broke loose with a SUrprising rush of words about her affair   
with Leslie Slote.    It took her a long time.    Byron said little, interrupting only to throw more   
wood on the fire.    It was a familiar tale of a clever older man having fun with a girl and getting   
snared into a real passion.    Resolving to marry him, she had made his life a nlisery- He didn't   
want to marry her, she said, simply because she was Jewish and it would be awkward for his   
career.    That was all his clouds of words had ever come to. At last, with this letter, after thir   
months, she had him where she wanted 
 
him.    tY 
 
Byron hated every word of the story, yet he was fascinated, and grateful.    The closemouthed   
girl was taking him into her life. These word" which couldn't be unsaid, were ending the   
strange tension between them since Warsaw, their own little phony war-the long hostile   
silences in the library, her holing up in her room, her odd snappish condescension. 
 
As she talked, they were growing intimate as they never had become in a month of adventuring   
through Poland, Everything about this girl interested him.    If it was the account of and this was   
what he had her affair with another man, let it be that! At least Byron was talking about   
Natalie Jastrow with Natalie ja trow, been starved for.    He was hearing this sweet rough voice   
with its occaali tai s sional New Yorkisms, and he could watch the play of her free gesturing   
hand in the firelight, the swoop and sudden stop in the air of flat palm and fingers, her visible   
signature. 
 
Natalie Jastrow was the one person he had ever met who meant as much to him as his father   
did.    In the same way, almost, he hungered to talk to his father, to listen to him, to be with him,   
even though he had to most every conversation be either offended or disappointed Victor   
Henry.    His mother he took resist and withdraw, even though he knew that in a] for granted, a   
warm presence, cloying in her affection, annoying in her kittenish changeability. His father   
was terrific, and in that way Natalie wa, terrific, entirely aside from being a tall dark girl whom   
he had hopelessly craved to seize in his arms since the first hour they had met. 
 
"Well, there you have it," Natalie said.    "This mess has been endless, b"t that's the general idea.   
How about some more of Aaron's brandy? 
 233 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wouldn't you like some?    It's awfully good brandy.    Funny, I usually don't care for it." 
 
Byron poured more for both of them, though his glass wasn't empty. 
 
"What I've been puzzling about all day," she said after a sip, "is why Leslie is throwing in the   
towel now.    The trouble is, I think I know." "He's lonesome for you," Byron said. 
 
Natalie shook her head.    "Leslie Slote behaved disgustingly on the Praha road.    I despised him   
for it, and I let him know I did.    That was the turnaround.    He's been chasing me ever since.    I   
guess in a way I've been running, too.    I haven't even answered half his letters." 
 
Byron said, "You've always    exaggerated that whole thing. All he did-"- "Shut up, Byron.   
Don't be mealymouthed with me.    All he did was turn yellow and use me as an excuse.    He hid   
behind my skirts.    The Swedish ambassador all but laughed in his face."    She tossed off most of   
her brandy.    "Look, physical courage isn't something you can help. 
 
It isn't even important nowadays.    You can be a world leader and a cringing sneak.    That's what   
Hitler probably is.    Still, it happened. 
 
It happened. 
 
I'm not saying I won't marry Leslie Slote because shellfire made him panic. 
 
After all, he behaved well enough at the railroad station.    But I do say that's why he's proposing   
to me. This is his way of apologizing and being a man. it's not quite the answer to my   
maidenly prayers." 
 
it's what you want."    "Well, I don't know.    There are complications. 
 
There's my family. 
 
My parents had wild fits when I told them I was in love with a Christian.    My father took to his   
bed for a week, though that bit of melodrama left me unmoved.    Well, now there's that whole   
fight again. 
 
And Leslie's proposal is odd.    It's not very specific as to time and place.    If I wrote him back   
yes, he might well get on his bicycle again. 
 
"If he's really that kind of fool, which I doubt very much," Byron said, "you could just let him   
bicycle away." 
 
"Then there's Aaron."    "He's not your problem.    He ought to get out of Italy in any case."    "He's   
very reluctant to go." 
 
"Well, he survived while we were away. 
 
'Oh, that's what you think. You should have seen the library and study when I got back.   
Chaos.    And he hadn't written anything in weeks. 
 
Aaron should have gotten married ages ago. He didn't, and he needs a lot of fussing and   
 234 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
petting.    He can't even sharpen a pendl properly." 
 
Byron wondered whether Natalie's irritable garrulity was due to the brandy.    She was gesturing   
broadly, talking breathlessly, and her eyes were wild.    "And there's still another complication,   
you know. 
 
The biggest.l "What's that?" 
 
A She stared at him. "Don't you know what it is, Briny? Haven't you any idea? Not the   
faintest inkling?    Come on now.    Stop it."    He said or rather stammered, because the sudden   
penetrating sexuality in Natalie Jastrow's glance made him drunk, 'I don't think I do." 
 
"All right then, I'll tell You.    You've done it, you devil, and you know it.    You've done what   
you've wanted to do from the first day you came here.    I'm in love with you."    She peered at   
him, her eyes shining and enormous.    "Ye gods, what a dumb stunned face.    Don't you believe   
me?)' Very hoarsely he said, "I just hope it's true."    He got out of his chair, and went to her.   
She jumped up and they embraced. 
 
"Oh God," she said, clinging to him, and she kissed him and kissed him. 
 
"You have such a Marvelous mouth," she muttered. She thrust her hands in his hair, she   
caressed his face.    "Such a nice smile.    Such fine hands.    I love to watch your hands.    I love the   
way you move. 
 
You're so sweet."    It was like a hundred daydreams Byron had had, but far more intense and   
confusing and delicious.    She was rubbing against him in c rude sensual delight, almost like a   
cat.    The brown wool dress was scratchy in his hands.    The perfume of her hair couldn't be   
daydreamed, nor the moist warm sweet breath of her mouth.      Above all gleamed the   
inconceivable wonder that all this was happening. They stood embraced by the crackling   
flames, kissing, saying broken foolish sentences, whispering, laughing, kissing, and kissing   
again. 
 
Natalie pulled away.    She ran a few steps and faced him, her eyes blazing.    "WeE, right. 
 
all I had to do that or die.    I've never felt anything like this in my life, Byron, this maddening   
pull to you.    I've been fighting it off and fighting it off because it's no daum good, you know.   
You're a boy. I won't have it.    Not a Christian.    Not again.    And besides-"she put both hands   
over her face.    "Oh.    Oh!    Don't look at me like that, Briny!    Go out of my bedroom."    Byron   
turned to go, on legs almost caving under him.    He wanted to please her. 
 
She said in the next breath, "Christ, you're a gentleman. It's one of the unbelievable things   
about You.    Would you rather stay?    My darling, MY love, I don't w t put you 0 an to u I want   
to talk some more, but I want to make some sense, that's all.    And I don't want to make any   
false moves. 
 
I)II do anything you say.    I absolutely adore you."    He looked at her standing in the firelight in   
the long wool dress with her arms crossed, one leg out to a side, one hip thrust out, a typical   
 235 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Natalie Pose.    He was dazed with happiness beyond imagining, and flooded with gratitude for   
being alive.    "Listen-would you think of marrying me?" 
 
Byron said. 
 
Natalie's eyes popped wide open and her mouth dropped.    Byron could not help it; he burst out   
laughing at the comic change of her face, and that made her laugh crazily too.    She came to   
him, almost flung herself at him laughing so uproariously that she could hardly manage to kiss   
him. "God in heaven," she gasped, twining him in her arms, "you're incredible. That's two   
proposals in one day for la Jastrow!    It never rains but it pours, eh?" 
 
"I'm serious," he said.    "I don't know why we're laughing.    I want to marry you.    It's always   
seemed preposterous, but if you really do love me-" 
 
"It is preposterous"-Natalie spoke with her lips to his cheek-"preposterous beyond words, but   
where you're concerned I appear to be quite mindless, and perhaps-well! Nobody can say   
you're a beardless boy, anyway!    Quite sandpapery, aren't you?"    She kissed him once more,   
hard, and loosened her arms.    "The first idea was right. 
 
You leave. 
 
Goodnight, darling. 
 
I know you're serious, and I'm terribly touched.    One thing we've got in this godforsaken place   
is time, all the time in the world." 
 
In the darkness, on his narrow bed in the tiny attic room, Byron lay wide awake.    For a while   
he heard her moving about below, then the house was silent.    He could still taste Natalie's lips.   
His hands smelled of her perfume. Outside in the valley donkeys bee-hawed to each other   
across the echoing slopes, a misguided rooster hailed a dawn hours away, and dogs barked.   
There came a rush of wind and a long drumming of rain on the tiles, and after a while water   
dripped into the pail near his bed, under the worst leak.    The rain passed, moonlight shafted   
faint and blue through the little round window, the pattering in the pail ceased, and still Byron   
lay with open eyes, trying to believe it, trying to separate his dreams and fantasies of half a   
year from the real hour when Natalie Jastrow had overwhelmed him with endearments.    Now   
his feverish mind ran on what he must do next.    The window was turning violet when he fell   
asleep in a jumble of ideas and resolves, ranging from medical school and short-story writing   
to the banking business in Washington. Some distant cousins of his mother did control a bank. 
 
Hi, Natalie." "Oh, hi there. Sleep well?" It was almost eleven when he hurried into the   
library.    Byron was a hardened slugabed, but he had not come down this late before.    Three   
books lay open on Natalie's desk, and she was typing away.    She gave him one ardent glance   
and went on with her work. Byron found on his desk a mass of first-draft pages heavily   
scribbled with jastrov/s corrections, to which was clipped a note in red crayon: Let nw have   
this material at lunch, please. 
 
'A.J. looked in here ten minutes ago," Natalie said, 'and made vile noises." 
 236 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Byron counted the pages.    "He's going to make viler ones at lunch. 
 
I'm sorry, but I didn't close my eyes till dawn." 
 
"Didn't you?"    she said, with a secret little smile.    "I slept exceedingly well." 
 
With a quick shuffling of papers and carbon he began to type, straining his eyes at Jastrow's   
scrawl.    A hand ran through his hair and rested warmly on his neck.    "Let's see."    She stood   
over him, looking down at him with affectionate amusement.    Pinned on the old brown dress   
over her left breast was the gold brooch with purple stones from Warsaw. She had never   
before worn it.    She glanced through the pages and took a few. 
 
"Poor Briny, why couldn't you sleep?    Never mind, type your head off, and so Will I." 
 
They did not finish the work before lunch, but by then, as it turned out, Dr.    Jastrow had other   
things on his mind. At noon, an enormous white Lancia rattled the gravel outside the villa.   
Byron and Natalie could hear the rich voice of Tom Searle and the warm hard laugh of his   
wife. 
 
Celebrated American actors, the Searles had been living off and on for fifteen years in a hilltop   
villa not far from Jastrow's.    The woman painted and gardened, while the man built brick walls   
and did the cooking.    Endlessly they read old plays, new plays, and novels that might become   
plays. 
 
Other celebrities came to Siena just to see them.      Tlrough them Jastrow had met and   
entertained Maugham, Berenson, Gertrude Lawrence, and Picasso.    A retired college professor   
would have been a minnow among these big fish; but the success of A Jew's Jesus had put him   
fairly in their company. He loved being part of the celebrities' group, though he grumbled   
about the interference with his work. He often drove down to Florence with the Searles to   
meet their friends, and Natalie and Byron thought the actors might be passing by now to fetch   
him off.    But coming down for lunch, they found A.J. alone in the drawing room, sneezing,   
red-nosed, and waving an emptied sherry glass. 
 
He complained that they were late.    In fact they were a bit early. 
 
"The Searles are leaving," he said when lunch was over, having sneezed and blown his nose all   
through the meal without uttenng a word. 
 
"Just like that.    They came to say good-bye." 
 
"Oh?    Are they doing a new play?"    said Natalie. 
 
"They're getting out.    Lock, stock, and barrel.    They're moving every stick back to the States." 
 
"But doesn't their lease run for-how many more years?    Five?" 
 
"Seven.    They're abandoning the lease.    They can't afford to get stuck here, they say, if the war   
spreads."    Jastrow morosely fingered his beard. 
 237 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"That's one difference between leasing and buying.    You just walk away. 
 
You don't bother your head about what happens to the place. I must say they urged me to   
lease.    I should have listened to them.    But the purchase rice was so cheap!" 
 
p Byron said, "Well, sir, if you think there's any danger, your skin comes first." 
 
"I have no such fears.    Neither have they.    For them it's a matter of business.    We'll have our   
coffee in the lemon house."    With a peevish toss of his head, he lapsed into silence.  
 
The lemon house, a long glassed-in structure with a dirt floor, full of small potted citrus trees,   
looked out on a grand panorama of the town and the rounded brown hills.    Sheltered here from   
cold winds that swept up the ravine, the trees throve in the pouring sunlight, and all winter long   
blossomed and bore fruit.    Jastrow believed, contrary to every medical opinion, that the sweet   
heavy scent of the orange and lemon blooms was good for the asthma that hit him when he was   
nervous or angry.    Possibly because he believed this, it tended to work.    His wheezing stopped   
while they drank their coffee.    The warm sun cheered him up.    He said, "I predict they'll sneak   
back in short order with their tails between their legs, and three vans of furniture toiling up the   
hill.    They remind me of the people who used to go fleeing off Martha's Vineyard at the first   
news of a hurricane. I sat through four hurricanes and thoroughly enjoyed the spectacle."   
Natalie said after he left, "He's badly shaken." 
 
"I hope he gets shaken loose from here." 
 
"Dear, this house will go to rack and ruin if A.J. leaves it." 
 
"So what?" 
 
"You've never owned anything, have you, Briny?    Or saved any money. 
 
Once you have, you may understand." 
 
"Look, Natalie, A.J. had a windfall late in life and got carried away and bought himself a big   
Italian villa for a song, in a lonesome mountain town.    All right.    Suppose he walks away now?   
If he offers it for sale he'll get something for it.    Otherwise he can return after the war and put it   
back in shape.    Or he can just forget it, and Ict it fall down.    Easy come, easy go." 
 
"You see things so simply, she said. 
 
They were sitting side by side on a white wicker couch.    He started to put his arm around her.   
"Stop that," she said, catching her breath and L deflecting his arm. "That's too simple, too.   
Listen carefully, Byron.    FloN, old are you?    Are you twenty-five yet?    I'm twenty-seven." 
 
"I'm old enough for you, Natalie." 
 
"Old enough for what?    To sleep with me?    Don't talk rubbish.    The question is, what are you   
doing with yourself? I can teach at a university anytime. I've got my M.A. thesis almost   
finished.    What have you got?    A smile that drives me mad and a handsome head of hair. 
 238 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
You ) re brave, you're gentle, but you just drifted here.    You only stayed because of me. 
 
You're killing time and you're trained for nothing." 
 
"Natalie, how would you like to be married to a banker?" 
 
"A what?    A ha?" 
 
He told her about his relatives and their bank in Washington. 
 
Hands folded in her lap, she beamed at him, her face aglow in the sunshine. 
 
"How does that sound?"    he said. 
 
"Oh, fine," she said.    "You're really facing up to life at last. 
 
A stern, serious business, isn't it?    Tell me one thing." 
 
"What?"    "Tell me when you decided you liked me. 
 
"Don't you want to discuss this bank idea?" 
 
'Of course, dear.    All in good time.    When was it?" 
 
"All right, I'll tell You.    When you took off your sunglasses. 
 
"My sunglasses? When was that?" "Why, that first day, when we came into the villa with   
Slote.    Don't You remember You had big ? 
 
these dark glasses on in the car, but then you took them off, and I could see your eyes." 
 
"So?" 
 
u "But it's so absurd.    Like everything else you say and do.    What did "You asked me whe n I   
fell in love with you.    I'm telling you. 
 
YOu know about me?    Anyhow, my eyes must have been totally bloodshot. 
 
I'd been up four, having till one hellish row with Leslie.    You struck me as nothing at all, dear,   
so i didn't give a damn.    Now look, you don't really 'want to be a banker, do you?" 
 
He said with an abashed grin, "Well, I did think of one other thing. 
 
But don't laugh at me." 
 
"I won't." 
 
"I thought of the Foreign Service.    it's interesting and it's serving the country." 
 
"You and Leslie in the same service," she said.    "That would be a ho, one."    She took his hand   
in a maternal way that depressed Byron. 
 239 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"This isn't much fun for you, Briny dear, all this serious talk." 
 
"That's okay," Byron said.    "Let's go right on with it." 
 
For a moment    she sat pondering, holding his hand in her lap, as she had in the Swedish   
ambassador's limousine.    "I'd better tell you what I really think.    The trouble is you are trained   
for something. 
 
You're a naval officer."    "That's the one thing I'm not, and that I've made a career of not being."  
 
"You already have a commission." 
 
"I'm just a lowly reserve.    That's nothing." 
 
"If the war goes on, you'll be called up.    You'll stay in for years. That's what you'll probably be   
in the end, from sheer inertia, and family custom, and the passing of time." 
 
"I can resign my reserve commission tomorrow.    Shall I?" 
 
'But suppose we get in the war?    What then?    Wouldn't you fight?" 
 
"There's nothing else to do then."    She put her hand in his hair, and yanked it.    "Yes, that's how   
your mind works.    Well, I love you for that and for other things, but Byron, I'm not going to be   
the wife of a naval officer. I can't think of a more ridiculous and awful existence for me. I   
wouldn't marry a test pilot either, or an actor, don't you understand?" 
 
"It's no issue, I tell you, I'll never be a naval officer-what the devil? 
 
Now what?    Why are you crying?" 
 
She dashed the sudden tears from her face with the back of her hand, smiling.    "Oh, shut up.   
This is an insane conversation.    The more I try to make sense, the wilder it all gets.    All I know   
is that I'm crazy about you.    If it's a dead end, who cares?    I obviously thrive on dead ends.    No,   
not now, love, really, no-" She gasped the last words as he firmly took her in his arms. 
 
There was nobody in sight.    Beyond the glass there was only the panorama of hills and town,   
and inside the lemon house silence and the heavy sweet scent of the blossoms.    They kissed   
and kissed, touching and holding and gripping each other.    Soon Natalie happened to glance up   
and there stood the gardener Giuseppe outside the glass, leaning on a wheelbarrow full of   
cuttings, watching.    With a squinting inebriated leer, he wiped a sleeve of his sweater across   
his knobbed nose, and obscenely winked. 
 
"Oh, Jesus Christ," she said, yanking angrily at her skirt. The gardener showed sparse foul   
teeth in a grin and trundled the wheelbarrow away.    Byron sat flushed, dazed, and dishevelled,   
looking after him. 
 
"Well, there goes our little secret, sweetheart.      Kissing and smooching under gsl What's   
happened to me? This whole thing is a plain brute attraction between two people isolated   
together too long." 
 240 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
She leaped to her feet and pulled at his hand.    "But I love you. 
 
I can't help it.    I don't want to help it.    Oh, that son of a bitch Giuseppe!    Come, let's get back to   
the rock pile.    We must." 
 
Jastrow called from his study as they came into the house, "Natalie, where is your letter?    May   
I read it?" 
 
"What letter, A.J.?    I didn't get any mail." 
 
"Are you sure?    I have one from your mother.    She says she's written you another and much   
longer one.    Come read this.    It's important." 
 
He waved a flimsy airmail sheet as Byron went upstairs. 
 
There were only half a dozen lines in her mother's neat featureless writing, a Manhattan public   
school script: Dear Aaron: We would both appreciate it if you would urge Natalie to come   
home.    Louis took that story of her trip to Poland very hard.    The doctor even thinks that it may   
have been the cause of this attack.    I've written Natalie all about it.    You MaY as well read that   
letter, there's no sense in my repeating the whole terrible story. In ret"spect, we were very   
lucky. 
 
Louis seems in no immediate danger, but that's all the doctor will tell us. 
 
We're all wondering how long you yourself intend to stay on in Italy. 
 
Don't you feel it's dangerous? I know that you and Louis have been out of touch all these   
years, but still he does worry about you. 
 
You're his one brother. 
 
Love, Sophie and Louis Natalie checked the mail piled on her desk in the library, but there was   
only one letter for her, from Slote. 
 
Looking up from his work, Byron saw her somber expression.    ('What is it, Natalie?" 
 
"It's my father.    I may have to leave." 
 
The letter from her two rnve later. Meantime Natalie resumed a certain aloofness toward   
Byron, though she still wore the brooch, and looked at him with changed eyes. 
 
She took the long and somewhat frantic account of her father's heart attack to Jastrow, who   
was having his tea by the fire in the study, wrapped in a shawl.      He shook his head   
sympathetically over it and handed it back to her.    Gazing at the fire and sipping tea, he said,   
'You had better go." 
 
"Oh, I think so.    I'm practically packed." 
 
"What was Louis's trouble last time?    Was it this bad?" 
 241 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The brothers were deeply estranged-Natalie did not know exactly why-and this breaking of   
their long tacit silence about her father gave her ai awkward, unpleasant sensation. 
 
I was in love 
 
"No, not really.    The trouble was my announcement that with e. 
 
Papa got awfully weak and had breathing difficulty and a blackout episode. But he wasn't   
hospitalized that time."    Jastrow pensively fingered his beard.    'He's only sixty-one.    You know,   
it gets to be suspenseful, Natalie, this question of whose heredity you've got. Our mother's   
family mostly popped off in their fifties.    But Father's two brothers both made it past ninety   
and he reached eighty-eight. My teeth are like my father's. I have excellent teeth. Louis   
always had a lot of trouble with his teeth, the way Mama did."    Jastrow became aware of the   
girl's dark watchful regard. He made a little apologetic gesture with both hands. "You're   
thinking what a self-centered old horror A.J. is." 
 
"But I wasn't thinking that at all."    Jastrow put on cotton gloves to poke at the fire and throw on   
a fresh log.    He was vain about his small finely shaped hands.    "You won't come back.    I know   
that.    Life will get difficult here.    Possibly I could go to New Mexico or Arizona. 
 
But they're such dull, arid, zero-culture places!    The thought of trying to write there!"    He gave   
a deep sigh, almost a groan. 
 
"No doubt my books aren't that important.    Still, the work is what keeps me going." 
 
'Your books are important, A.J."    "Are they?    Why?"    Natalie sat leaning her chin on a fist,   
groping for an honest and precise answer. 
 
She said after a pause, "Of course they're extremely readable, and often brilliant, but that's not   
their distinction.    Their originality lies in the spirit.    The books are very Jewish.    In a creditable,   
unsentimental way, in substance and in attitude.    They've made me, at least, rehlize how very   
much Christendom owes this bizarre little folk we belong to. It's surprising how much of that   
you've gotten even into the Constantine book." 
 
Her words had a remarkable effect on Aaron Jastrow.    He smiled tremulously, his eyes misted,   
and he all at once did look strikingly Jewish -the mouth, the nose, the expression, the soft white   
hand at his beard, were all features of a badess little rabbi.    He spoke in a soft shaky voice.  
 
"Of course you know exactly what to say to please me." 
 
"That's what I think, Aaron."    "Well, bless you.    I've evolved into a pagan, a materialist, and a   
hedonist-and I fell in love with the grandeur of Christianity and of Jesus long long ago-but   
none of that has made me less Jewish.    Nobody else in the family will accept that, your father   
least of all.    I'm so grateful that you can.    I truly think that the books on Constantine and Luther   
will round out the picture.    I want to get them done.    In my way I'm bearing witness, as my   
rabbinic forebears did in theirs.    Though no doubt they'd be horrified by me." 
 
He studied her face.    He smiled, and his eyes began to twinkle. 
   
  805 
 242 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"How long after you left would Byron remain? He gives me such a secure feeling, just by   
being here." 
 
"Give him a raise in salary. That'll convince him more than anything. He's never earned a   
penny before." 
 
Jastrow pursed his lips, rounded his eyes, and tilted his head. 
 
Many years of living in Italy showed in the mannerism. "I have to watch my money now.   
We'll see.    My strong impression is, actually, that you'll marry Leslie once you get back there,   
and-oh, stop blushing and looking so coy.    Have I hit it?" 
 
"Never mind, A.J." "I'm sure if Byron were aware of that, he'd be more likely to stay on."   
Jastrow stroked his beard, smiling at her. 
 
-Good COd, Aaron!    Do you expect me to tell Byron Henry I'm going to marry Slote, just to   
make him stay with you?"    "Why, my dear, whoever suggested such a thing?    Wait-my point   
is-" Jastrow stretched out a hand and looked after her, utterly astonished at her abrupt walkout.  
 
Holy cow!"    Byron exclaimed.    'There's my father, or his double." 
 
"Where?"    said Natalie.    Her flight was delayed, and they were drinking coffee in the Rome   
airport at a table outside a little cafe; the same cafe where they had lunched before setting off   
for Warsaw. 
 
"Inside that ring of carabinieri over there." 
 
He pointed to a group of men leaving the terminal, escorted by six deferential police officers.   
Some of the party wore the green uniform of the foreign ministry; the rest were in civilian   
clothes.    The military bearing of a short broad-shouldered man, in a pepper-and-salt suit and   
soft hat, had caught Byron's eye.    He stood, saying, "Can it be him?    But why the devil didn't   
he write or wire me that he was coming to Italy?    I'll take a look."    "Briny!" 
 
He was starting to lope away; he stopped short.    "Yes?" 
 
"If it is your father-I'm so tacky and sooty from that horrible train ride, and he's obviously   
busy."      Natalie, usually so self-assured, suddenly looked confused and nervous, in an   
appealing, pathetic way. "I wasn't expecting this.    I'd rather meet him another time."    "Well,   
let's see if it's him." 
 
Victor Henry heard the voice behind him just as the party reached the exit doors.    'Dad!    Dad!   
Wait up!" 
 
Recognizing the voice, Pug turned, waved, and asked his escort from the ministry to wait for   
him. 'D'accordo." The Italian smiled and bowed, eyeing sharply the young man who was   
hurrying up.    "I wig see to your luggage, Commander, and meet you outside.    There is plenty   
of time." The father and son clasped hands.    "Well, how about this?" 
 
Victor Henry said, looking up at Byron's face, with affection he usually concealed when less   
 243 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
surprised. 
 
"What's up, Dad?    Couldn't you let me know you were coming?" 
 
'It happened sudden-like.    I intended to ring you tonight.    What are you doing down here in   
Rome?" 
 
"Natalie's going home.    Her father's sick."    'Oh?    Has she left already?" 
 
"No.    That's her, sitting over there." 
 
"That's the famous Natalie Jastrow?    The one in gray?" 
 
"No, further over, in black.    With the big hat." 
 
Victor Henry caught a new proprietary note in his son's voice. 
 
The listless, hangdog air of his Berlin days had given way to a confident glance and a straighter   
back.    "You're looking mighty bright-eyed and bushytailed," Pug said. 
 
"I feel Marvelous." 
 
"I'd like to meet that girl."    The father suddenly strode toward her, so fast that Byron had to   
take a running step or two to catch up. 
 
There    was no    stopping    him.      They    came    and    faced    Natalie, who    remained seated,   
hands   
clasped in her lap. 
 
'Natalie, this is Dad." 
 
With such a flat introduction these two people, the opposed poles in Byron's life, all at once   
confronted each other.    Natalie offered her hand to Byron's father, looked him in the eye, and   
waited for him to speak.    At first sight, Victor Henry was taken by this weary-looking travel- 
stained girl with the dark eyes and gaunt face.    She was not the legendary adventurous Jewess   
he had built up in his imagination; she had an everyday American look; but withal there was a   
certain exotic aura, and a strong calm feminine presence. She must be feeling highly self- 
conscious, he thought, but there was no sign of it.    In her slight smile as he took her hand, there   
was even a trace of reflected affection for Byron. 
 
He said, "I'm sorry to hear about your father." 
 
She nodded her thanks.    "I don't know how bad it is.    But they want me at home, and so I'm   
going."    Her low voice was sweet, yet as firm as her look. 
 
"Are you coming back?" 
 
"I'm not sure.    Dr.    Jastrow may be returning to the States too, you see." 
 
"He'd be well advised to do that, fairly fast." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pug was looking keenly at her, and she was meeting his glance. 
 
When neither found more to say for the moment, it became a sort of staring contest. Soon   
Natalie smiled a broad, wry, puckish smile, as though to say-"All right, you're his father and I   
don't blame you for trying to see 'what's there.    How do you like it?" 
 
This disconcerted Victor Henry.    He seldom lost such eye-to-eye confrontations, but this time   
he shifted his glance to Byron, who was watching with lively interest, struck by Natalie's swift   
recovery of her poise. "Well, Briny," he almost growled, "I ought to mosey along, and not   
keep that foreign ministry type waiting." 
 
"Right, Dad." 
 
Natalie said, 'Byron told me that you became friendly with the Tudsburys in Berlin,   
Commander.    I know Pamela." 
 
"You do?"    Pug managed a smile.    She was actually trying to put him at his ease with small   
talk, and he liked that. 
 
"Yes, in Paris she and I used to date two fellows who shared the same Hat.    She's lovely." 
 
'I agree, and very devoted to her father.    Maniacal driver, though." 
 
'Oh, did you find that out?    I once drove with her from Paris to Chartres, and almost walked   
back.    She scared me senseless." 
 
'I'd guess it would take more than that to scare you."    Pug held out his hand.    "I'm glad I met   
you, even in this accidental way, Natalie." Awkwardly, in almost a mumble, he added, "It   
explains a lot. 
 
Happy landings. 
 
Flying all the way?" 
 
'I've got a seat on the Thursday Clipper out of Lisbon. I hope I don't get bumped." "You   
shouldn't.    Things are quiet now.    But you're well out of this continent.    Good-bye." 
 
'Good-bye, Commander Henry." 
 
Victor Henry abruptly walked off, with Byron hurrying at his elbow. 
 
"Briny, what about you, now?    You're staying on in Siena?" 
 
"For the time being."    "Do you know that Warren's engaged?" 
 
"Oh,it's definite now?" 
 
"Yes.    They've set a date for May twentieth, after he finishes his carrier training.    I hope you'll   
count on getting back by then.    You won't see any more brothers' weddings.    I'm working on a   
leave for myself." 
 245 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"I'll certainly try.    How's Mom?" 
 
"Off her feed.    Berlin's getting her down."    'I thought she liked it." 
 
"It's becoming less likable."    They stopped at the terminal's glass doors. 
 
"How long will you be in Rome?" 
 
"If I can see you, Dad, I'll just stay on till you're free." 
 
"Well, fine.    Check in at the embassy with Captain Kirkwood.    He's the naval attache.    Could   
be we'll dine together tonight."    "Great." 
 
"That's some girl." 
 
Byron smiled uncertainly.    "Could you really tell anything?"    What you never said is that she's   
so pretty." 
 
"What? I honestly don't think she is. Not pretty, exactly. I'm nuts about her, as you well   
know, but-" 
 
"She's got eyes you could drown in. She's stunning. However, what I wrote you about her   
long ago still goes.    Even more so, now that I've seen her.    She's a grown-up woman.") He put   
his hand for a moment on Byron's shoulder.    "No offense." 
 
"I love her." 
 
"Well, we won't settle that question here and now.    Go back to her, she's sitting there all alone.   
And call Kirkwood about tonight." 
 
"I Will." 
 
Natalie's face was tense and inquiring when Byron came back.    He fell into the chair beside   
her.    "Gad, that was a shock.    I still can't quite believe it.    It all went so fast.    He looks tired." 
 
"Do you know why he's here?" 
 
Byron shook his head slowly. 
 
She said, 'I didn't picture him that way.    He doesn't look severe; on the contrary, almost genial.   
But then when he talks he's scary." 
 
"He fell for you." 
 
"Byron, don't talk rot.    Look at me.    A soot-covered slattern." 
 
'He said something sappy about your eyes." 
 
"I don't believe it.    What did he say?" 
 
"I won't tell you.    It's embarrassing- I never heard him say anything like it before.    Wh I at uck!   
 246 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
He likes you.    Say, my brother's getting married." 
 
"Oh?    When?" 
 
"In May. She's the daughter of a congressman. She doesn't seem all that concerned about   
marrying a naval officer!    Let's make it a double wedding." 
 
'Why not?    You'll be manager of a bank by then, no doubt." 
 
They were both smiling, but the unsettled questions between them put an edge in their tones.    It   
was a relief when the droning loudspeaker announced her flight. Byron carried her hand   
luggage and some fragile gifts for her family into the mill of jabbering, weeping passengers   
and relatives at the gate.    Natalie was clutching her ticket, and trying to understand the shouts   
of the uniformed attendants.    He attempted to kiss her, but it wasn't much of a kiss. 
 
"I love you, Natalie," he said. 
 
She embraced him with one arm arrdd the jostling passengers, and spoke over the tumult.    "It's   
as well that I'm going home just now, I think. 
 
Meantime I met your father!    That was something.    He did like me? 
 
Really?" 
 
"You bowled him over, I tell you.    And why not? 
 
The crowd was starting to push through the gate. 
 
'How will I ever carry all this stuff?    Load me up, sweetheart." 
 
'Promise me you'll cable if you decide not to come back," Byron said, poking bundles into her   
arms and under them.    "Because I'll take the next plane home." 
 
"Yes, I'll cable."    "And promise that you'll make no other decisions, do nothing drastic, before   
you see me again." 
 
"Oh, Byron, how young you are.    All these damned words.    Don't you know how I love you?"   
'Promise!' Her dark eyes wet and huge, her hands and arms piled, the green and yellow ticket   
sticking out of her fingers, she shrugged, laughed, and said, "Oh, hell.    it's a promise, but you   
know what Lenin said.    Promises like piecrusts are made to be broken. Good-bye, my darling,   
my sweet. 
 
Good-bye, Byron."    Her voice rose as the press of passengers dragged her away. 
 
After a couple of hours of troubled sleep at the hotel, Commander Henry put on a freshly   
pressed uniform, with shoes gleaming like black mirrors, and walked to the embassy.    Under a   
low gray sky, in the rows of tables and chairs along the Via Veneto, only a few people were   
braving the December chill.    The gasoline shortage had almost emptied the broad boulevard of   
traffic.    Like Berlin, this capital city exuded penury and gloom. 
 247 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Captain Kirkwood had left for the day.    His yeoman handed Pug a long lumpy envelope.    Two   
small objects clattered to the desk when he ripped it open: silver eagles on pins, the collar   
insignia of a captain. 
 
Captain William Kirkwood presents his compliments to Captain Victor Henry, and trusts he is   
free to dine at nine, at the Osteria dell' Orso. 
 
P.S. You're out of uniform.    Four stripes, please. 
 
Clipped to the note was a strip of gold braid, and the Alnav letter    Esting newly selected   
captains, on which Victor (none) Henry was ringed in heavy red lines. 
 
The yeoman's refreshing, freckled American face wore a wide grin. 
 
"Congratulations, Capon." 
 
"Thank you.    Did my son call?"    , suh.    He's coming to dinner. 
 
That's all arranged.    Ah've got fresh coffee going, suh, if you'd like a cup in the cap'n's office." 
 
"That'll be fine." 
 
Sitting in the attache's swivel chair, Pug drank one cup after another of the rich Navy brew,   
delightful after months of the German ersatz stuff. He ranged on the desk before him the   
eagles, the Alnav, the strip of gold braid.    His seamed pale face looked calm, almost bored, as   
he swung the chair idly, contemplating the tokens of his new rank; but he was stirred, exalted,   
and above all relieved. 
 
He had long been dreading that the selection board, on this first round, might him over.    E Pass   
xecs of battleships and cruisers, squadron commanders of submarines and destroyers, insiders   
in BuShips and BuOrd, could well crowd out an attache.    The big hurdle of the race for flag   
rank was early promotion to captain. The few officers who became admirals had to make   
captain on the wing.    This early promotion, this small dry irrevocable statistic in the record,   
was his guerdon for a quarter of a century of getting things done.    It was his first promotion in   
ten years, and it was the crucial one. 
 
He wished he could share this cheering news at once with his restless wife.    Perhaps when he   
got back to Berlin they could throw a wingding, he thought, for embassy people,   
correspondents, and friendly foreign attaches, and lighten the gloom lying heavy in the jemes   
mansion in Grunewald. 
 
Natalie Jastrow popped back into his mind, displacing even the promotion.    Since the chance   
encounter, he kept thinking of her.    In those few minutes he had sensed the powerful, perhaps   
unbreakable, bond between his son and the girl.    Yet how could that be?    Young women like   
Natalie Jastrow, if they went outside their natural age bracket, tended to marry a man almost   
his own age rather than to reach down and cradlesnatch a stripling like Byron.    Natalie was   
more mature and accomplished than Janice, who was marrying Byron's older brother.    It was   
mismatch enough for these reasons, and made him wonder about her sense and stability, but   
 248 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
the Jewish problem loomed above all. 
 
Victor Henry was no bigot, in his own best judgment.    His narrowly bounded little had brought   
him into very little contact with Jews. He was an and realist and the whole thing spelled   
trouble. If he were to have halfJewish grandchildren, well, with such a mother they would   
probably be handsome and bright.    But he thought his son was not man enough to handle the   
complications and might never be. The coolness and courage he had displayed in Warsaw   
were fine traits for an athletic or military career, but in daily life they meant little, compared to   
ambition, industry, and common sense. 
 
"Mr.    Gianelli is here, sir."    The yeoman's voice spoke through the squawk box. 
 
"Very well."    Victor Henry swept up the tokens and put them in a trouser pocket, not nearly as   
happy as he had once thought promotion to captain would make him. 
 
The San Francisco banker had changed to an elegant doublebreasted gray suit with bold chalk   
stripes and outsize British lapels.    The interior of his green Rolls Royce smelled of a strong   
cologne.    "I trust you enjoyed your nap as much as I did mine," he said, lighting a very long   
cigar.    All his gestures had the repose, and all the details of his personmanicure, rings, shirt,   
tie-the sleekness, of secure wealth. Withal, he appeared stimulated and slightly nervous.    "Now   
I've already spoken to the foreign minister.    You've met Count Ciano?" 
 
Pug shook his head. "I've known him well for many years. He's definitely coming to the   
reception, and from there will take me to the Palazzo Venezia.    Now, what about you?    What   
are your instructions?" 
 
'To consider myself your aide as long as you're in Italy and Germany, sir, and to make myself   
useful in any way you desire." 
 
'Do you understand Italian?" 
 
'Poorly, to say the least.    I can grope through a newspaper if I have to. 
 
"That's a pity." The banker smoked his cigar with calm relish, his drooping eyes sizing up   
Victor Henry.    'Still, the President said there might be value in having you    along at both   
interviews, if these heads of state will stand for it.    just another pair of eyes and ears.  
 
At Karinhall, of course, I can ask that you interpret for me.    My German's a bit weak.    I think   
we have to feel our way as we go.    This whole errand is unusual and there's no protocol for it.   
Ordinarily I'd be accompanied by our ambassador." 
 
"Suppose I just come along, then, as though it's the natural thing, unless they stop me?" 
 
The banker's eyes closed for several seconds, then he nodded and opened them.    "Ah, here's the   
Forum.    You've been in Rome before? 
 
We're passing the Arch of Constantine.    A lot of old history here! 
 
I suppose envoys came to Rome in those days on errands just as strange." 
 249 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pug said, "This reception now, is it at your apartment?" 
 
"Oh no, I keep just a very small flat off the Via Veneto.    My uncle and two cousins are bankers   
here.    It is at their town house, and the reception is for me.    Let us just see how this goes.    If,   
when we're with Ciano, I touch my lapel so, you'll excuse yourself. 
 
Otherwise come along, in the way you suggest."    These arrangements proved needless because   
Mussolini himself dropped in on the party. 
 
About half an hour after the arrival of the Americans, a commotion started up at the doorway   
of the enormous marblecolumned room, and Il Duce came walking bouncily in.    He was not   
expected, judging by the excitement and confusion among the guests. 
 
Even Ciano, resplendent in green, white, and gold uniform, seemed taken aback. Mussolini   
was a surprisingly small    man,    shorter than Pug, dressed in a wrinkled tweed jacket, dark   
trousers, a sweater, and brown-and white saddle shoes. It struck Pug at once that with this   
casual apparel Mussolini was underlining-perhaps for its eventual effect on the Germans-his   
contempt for Roosevelt's informal messenger. 
 
Mussolini went to the buffet table, ate fruit, drank tea, and chatted jauntily with guests who   
crowded around.    He moved through the room with a teacup, talking to one person and another.   
He glanced once at Luigi Gianelli as he passed Close by, but otherwise be ignored the two   
Americans.    In this setting Mussolini hardly resembled the chin-jutting imperial bully with the   
demonic glare, His prominent eyes had an Italian softness, his t-.mile was wide, ironical, very   
worldly, and it seemed to Victor Henry that here was a smart little fellow who had gotten   
himself into the saddle and loved it, but whose bellicosity was a comedy.    There was no   
comparing him with the ferocious Hitler. 
 
Mussolini left the room while pug was clumsily making talk with the banker's aunt, a   
bejewelled, painted crone with a haughty manner, a peppermint breath and almost no hearing.   
Seeing the banker beckon to him and walk off after IDano, Pug excused himself and followed.   
The three men went through tall carved wooden doors into a princely high-ceilinged library,   
lined with volumes    bound in gold-stamped brown, scarlet, or blue leather. Tall    windows   
looked out over the city, which appeared so different from blacked-out Berlin, with electric   
lights twinklin and blazing in long crisscrossing lines and scattered clusters. Mussolini with a   
regal gesture invited them to sit. The banker came to the sofa beside bin4 while Ciano and   
Victor Henry faced them in armchairs.    Mussolini coldly stared at Henry and turned the stare to   
Gianelli. 
 
The look at once changed Pug's impression of the Italian leader, and gave him a forcible sense   
that he was out of his depth and under suspicion. 
 
He felt junior and shaky, an ensign who had blundered into flag country. 
 
Ciano had given him no such feeling, and still didn't, sitting there gorgeous and wary, the son- 
in-law waiting for the powerful old man to talk. 
 250 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
At this close range Pug could see how white Mussolini's fringe of hair was, how deep the   
creases of decision were folded in his face, how vivid were the large eyes, which now had an   
opaque glitter.    This man could readily order a hundred murders, Pug decided, if he had to.    He   
was an Italian ruler. 
 
Pug could half follow the banker's clear, measured Italian as he rapidly explained that Franklin   
Roosevelt, his treasured friend, had appointed the Berlin naval attache as an aide for his few   
days in Europe; also that Henry would be acting as interpreter with Hitler. He said Henry   
could now remain or withdraw at Il Duce's pleasure. 
 
Mussolini gave the attache another glance, this time obviously weighing him as a Roosevelt   
appointee.    His expression warmed. 
 
'Do you speak Italian?"    he said in good English, catching Henry unawares almost as though a   
statue had broken into speech. 
 
"Excellency, I can follow it in a fashion.    I can't speak it.    But then, I have nothing to say." 
 
Mussolini smiled, as Pug had seen him smile at people in the other room. "If we come to naval   
matters maybe we will talk English."    He looked expectantly at the banker. 
 
i(, Luigi?), The banker talked for about a quarter of an hour. 
 
Since Pug already knew the substance, the banker did not altogether lose him. After some   
compliments, Gianelli said he was no diplomat and had neither the credentials nor the skill to   
discuss matters of state. 
 
He had come to put one question informally to Il Duce, on behalf of the President. Mr.   
Roosevelt had sent a private citizen who knew 11 Duce, so that a negative reply would not   
affect formal relations between the United States and Italy. 
 
The President was alarmed by the drift toward catastrophe in Europe. If fall-scale war broke   
out in the spring, horrors that nobody could foresee might engulf the whole world. Was it   
possible to do something, even at this late hour?    Mr.    Roosevelt had in mind a formal, urgent   
mission by a high United States diplomat, somebody on the order of Sumner Wefles (Ciano,   
drumming the tips of his fingers together, looked up at the mention of the name), to visit all the   
chiefs of the warring states, perhaps late in January, to explore the possible terms of a general   
European settlement. 
 
E Duce himself had made a last-minute call for a similar exploration on August 31, in vain.   
But if he would join the President now in bringing about such a settlement, he would hold a   
place in history as a savior of mankind. 
 
Mussolini deliberated for a minute or so, his face heavy, his shoulders bowed, his look   
withdrawn, one hand fiddling with his tweed lapels. Then he said-as nearly as Pug could follow   
him-that the foreign policy of Italy rested on the Pact of Steel, the unshakable tie with   
Germany.    Any attempt, any maneuver, any trick designed to split off Italy from this alliance   
 251 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
would fail.    A settlement in Europe was always possible.    No one would welcome it more than   
he.    As Mr. 
 
Roosevelt acknowledged, he himself had tried to the last to preserve the peace.    But Hitler had   
offered a very reasonable settlement in October, and the Allies had spurned it.    The American   
government in recent years had been openly hostile to Germany and Italy.    Italy too had serious   
demands that had to be part of any settlement.    These were not matters in Luigi ) s province,   
Mussolini said, but he was stating them to clarify his very pessimistic feeling about a mission   
by Sumner Welles. 
 
"You have put a question to me," he concluded.    "Now, Luigi, I will put a question to you." 
 
"Yes, Duce." 
 
"Does this    initiative    come    from President Roosevelt,    or is    he acting at the request of the   
Allies?" 
 
"Duce, the President has told me this is his own initiative." 
 
Ciano cleared his throat, leaned forward with his hands clasped, and said, "Do the British and   
French know and approve of this visit you are making?" 
 
"No, Excellency.    The President said that he would be making informal inquiries of the same   
nature, at this same time, in London and Paris." 
 
Mussolini said, "The newspapers have no information on any of this, is that correct "What I   
have told you, Duce, is known outside this room only to the President and his Secretary of   
State.    My trip is a matter of private business, of no interest to the press, and so it will remain   
forever." 
 
'I have stated my deep reservations," said Mussolini, speaking slowly, in an extremely formal   
tone.    "I have very little hope that such a mission would be to any useful purpose, in view of   
the maniacal hosdhty of the British and French ruling circles to the resurgent German nation   
and its great Fuhrer.    But I share Mr.    Roosevelt's sentiment about leaving no stone unturned."   
He took a long portentous pause, then spoke with a decisive nod. "If the President sends   
Sumner Welles on such a mission, I will receive him." 
 
Gianelli's fixed snile gave way to a real one of delight and pride. He gushed over Mussolini's   
wise and great decision, and his joy at the prospect of Italy and the United States, his two   
mother    countries, joining to rescue the world from tragedy.    Mussolini nodded tolerantly,   
seeming to enjoy the flood of flattery, though be waved a deprecating hand to calm down the   
banker. 
 
Victor Henry seized the first pause in the banker's speech to put in, "Duce, may I ask whether   
Signor Gianelli is permitted to tell the Fuhrer this? That you have consented to receive a   
formal mission by Sumner Welles?" 
 
Mussolini's eyes sparked, as sometimes an admiral's did when Victor Henry said something   
 252 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
sharp.    He looked to Ciano.    The foreign minister said condescendingly in his perfect English,   
"The Fuhrer will know long before you have a chance to tell him."    "Okay," said Henry.  
 
Mussolini rose, took Gianelli's elbow, and led him out through french doors to the balcony,   
letting a gust of cold air into the room. 
 
Ciano smoothed his thick black hair with both white hands.    "Well, Commander, what do you   
think of the great German naval victory in the south Atlantic?" 
 
'I hadn't heard of one." 
 
'Really? It will be on Rome radio at seven o'clock. The battleship Graf Spee has caught a   
group of British cruisers and destroyers off Montevideo. The British have lost four or five   
ships and all the rest have been damaged.    it's a British disaster that changes the whole balance   
of force in the Atlantic."    Victor Henry was shocked, but skeptical.    "What happened to Graf   
Spee?"    'Nfinor hits that will be repaired overnight.    Graf Spee was much heavier than anything   
it faced." "The British have acknowledged this?"    Count Ciano smiled.    He was a good-looking   
young man, and obviously knew it; just a little too fat and proud, Pug thought, from living high   
on the hog. 
 
'No, but the British took a little while to acknowledge the sinking of the Royal Oak." The   
dinner celebrating Victor Henries promotion began in gloom, because of the Graf Spee news.   
The two attaches sat talking over highballs, waiting for Byron to show up. 
 
Captain Kirkwood asserted that he believed the story; that in the twenty years since the last   
war, a deep rot had eaten out the heart of England. Kirkwood looked like an Englishman   
himself-long-jawed, ruddy, and big-toothed-but he had little use for Great Britain.    The British   
politicians had stalled and cringed in the face of Hitler's rise, he declared, because they sensed   
their people no longer had a will to fight.    The Limey navy was a shell.    England and France   
were going to crumple under Hitler's onslaught in the spring. 
 
'It's too bad, I suppose," Kirkwood said.    "One's sentiments are with the Allies, naturally.    But   
the world moves on.    After all, Hitler halted Communism in its tracks.    And don't worry, once   
he takes the fight out of the Allies, he'll settle Stalin's hash.    The Russians are putting on one   
stumblebum performance in Finland, aren't they?    They'll be a walkover for the Wehrmacht.    In   
the end we'll have to make a deal with Hitler, that's becoming obvious.    He holds all the cards   
on this side of the water." 
 
"Hi, Dad."    Byron's sports jacket and slacks were decidedly out of place in this old luxurious   
restaurant, where half the people wore evening dress. 
 
Henry introduced him to the attache.    "Where have you been? 
 
You're late." 
 
"I saw a movie, and then went to the Y.M.C.A to flake out for a little while." 
 
"Is that all you could find to do in Rome?    See a movie?    I Wish I had a few free hours in this   
 253 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
city." 
 
"Well, see, I was tired."    Byron appeared much more his old slack self. 
 
The waiter now brought champagne and Yirkwood proposed a toast to Captain Victor Henry.  
 
"Hey, Dad!    Four stripes!    Really?"    Byron sprang to life, radiating surprised joy.    He clasped   
his father's hand and lifted a brimming glass.    "Well! 
 
I'm sure glad I came to Rome, just for this.    Say, I know one doesn't mention such things, but   
the hell with it, doesn't this put you way out front, Dad?" 
 
Captain Kirkwood said, "He's been out front all along.    That's what this means." 
 
"All it takes now is one false move," said Pug dryly, shaking his head, "one piece of bad luck,   
one mislaid dispatch, one helmsman doping off on the midwatch.    You're never out front till   
you retire." 
 
'What's your situation, by the way, Byron?"    Kirkwood said. 
 
The young man hesitated. 
 
"He's ROTC," Pug quickly said.    "He's got a yen for submarines. 
 
By    the way, Briny, the New London sub school is doubling the enrollment in May and   
accepting any reserves that can pass the physical" Iirkwood smiled, examining Byron with a   
shade of curiosity. 
 
"Now's the time to get in on the ground floor, Byron.    How)re your eyes? Got twenty-twenty   
vision?"I "My eyes are okay, but I have this job to do here." 
 
"What sort of job?" 
 
"Historical research," Kirkwood's face wrinkled. 
 
Pug said, "He's working for a famous author, Uron Jastrow.    You know, the one who wrote A   
Jew's Jesus.)) "Oh, Jastrow, yes.    That fellow up in Siena.    I had lunch with him at the embassy   
once. 
 
Brilliant fellow.    Having some trouble getting back home, isn't he?" 
 
Byron said, "He isn't having trouble, sir, he just doesn't want to leave." 
 
Kirkwood rubbed his chin.    'Are you sure?    Seems to me that's why he was in Rome.    There's a   
foul-up in his papers.    He was born in Russia or Lithuania or somewhere, and-whatever it is, I   
guess something,can be worked out.    Taught at Yale, didn't he?" 
 
"Yes, sir. "Well, he ought to make tracks while he can.    Those Germans are just over the Alps.   
Not to mention old Benito's anti-Jew laws." 
 254 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Victor Henry was returning to Berlin that night by train, accompanying the banker.    He said   
nothing about his mission in Rome to Kirkwood or his son, and they did not ask.    After dinner   
Byron rode to the railroad station in the    with him, in a prolonged silence. 
 
Natalie Jastrow was a heavy invisible presence in the cab, and neither one would start the   
topic.    Pug said as they drove into the brilliantly lit empty square before the terminal, "Briny, if   
the British really took that shellacking off Montevideo, we won't stay out much longer. 
 
We can't let the Germans close the Atlantic.    That's 1917 again. 
 
Why don't you put in for sub school?    It won't start till May.    By then Jastro'll be back in the   
States, if he isn't simpleminded." 
 
May's a long way off."    "Well, I'm not going to argue."    Pug got out of the cab.    "Write to your   
mother a little more often.    She's not happy." 
 
"Okay, Dad." 
 
"Don't miss Warren's wedding." 
 
"I'll try not to.    Gosh, won't that be something, if this family finally gets together again?" 
 
"That's why I want you there.    It'll be the last time in God knows how many years.    Good-bye." 
 
"Good-bye.    Listen, I'm real proud you made captain, Dad." 
 
Pug Henry gave his son a gloomy half-smile through the cab window and walked off to the   
train.    And still not a word more had passed between them about the Jewish girl. 
 
So irascibly did Rhoda Henry greet her husband on his return that he began to think something   
might be wrong with her. 
 
the fall weather in Berlin stank, life stank, she was bored, German efficiency was a fiction,   
nobody understood how to do anything right, and there was no Service and no honesty an ore. 
 
She had "her pain," Yin an untreatable affliction that during previous Slumps had showed up in   
an arm and in her back, and now was behind an ear. She feared cancer, but it didn't really   
matter because everything good was all finished anyway. 
 
Rhoda had always come out of these sags before, and then could be contritely sweet.    Pug had   
hoped when he suddenly left Berlin for Rome that he would find her better when he got back.   
She was worse. 
 
She wanted to go with him to Karinhall. In his absence an invitation engraved in gold on   
creamy    thick    stationery, addressed    to Commander    Victor    Henry, had been    delivered    by   
a   
Luftwaffe staff officer.    Pug hadn't been home ten minutes when she brought it out wanting to   
know why she hadn't been invited too.    If he went to the Goerings' party at Karinhall and left   
her behind, she said, she could never face anybody in Berlin again. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pug could not disclose that he was going along for secret state purposes, as a flunkey to an   
international financier.    He couldn't take her into the snow-covered garden to soothe her with   
hints of this; it was almost midnight, and she was wearing a cloudy blue negligee, in which,   
indeed, she looked very pretty. 
 
"Listen, Rhoda, take my word for it that there are security reasons for all this. 
 
"Ha.    Security reasons.    That old chestnut, whenever you want to do anything your way." 
 
"I'd rather have you along.    You know that" 
 
"Prove it.    Call the Protocol officer at the air ministry tomorrow.    Or if You're too bashful, I   
will." 
 
Pug was conducting this conversation in the library, while glancing down the letter through   
piled-up mail.    He put staring at his wife, he said, "Are you well?" 
 
"I'm bored to death, otherwise I'm fine, why?" 
 
"Have you been taking the iron pills?" 
 
"Yes, but I don't need pills. What I need is a little fun. Maybe I should go on a bender."   
"You're not calling the air ministry!    I hope that's understood." 
 
Rhoda made a mutinous noise, and sat pouting. 
 
'Hullo.    Here's a letter from that Kirby fellow.    What's he got to say for himself?"    "Read it.    it's   
as dun as he is. All about how glad he is to be home, and how good the skiing is around   
Denver, and how much he enjoyed our hospitality.    Three pages of nothing." 
 
Pug tossed the letter unread on the routine pile. 
 
'Honestly, you're a riot, you're so predictable, Pug. For twenty-five years whenever you've   
come home you've gone straight for the mail. What are you expecting, a letter from a lost   
love?" 
 
He laughed, and shoved the letters aside. "Right you are. Let's have a drink. Let's have a   
couple of drinks.    You look wonderful."    'I do not. That goddamned hairdresser baked my hair   
into shredded wheat again.    I'm tired.    I've been waiting up to talk to you.    You were two hours   
late." 'There was trouble at the passport office." 
 
"I know.    Well, I'm going to bed.    Nothing to talk about, since Karinhall is out.    I even bought a   
sensational dress.    I was going to show it to you, but to hell with it.    I'll send it back." 
 
'Keep it.    You might just find a use for it pretty soon." 
 
"Oh? Expect to be invited to the Goerings' again?" She went out without staying for an   
answer. 
 
Pug prepared a couple of highballs to toast the news of his promotion. 
 256 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
When he got upstairs, her light was out-an old unpleasant marital signal. 
 
He wanted very much to spend the night with his wife.    Moreover, he had been saving the story   
of his encounter with Natalie Jastrow for their bedroom talk.    He drank both highballs himself,   
and slept on the sofa in the library. 
 
The next day was brightened for him by the German announcement that the Graf Spee had   
heroically scuttled itself after its historic victory, and that its commanding officer had then   
nobly shot himself in a hotel room. He heard over the BBC that three much lighter British   
vessels had in fact beaten the German warship in a running sea fight and sent it limping into   
port before the scuttling.    The German people didn't hear a word rs.    After a minute of cold of   
this, and they were baffled by the revelation that the victorious pocket battleship had elected to   
blow itself up.    The Nazi propagandists did not bother to explain, smothering the story instead   
with a whooping account of a vast fictitious air victory: twenty-five British bombers shot down   
over Heligoland. Pug knew that the chances of his ever meeting Count Ciano again were   
remote, but he would have given much to chat with him again about the Graf Spee. 
 
, when Rhoda learned of Pug's promotion she came out of her blues as though by shock.    Not   
another peep did she utter about Karinhall. 
 
She proceeded to give well the honeymoon treatment, and they had a happy week or so.    His   
account of Natalie Jastrow fascinated and appalled her. "Sounds to me as though our only hope   
is that she'll come to her senses and drop Briny," she said. 
 
Karinhall looked like a federal penitentiary built in the style of a hunting lodge. It sat in a   
game preserve about two hours' drive from Berlin, a wilderness of small bare trees and green   
firs mantled in snow. 
 
Off the autobahn, the approach ran through heavy gates electrically controlled, steel and   
concrete fences jagged with icicles, and a gauntlet of machinegun-bearing Luftwaffe sentinels   
whose breaths smoked as they shouted challenges. just as the car turned a corner and they   
caught a glimpse of the grandiose timber and stone building, a deer with big frightened eyes   
bounded across the road.    The San Francisco banker no longer wore his automatic smile.    His   
mouth was tightly pursed, and the soft brown Italian eyes were open wide and darting here and   
there, rather like the deer's. 
 
In    the    vaulted banquet    room, amid    a    dazzling crush of    uniformed    Nazis and    their   
white- 
shouldered women-some lovely, some grossly fat, all briuiandy gowned and heavily gemmed- 
Adolf Hitler was playing with the little Goering girl.    A string orchestra lost in a corner of the   
marble-paved expanse was murmurin Mozart.      Great logs flamed in a fireplace with a   
triangular stone pediment soaring to the ceiling, and on a carved heavy table stretching the   
entire length of the room an untouched banquet lay piled.    Rich smells hung in the air: wood   
smoke, cigar smoke, roast meat, French perfume.      The happy, excited crowd of eminent   
Germans were laughing, cooing, clapping hands, their eyes shining at their Leader in his Plain   
field-gray coat and black trousers as he held the beautiful whiteclad child in his arms, talking to   
her, teasing her with a cake.    Goering and his statuesque wife, both ablaze in operatic finery   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and jewelry, the man more showy than the woman, stood near, beaming with soft affectionate   
Pride.    Suddenly the little girl kissed the Fuhrer on his big pale nose, and he laughed and gave   
her the cake.    A cheer went up, everybody applauded, and women wiped their eyes. 
 
"The Fuhrer is so wonderful," said the Luftwaffe officer accompanying the two Americans, a   
small dark aviator wearing the diamond-studded cross of the Condor Legion.    "Ach, if he could   
only marry!    He loves children." 
 
And to Pug Henry, also, there was something appealing about Hitler: his shy smile   
acknowledging the applause, the jocular reluctance with which he handed the girl to her   
ecstatic mother, his wistful shrug as he slapped Goering's back, like any bachelor   
congratulating a luckier man. 
 
At this moment Hitler had a naive, almost mushy charm. 
 
The Goerings escorted Hitler to the table, and this signalled a general swarming toward the   
buffet.    A troop of lackeys in blue and gold livery marched in, setting up gilt tables and chairs,   
helping the guests to food, pouring the wine, bowing and bowing.    Guided by the Luftwaffe   
officer, he and Gianelb landed at a table with a banker named Wolf Stblier, who hailed the   
American    financier    as an old acquaintance:    a slight Teuton in his fifties,    with sandy hair   
plastered close to his head.    The wife, an ashenhaired beauty, had eyes that glittered clear blue   
like the large diamonds on her neck, her arms, her fingers, and her ears. 
 
By chance, Victor Henry had just written a short report on Steller and knew a lot about him.   
Steller's    bank was the chief conduit by which Goering was amassing    his riches. Steller's   
specialty was acquiring Obiekte, the term in German business jargon for Jewish-owned   
companies forced to the wall. 
 
In the queer Germany of 1939, which Victor Henry was just beginning to understand, there   
was much stress on legality in looting the Jews. 
 
Outright confiscation or violence were rare.    New codes of law dating from 1936 simply made   
it hard for them to do business; and month by month rulings came out making it ever harder.   
Jewish firms couldn't get import or export licenses or raw materials.    Their use of railroads and   
shipping was restricted.    Conditions kept tightening until they had no course but to sell out.    A   
market flourished in such Obiekte, with many alert upperclass Germans bidding eagerly   
against each other.    Wolf Steller's technique was to find and unite all the buyers interested in an   
Obiekt, and to make a single very low offer.    The owners had the choice of taking it or going   
bankrupt. Steller's group then divided up the firm in shares. Tlrough Goering, Steller had   
access to the Gestapo's records, and was usually first on the scent of a major Jewish firm   
buckling to its knees. The big prizes Goering bought up himself-metal, banking, textiles-or   
took a large participation. 
 
Steller's bank got its broker's fees and also its own participations in the Obiekte. 
 
All this Pug had learned from the American radio commentator in Berlin, Fred Fearing, who   
had been at some pains to dig it up.    Fearing recounted it to him with deep anger, the more so   
 258 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
as he couldn't broadcast the story.    The Germans claimed that any report of unfair treatment of   
the Jews was paid Allied propaganda.      The Jewish laws aimed simply at restricting this   
minority, they said, to its due share in Germany's economy. 
 
Pug had more or less shut his mind to the Jewish problem, so as to focus on the military   
judgments which were his job. Jews had become all but invisible in Berlin, except in their   
special shopping hours, when, pamd and harried, they briefly filled the stores and then again   
faded from sight.    The oppression was not a highly visible affair; Pug had never seen even the   
outside of a concentration camp.    He had observed the signs on benches and restaurants, the   
white-faced worried wretches pulled off trains and airplanes, an occasional broken window or   
old charred synagogue, and once a bad business of a man beaten bloody in the zoo by three   
boys in Hitler Youth uniforms, while the man's wife wept and screamed and two policemen   
stood by laughing. But Fearing's account was his first technical insight into German anti- 
Semitism.    At bottom its purpose, in Fearing's view, was just robbery, which was disgusting   
but at least rational.    Pug felt a qualm when Wolf Steller with a cultured bow offered his hand,   
but    of    course he    took    it;    and    soon there they    sat eating    together and    toasting    each   
oerin   
Moselle, Riesling, and champagne. 
 
Steller was a cordial, clever German, in every way indistinguishable from the hundreds that   
Victor Henry had met in the military and industrial worlds and at social gatherings.    He spoke a   
fine English. His countenance was open and hearty. He made bright jokes, including bold   
pleasantries about Goering's corpulence and theatrical uniforms. He expressed deep regard for   
the United States (he especially loved San Francisco) and melancholy regret that its relations   
with Germany were not better.    In fact, could he not do something to improve them, he said, by   
inviting Gianelli and the Henrys for a weekend at his estate? It was no Karinhall, but he could   
promise them good company.    Captain Henry might have the luck to shoot a deer. 
 
Game was outside the meat ration, and some venison might be very welcome to Mrs.    Henry!   
The banker's wife, touching Pug's hand with her cool jewelled white fingers, crinkled her blue   
eyes at him in invitation. 
 
She had heard that Mrs. Henry was the most elegant and attractive wife in the American   
diplomatic mission, and she longed to meet her. 
 
Cianelli declined; he had to start his return journey in the morning. 
 
Officially there was every reason for Victor Henry to accept. 
 
Part of his job was to penetrate influential levels of Germans. 
 
He had no stomach for Steller, but it occurred to him that here was a chance to give Rhoda the   
kind of fun she complained of missing. 
 
There was no telling good Germans from bad Germans.    Steller conceivably might be working   
for Goering under duress, though his wife in consequence dripped diamonds. Pug said he   
would come. The look the Stbllers exchanged convinced him that none of this was casual.   
They were cultivating him. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Steller took the two Americans on a tour of Karinhall.    Again Pug had the feeling that Nazi   
grandeur usually woke in him: the Hollywood impression, the sense of ephemeral, flamboyant   
make-believe, which persisted no    matter how vast and solid the structures, how high the   
ceilings, how elaborate the decorations, how costly the art.      The corridors and rooms of   
Karinhall seemed to go on for miles.    Glass cases by the dozens displayed solid gold objects   
crusted with gems-vases, crosses, maces, swords, busts, batons, medals, books, globes-tributes   
to the field marshal from steel corporations, cities, and foreign governments on his birthday,   
his wedding, the birth of a child, the return of the Condor Legion from Spain. Italian and   
Dutch old masters crowded the walls, interspersed with the vapid calendar nudes of living   
Nazi-approved painters.    Other reception rooms with nobody in them, almost as vast and ornate   
as the banquet hall, were hung with tapestries and flags, walled in wood, filled with statuary   
and jewelled suits of armor. Yet it all might almost have been papier-machae and canvas.   
Even the food on the banquet table had looked like a Cecil B. deMille feast, and the pink meat   
inside the roast pig might instead have been wax or plaster.    But Victor Henry well knew that   
he was looking at an immense treasure, mostly booty collected through Dr. 
 
Steller.    Moral considerations aside, the vulgar edifice disappointed Pug because Goering was   
supposed to stem from an aristocratic family. 
 
Even the admiring comments of Luigi Gianelli had a strong tinge of irony. 
 
The Luftwaffe officer wearing the diamond cross caught up    with them and    whispered to   
Steller. 
 
P) 
 
'Ah, what a pity, now you must go , said the German banker.    "And you haven't begun to see   
the wonders of Karinhall.    Captain Henry, my office will make all the arrangements to bring   
you and your dear wife on Friday to Abendruh, though I fear it will look rather p itiful after   
this. 
 
We will telephone you tomorrow.    and Steller accompanied the two Americans through more   
rooms and corridors, stopped at double doors of dark wood heavily carved with hunting scenes,   
and opened them on a timbered room with log-and-plaster walls, hung with antlers, stuffed   
heads, and animal hides.    The dusty smell of the dead creatures was strong in the air.    On either   
side of a roaring fire sat Ribbentrop and Goering.    Hitler was not in the room.    A long, crudely   
made wooden table and two low benches took up most of the floor space.    Pug thought at once   
that this must be the main room of the old hunting lodge, around which the field marshal had   
constructed the banal palace. Here was the heart of Karinhall- E-,ept for the glow from the   
fire, the room was dank, dark, and cold. 
 
Goering lolled on a settee with one thick white leather-booted leg off the floor, sipping coffee   
from a gold demitasse-part of a gold service on a low inlaid marble table. He nodded and   
smiled familiarly at Cianelli. 
 
Diamond rings bulged on three of the five fingers that held the cup. Ribbentrop stared at the   
 260 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
ceiling, hands interlaced across his stomach. The German banker introduced Victor Henry,   
backed out of the room, and closed the door. 
 
"You will have exactly seven Minutes of the Fijhre?s time to state your business," said   
Ribbentrop in German. 
 
Gianelli stammered, "Excellency, permit me to reply in English.      I am here in a private   
capacity, and I regard that much time as an extraordinary courtesy to my country and my   
President." 
 
Ribbentrop sat with a blank face, looking at the ceiling, so Victor Henry ventured to translate.   
The foreign minister cut him off with a snapped sentence in perfect Oxford accents, "I   
understand English." 
 
Goering said to Gianelli, "You are welcome to Karinhall, Luigi.    I have tried to invite you more   
than once.    But this time you have come a long way for a short interview." 
 
"May I say, Field Marshal," the banker answered in broken German, that I have seen millions   
of money made and lost in a conference lasting a few minutes, and that world peace is worth   
any effort, however unpromising." 
 
"I am in complete agreement with that."    Goering motioned them to chairs placed near him. 
 
Ribbentrop, seizing the arms of his chair and closing his eyes, burst out in high rapid tones, in   
German, "This peculiar visitation is another studied insult by your President to the German   
head of state. 
 
Whoever heard of sending a private citizen as an emissary in such matters?    Between civilized   
countries the diplomatic structure is used. 
 
Germany did not withdraw its ambassador in Washington by choice. 
 
The United States first made the hostile gesture. The United States has allowed within its   
borders a boycott of German products and a campaign of hate propaganda against the German   
people.      The United States has revised its so-called 'eutrality Act in blatant favor of the   
aggressors in this conflict.      Germany did not declare war on England and France. They   
declared war on Germany." 
 
The foreign minister stopped talking and sat with his eyes closed, the long-jawed haggard face   
immobile, some strands of the graying blond hair falling over his face.    The California banker   
looked first at Goering, then at Victor Henry, clearly shaken.    Goering poured himself more   
coffee. 
 
Concentrating with all his might, Victor Henry translated the foreign minister's tirade.   
Ribbentrop did not correct or interrupt him. 
 
Gianelli started to talk, but Ribbentrop burst out again: "What purpose can be served by this   
maladroit approach, other than a further deliberate provocation, one more expression of your   
 261 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
President's highly dangerous contempt for the leader of a powerful nation of eighty million   
people?, With a trembling wave of his hand at Henry to indicate that he understood, Gianelli   
said, "May I respectfully reply that-" The bright blue eyes of Ribbentrop opened, closed again,   
and he said in still louder tones, 'The willingness of the Fuhrer to give you a beaning in these   
circumstances is a testimony to his desire for peace that history will so me day record.    This is   
the sole value this peculiar interview possesses." 
 
Goering said to the banker in a milder, but no more friendly tone "What is your purpose here,   
Luigi?" "Field Marshal, I am an informal messenger of my President to your Fuhrer, and I   
have a single question to put to him, by my President's instructions.    To ask it, and to answer it,   
should take very little time.    But by God's grace it can lead to lasting historical results."    Victor   
Henry put this into German. 
 
'What is the question?"    Goering said. 
 
The banker's face was going yellow.    "Field Marshal, by my President's order, the question is   
for the Fuhrer," he said hoarsely in German. 
 
"It is for the Fuhrer to answer," Goering said, "but obviously we are going to hear it anyway.   
What is the question?"    He raised his voice, ri)ting his gaze on the banker. 
 
Gianelli turned away from Grins eyes, which were lazily hard, licked his lips, and said to   
Henry, "Captain, I beg you to confirm my instructions to the great field marshal." 
 
Victor    Henry    was rapidly calculating    the    situation, including the    trace    of    physical   
danger   
which had shadowed his mind since passing through the outer fences of Karinhall.    Goering,   
for all his gross jolly facade, was a tough and ugly brute.    If this monstrously fat German, with   
the rouge-red face, thin scarlet lips, and small jewelled hands, wanted to harm them, diplomatic   
immunity was a frail shield here.    But Pug judged that his talk was cat-and-mouse fooling to   
kill time.    He translated the banker's answer under the straight stare of Goering, and added, 'I   
confirm that the instructions are to put the question directly to the Fuhrer, as Herr Gianelli   
already has done to his good friend Il Duce in Italy, where in my presence 11 Duce gave him a   
favorable response." 
 
'We know all that," Ribbentrop said.    'We know the question, too." 
 
Goering blinked at Henry and the tension broke. The banker brushed his fingers across his   
brow.    The silence lasted for perhaps a minute. 
 
Adolf Hitler, pushing a lock of hair across his forehead, came into the room through a side   
door hung with a tiger skin. 
 
As quickly as the Americans, Goering and Ribbentrop rose, assuming very much the lackey   
look.    Goering moved away from the comfortable settee to a chair, and Hitler took his place,   
gesturing to the others to sit. 
 
He did not shake hands.    Seen at this close range the Fuhrer looked healthy and calm, though   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
too fat and puffy-eyed. His dark hair was clipped to the bone at the sides like a common   
soldier's.    Except for the famed mustache he had an ordinary face, the face of any small man of   
fifty or so wamng by on a German city street.    Compared to this man of the people, the other   
two Nazis seemed bedizened grotesques. 
 
His gray coat with the single Iron Cross over his left breast contrasted remarkably with   
Ribbentrop's    gold-braided    dark blue    uniform and the    air marshal's    extravaganza    of colors,   
gems, and medals. 
 
Folding one hand over the other in his lap, he took in the Americans with a grave glance. 
 
"Luigi Gianelli, American banker.      Captain Victor Henry, United States naval attache in   
Berlin," said Ribbentrop, in a sarcastic tone emphasizing the unimportance of the visitors.   
"Extraordinary informality emissaries, Mei F hr r, from the President of the United States. 
 
The banker cleared his throat, attempted an expression of gratitude for the interview in   
German, made a flustered apology, and shifted to English.    The Fuhrer, his gaze steady on the   
banker while Henry    translated, kept shifting in his chair and    crossing and uncrossing his   
ankles.    With the same prologue on world peace that he had addressed to Mussolini, Gianelli   
put to the Fuhrer the question about Sumner Welles. As it came out in English, a contemptuous   
smile appeared on Ribbentrop's face.    Upon Henry's translation Hitler and Goering looked at   
each other, the Fuhrer impassive, Goering hoisting his shoulders, waving his thick-gemmed   
hands, and shaking his head, as though to say, "That's really it.    Unbelievable!" 
 
Hitler meditated.    The glance of his sunken, pallid blue eyes was straight ahead a nd far away.   
A bitter little smile moved his mustache and his mouth. He began to speak in quiet, very   
clear, Bavarianaccented    German,    'Your esteemed President, Herr GianeEi, seems    to feel a   
remarkable sense of responsibility for the whole present course of world history.    It is all the   
more remarkable in that only the United States, among the great powers, failed to join the   
League of Nations, and in that your Congress and your people have repeatecey indicated that   
they want no foreign entanglements. 
 
"In my speech of April twenty-ninth, mainly addressed to your President, I acknowledged that   
your country has more than twice the population of our little land, more than fifteen times the   
living space, and infinitely more mineral resources.    Perhaps therefore your President feels that   
he must approach me from time to time with stern fatherly admonitions. 
 
But of course I am giving my life for the renascence of my people, and I cannot help seeing   
everything from that limited point of view." 
 
Victor Henry did his best to translate, his heart pounding, his mouth dry. 
 
Hitler now began reminiscing garrulously about the Rhineland, Austria, Czechoslovakia, and   
Poland.    He spoke at length and seemed to be enjoying himself, slowly waving his hands and   
using relaxed tones. 
 
The justifications were familiar stuff. He grew briefly loud and acid only over the British   
 263 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
guarantee to Poland, which, he said, had encouraged a cruel reactionary regime to engage in   
atrocious measures against its German minority, in the illusion that it had become safe to do so.   
That was how the war had started.    Since then England and France had over and over spurned   
his offers of a peace settlement and disarmament.    What more could he do, as a responsible   
head of state, than arm his country to defend itself against these two great military empires,   
who between them controlled three-fifths of the habitable surface of the earth and almost half   
its population? 
 
German political aims were simple, open, moderate, and unchanging, he went on.      Five   
centuries before Columbus discovered America, there had been a German empire at the heart   
of Europe, its boundaries roughly fixed by geography and the reproductive vigor of the people.   
War had come over and over to this European heartland through the attempts of many powers   
to fragment the German folk. These attempts    had often had temporary success. But the   
German nation, with its strong instinct for survival and growth, had time and again rallied and   
thrown off foreign encirclements and yokes.    In this part of his talk Hitler made references to   
Bismarck, Napoleon, Frederick the Great, the War of the Spanish Succession, and the Thirty   
Years' War, which were beyond Victor Henry.    He translated them word for word as best he   
could. 
 
The Versailles Treaty, said the Fuhrer, had simply been the latest of these foreign efforts to   
mutilate the German heartland. 
 
Because it had been historically unsound and unjust it was now dead. 
 
The Rhineland was German.    So was Austria.    So was the Sudeteniand. So were Danzig and   
the Corridor.      The manufactured monstrosity of Czechoslovakia, thrust like a spear into   
Germany's vitals, had now become once again the traditional Bohemian protectorate of the   
Reich. 
 
This restoration of normal Germany was now complete.      He had done it almost without   
bloodshed. 
 
But for the absurd British guarantee, it would have all been finished in peace; the question of   
Danzig and the Corridor had been practically settled in July. Even now nothing substantial   
stood in the way    of lasting peace.      The other side simply had to recognize this restored   
normality in central Europe, and return to Germany her colonial territories.    For the Reich, like   
other great    modern    states, had a natural    right to the raw materials    of the underdeveloped   
continents. 
 
Victor Henry was deeply struck by Hitler's steady manner, by his apparent moral conviction,   
by his identification of himself with the German nation-'.    and so I restored the Rhineland to   
the-e Reich and so I brought back Austria to its historical origins... and so I normalized the   
Bohemian plateau..."-and by his broad visions of history.    The ranting demagogue of the Party   
rallies was obviously nothing but a public image, such as the Germans, in Hitler's estimate,   
wanted. He radiated the personal force that Captain Henry had seen in only two or three   
admirals. 
 264 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
As for the journalistic    picture-the carpet-chewing hysterical    Charlie    Chaplin politician-Pug   
now felt that it was a distortion of small things which had led the world into disaster. 
 
'I share the President's desire for peace ' Hitler was saying.    He was starting to gesture now as   
in his speeches, lough less broadly. 
 
His eyes had brightened astonishingly; Henry thought it must be an illusion, but they seemed   
eerily to glow.    'I hunger and yearn for peace.    I was a simple soldier in the front lines for four   
years, while he, as a rich and wellborn man, had the privilege    of serving as an Assistant   
Secretary of the Navy in a Washington office. I know war. I was born to create, not to   
destroy, and who can say how many years of life are left to me to fulfill my tasks of   
construction?    But the British and French leaders call for the destruction of 'Hitm"-he brought   
out the foreign tenn with contemptfilled sarcasm-'as their price for peace.      I can almost   
understand their hatred for me.    I have made Germany strong again, and that did not suit them.  
 
But this hate, if persisted in, will doom Europe, because I and the German people cannot be   
separated.    We are one.    This is a simple truth, though I fear the English will need a test of fire   
to prove it. 
 
I believe Germany has the strength to emerge victorious.    If not, we will all go down together,   
and historical Europe as we know it will cease to exist." 
 
He paused, his face tightened and changed, and the pitch of his voice all at once began to rise.   
'How can they be so blind to realities?    I achieved air parity in 1937 Since then I have never   
stopped building planes, planes, planes, U-boats, U-boats, U-boats!' He was screaming now,   
clenching his fists and waving his stiff outstretched arms.    "I have piled bombs, bombs, bombs,   
tanks, tanks, tanks, to the sky!    It has been a wasteful, staggering burden on my people, but   
what other language have great states ever understood?    It is out of a sense of strength that I   
have offered peace. I have been rejected and scorned, and as the price of peace they have   
asked for my head.    The German people only laugh at such pathetic nonsense!' On the shouted   
litany of "planes... bombs... U-boats' he swept both fists down again and again to strike the   
floor, bending far over so that the famous black lock of hair tumbled in his face, giving him his   
more usual newsreel look of the street agitator; and the red face and screeching tones had   
indeed something of the carpet chewer, after all. 
 
Suddenly, dramatically, as at a podium, he dropped into qtdet controlled tones.    "Let the test of   
fire come. I have done my utmost, and my conscience is clear before the bar of history."   
Hitler fell silent, then stood with an air of dismissal, his eyes burning and distance his mouth a   
down-curved line. 
 
"Mein Fuhrer," Goering said, lumbering to his feet, his boots creaking, after this wonderfully   
clear presentation of the realities you offer no objection to this visit of Herr Sumner Welles, I   
take it, if the President persists."    Hitler hesitated, appeared perplexed, and gave an impatient   
shrug. 
 
"I have no wish to return discourtesy for discourtesy, and petty treatment for petty treatment.    I   
 265 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
would do anything for peace.    But until the British will to destroy me is itself destroyed, the   
only road to peace is through German victory.    Anything else is irrelevant.    I will continue to   
hope with all my heart for a last-minute signal of sanity from the other side,    before the   
holocaust    explodes."      In    a    worked-up    manner, with    no    gesture    of    farewell, he    strode   
out   
through the carved double door.    Victor Henry glanced at his wristwatch. 
 
The Fuhrer had spent an hour and ten minutes with them, and so far as Henry knew, President   
Roosevelt's question remained unanswered. 
 
He could see on Gianelli's pale, baffled face the same impression. 
 
Goering and Ribbentrop looked at each other.    The fat man said, "President Roosevelt has his   
reply. The Fuhrer sees no hope in the Welles mission, but in his unending quest for a just   
peace he will not reject it." 
 
"That was not my understanding," said Ribbentrop in a quick, strained voice.    "He called the   
mission irrelevant. "If you want to press the Fuhrer for clarification," Goering said satirically to   
him, gesturing at the double doors, 'go ahead.    I understood him very well, and I think I know   
him."    He turned again to the banker, and his voice moderated.    'In informing your President of   
this meeting, tell him that I said the Fuhrer will not refuse to receive Welles, but he sees no   
hope in it-and neither do I-unless the British and the French drop their war aim of removing the   
Fuhrer.    That is no more possible than it is to move Mont Blanc.    If they persist in it, the result   
will be a frightful hattie in the West, ending in a total German victory after the death of   
millions." 
 
"That will be the result in any case," said Ribbentrop, "and the die will be cast before Mr.   
Sumner Welles can arrange his papers and pack his belongings."    miring took each of the two   
Americans by an elbow and said with a total change to geniality that brought to Victor Henry's   
mind the waiter at Wannsee, "Well, I hope you are not leaving so soon? 
 
We will have dancing a little later, and a bite of supper, and then some fine entertainers from   
Prague, artistic dancers."    He mlled his eyes in jocose suggestiveness. 
 
"Your Excellency is Marvelously hospitable," Gianelli replied. 
 
"But a plane is waiting in Berlin to take me to Lisbon and connect with the Clipper." 
 
"Then I must let you go, but only if you promise to come to Karinhall again.    I will walk out   
with you." 
 
Ribbentrop stood with his back to them, looking at the fire.    When the banker besitandy spoke   
a word of farewell, he grunted and hitched a shoulder.      Arm in arm with Goering, the   
Americans walked down the corridors of Karinhall.    The air minister smelled of some strong   
bath oil. His hand lightly tapped Victor Henry's forearm. "Well, Captain Henry, you have   
been to Swinemonde and seen our U-boat setup.      What is your opinion of our U-boat   
program?" 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Your industrial standards are as high as any in the world, Your Excellency- And with officers   
like Grohke and Prien you're in good shape. 
 
The U-boats are already making quite a record in the Atlantic." 
 
"It's only the beginning," Goering said.    'll-boats are coming off the ways now like sausages.    I   
doubt that all of them will yen see action. The air will decide this war fast.    I hope your attach   
for air, Colonel Powell, has been reporting the Luftwaffe's strength accurately to your   
president. 
 
We have been very open with Powell, on my orders." 
 
"Indeed he has made reports. He's very impressed." Goering looked pleased. "We have   
learned a lot from America. Curtis in particular has brilliant designers. Your Navy's dive- 
bombing was carefully studied by us and the Stuka was the result."    He turned to the banker   
and speaking in slow, simple German, asked him questions about South American mining   
companies.      They were walking through an empty ballroom with huge crystal-and-gilt   
chandeliers, and their clicking steps on the parquet floor echoed hollowly.    The banker replied   
in easy German, which he had not displayed under pressure, and they talked finance all the   
way to the front doors.    Guests walking in the halls stared at the sight of Goering between the   
two Americans. 
 
The banker's man-of-the-world smile reappeared and color returned to his face. 
 
It was snowing outside, and Goering stopped in the doorway to shake hands.    Gianelli had so   
far recovered that he came out with something Victor Henry considered absolutely vital.   
Henry was trying to think of a way to hint it to him, when the banker said, shaking hands with   
the air minister in a slight whirl of snow, 'Excellency, I will have to tell the President that your   
foreign minister does not welcome the Welles mission and has stated the Fuhrer does not." 
 
Goering's face toughened.    'If Welles comes, the Fuhrer will see him. 
 
That is official." Goering glanced up at the sky and walked through the snow with the two   
Americans to their car, as a Luftwaffe officer drove it up to the entrance. "Remember this.   
Germany is like all countries. Not everybody here wants peace.    But I do." 
 
Victor Henry sat up most of the night writing his report, so it could go back to the President in   
the banker's hands.    It was a longhand account, poured out pell-mell.    After a tale of the facts   
up to Goering's last words in the snow, Victor Henry wrote: The key question is, of course,   
whether or not a peace mission by Sumner Welles is now expected in the Third Reich. It   
seems inconceivable that in an interview with Hitler, Goering, and Ribbentrop, your emissary   
got no clear-cut answer.    I believe that Sumner Welles will be received by Hitler.    But I don't   
think the mission wig achieve anything, unless the Allies want to change their minds and   
accept some version of the "outstretched hand' formula. 
 
None of the three men seemed to take the interview very seriously. 
 267 
 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
They have bigger matters on their minds. We were a pair of nobodies. I would guess that   
Goering wanted it to take place, and that Hitler, being there in Karinhall anyway, didn't mind.   
I got the feeling that he enjoyed sounding off to a pair of Americans who would report directly   
to you.    All three men acted as though the offensive in the west is ready to roll.    I don't think   
they give a damn whether Welles comes or not. If the British are really as set on their terms as   
Hitler is on his, you'll have all-out war in the spring.    The parties are too far apart. 
 
Goering, it.;eems to me, is playing a side game by his peace talk. 
 
This man is the biggest thug in the Third Reich- He looks like a circus freakthe man is really   
disgustingly fat and dolled up-but he is the supreme realist in that crowd, and the unchallenged   
number two man. 
 
He has made a good thing out of Nazism, much more than the others. 
 
Mr.    Gianelli will no doubt describe Karinhall to you.    It's vulgar but stupendous.    Goering may   
be smart enough, even though he's riding high, he must realize that no string of good luck lasts   
forever. 
 
If the offensive should happen to go sour, then the man who always wanted peace will be right   
there, weeping tears over the fallen Fuhrer and happy to take on the job. 
 
Ribbentrop can only he described-if you will forgive me, Mr. 
 
President-as the classic German son of a bitch.    He is right out of the books with his arrogance,   
bad manners, obtuseness, obstinacy, and self-righteousness.    I think this is his nature, but I also   
believe he echoes how Hitler feels. This is just the old Navy business of the commanding   
officer being the impressive 'old man," while the exec is the mean crab doing his dirty work.   
Hitler unquestionably hates your guts and feels you've interfered and crossed him up far too   
much. He also feels fairly safe defying the USA, because he knows how public opinion is   
divided.    All this'Ribbentrop exprd for him in no uncertain terms, leaving the boss free to be   
the magnanimous German Napoleon and the savior of Europe. 
 
Driving away from Karinhall, I had a reaction like coming out of a trance.      I began to   
remember things about Hitler that I really forgot while I was listening to him and translating   
his words: the ravings in Mein Kampf, the way he has broken his word time after time, his wild   
lies, the fact that he started the war, the _Rmesome bombing of Warsaw, and his persecution of   
the Jews.    It's a measure of his persuasiveness that I could forget such things for a while, facing   
the man who has done them. He's a spellbinder. For big crowds I've heard him do coarse   
belligerent yelling, but in a room with a couple of nenous foreigners he can be-if it suits him- 
the reasonable, charming world leader.    They say he can also throw a foaming rage; we saw   
just a hint of that, and I certainly believe it. But the picture of him as a ludicrous nut is a   
falsehood. 
 
He never sounded more confident than when he said that he and the Germans are one. He   
simply knows this to be the truth.    Take away his mustache, and he sort of looks like all the   
Germans rolled into one. 
 268 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
He isn't an aristocrat, or a businessman, or an intellectual, or anything whatever except the   
German man in the street, somehow inspired. 
 
It's vital to understand this relationship between Hitler and the German people.    The present   
aim of the Allies seems to be to pry the two apart. 
 
I have become convinced that it can't be done.    For better or worse, the Allies still have the   
choice of knuckling under to Hitler or beating the Germans. They had the same choice in   
1936, when beating the Germans would have been a cinch.    Nothing has changed, except that   
the Germans may now be invincible. 
 
The glimpse of cross-purposes at the top may have showed a weakness of the Nazi structure,   
but if so it's all internal politics, it has nothing to do with Hitler's hold on the Germans.    That   
includes Goering and Ribbentrop.    When he entered the room they stood and cringed. 
 
If Hitler were the hal&crazy, half-comical gangster we've been reading about, this war would   
be a    pushover, because    running a    war    takes    brains, steadiness,    strategic    vision, and    skill.   
Unfortunately for the Allies, he is a very able man. 
 
Rhoda hugged and kissed Pug when he told her about the weekend. 
 
He didn't mention Steller's part in what Fred Fearing called robbing    the Jews.    It wasn't   
precisely that; it was a sort of legalized expropriation, and damned unsavory, but that was life   
in Nazi Germany. 
 
There was no point in making Rhoda share his uneasy feelings, when one reason for accepting   
Steller's hospitality was to give her a good time. 
 
The chauffeur sent by Steller drove past the colonnaded entrance to Abendrub and dropped   
them at a back door, where a maid conducted them two flights up narrow servants' stairs.    Pug   
wondered whether this was a calculated German insult. But the spacious, richly furnished   
bedroom and -sitting room looked out on a fine snowy vista of laKn, firs, winding river, and   
thatched outbuildings; two servants came to help them dress; and the mystery of the back stairs   
geared up when they went to dinner. 
 
The curving ipain staircase of Abendruh, two stories high, balustraded in red marble, had been   
entirely covered with a polished wooden slide. Guests in dinner clothes stood on the brink, the   
men laughing, the ladies    giggling and shrieking- Down below other guests stood with the   
stellers, watching an elegantly dressed couple sliding down, the woman hysterical with   
laughter as her gireen silk dress pulled away from her gartered thighs. 
 
'Oh my gawd, Pug, I'll DIEI" chortled Rhoda.    "I can't possimly! 
 
I've practically NOMwGon undemeatbf y don't they wmm a girl!" 
 
But of course she made the slide, screaming with embarrassed delight, exposing her legs-which   
were very shapely-clear up to her lacy underwear.    She arrived at the bottom scarlet-faced and   
convulsed, amid cheers and congratulations, to be welcomed by the hosts and introduced to   
 269 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
fellow    weekenders. It was a sure icebreaker, Victor Henry though if a trifle gross. The   
Germans certainly had the touch for these things, Next day when he woke he found a green   
leather hunting costume laid out for him, complete with feathered hat, belt, and dagger.    The   
men were a varied crowd: Luftwaffe and Wehrmacht officers, other bankers, the president of   
an electrical works, a prominent actor.    Pug was the only foreigner. 
 
The jolly group took him wamily into their horseplay and joking, and then into the serious   
business of the hunt. Pug liked duck-hunting, but killing deer had never appealed to him.   
General Armin von Roon was in the party, and Pug lagged behind with the hook-nosed   
general, who remarked that to see a deer shot made him feel ill. In this meeting Roon was   
more loquacious than before.    The forest was dank and cold, and like the others he had been   
drinking schnapps. 
 
They talked first about the United States, where, as it.turned out, Roon had attended the Army   
War College.    Then the general discussed the Polish campaign, and the Ribbentrop-Molotov   
pact,    which he    surprisingly called    a    disaster, because    of all    the ground Stalin    had    gained   
without firing a shot.    His grasp of the field operations was masterly.    His estimate of Hitler,   
Victor Henry thought, was cold-blooded and honest. 
 
Roon scarcely veiled his contempt for the master race theories of the Nazis, or for the Party   
itself, but he was making out a strong case for Hitler as a German leader, when shots rang out   
and a nearby hullabaloo drew them to join the party, ringed around a small deer lying dead in   
blood-spattered snow.    A ceremony ensued of horn-blowing and pushing a sprig of fir into the   
dead mouth over the bloody lolling tongue.    Henry became separated from the general.    That   
evening he looked for him before dinner, and was sorry to learn that Roon had been summoned   
back to Berlin. 
 
After dinner, a string quartet played Beethoven in a cream-and-gold French music room, and a   
fat-bosomed famous soprano sang Schubert songs. The guests listened with more attention than   
Pug could muster; some, during the lieder, had tears in their eyes.    Rhoda felt in her element,   
for in washington she was a patroness of music.    She sat beaming, whispering expert comments   
between numbers.    Dancing followed, and one German after another danced with her.    From   
the floor, she kept darting sparkling looks of gratitude at her husband, until Steller took him in   
tow to a library, where the actor and Dr. 
 
Knopfinann, the head of the electrical works, sat over brandy. 
 
As yet, on the weekend, Pug had not heard a word about the war. 
 
Conversation had stayed on personal chatter, business, or the arts. 
 
'Ah, here is Captain Henry," said the actor in a rich -ringing voice. 
 
"What better authority do you want?    Let's put it to him."    A gray-moustached man with thick   
hair, he played emperors, generals, and older men in love with young women.    Pug had seen   
his famous King Lear at the Schauspielhaus.    His face just now was purple-red over his stiff   
collar and buckling starched shirt. 
 270 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'It might embarrass him," Dr.    Knopfmann said. 
 
"No war talk now.    That's out," said Steller.    "This weekend is for pleasure."    "I don't mind,"   
Pug said, accepting brandy and settling in a leather chair.    "What's the question?" 
 
"I create illusions for a living," rumbled the actor, 'and I believe illusions should be confined to   
the stage.    And I say it is an illusion to hope that the United States will ever allow England to   
go down." 
 
'Oh, to hell with all that," said the banker. 
 
Dr.    Knopfrnann, a twinkling-eyed, round-faced man like the captain of the Bremen, but much   
shorter and fatter, said, 'And I maintain that it isn't 1917. The Americans pulled England's   
chestnuts out of the fire once, and what did they get for it? A bellyful of ingratitude and   
repudiation.    The Americans will accept the fait accompli.    They are realists.    Once Europe is   
normalized, we can have a hundred years of a firm Atlantic peace." 
 
'IMat do you say, Captain Henry?"    the actor asked. 
 
"The problem may never come up.    You still have to lick England." 
 
None of the three men looked very pleased.    The actor said, "Oh, I think we can assume that's   
in the cards-providing the Americans don't step in. That's the whole argument." 
 
Steller said, "Your President doesn't try to hide his British sympathies, Victor, does he?    Quite   
natural, in view of his Anglo-Dutch ancestry.    But wouldn't you say the people are against him,   
or at least sharply split?" 
 
"Yes, but America is a strange country, Dr.    Steller.    Public opinion can shift fast.    Nobody   
should forget that, in dealing with us." 
 
The eyes of the Germans flickered at each other. Dr. Knopfmann said, "A shift in public   
opinion doesn't just happen.    It's manufactured." 
 
"There's the live nerve," Steller said.    "And that's what I've found difficult to convey even to   
the air marshal, who's usually so hardheaded. 
 
Germans who haven't been across the water are impossibly provincial about America. I'm   
sorry to say this goes for the Fuhrer himself.    I don't believe he yet truly grasps the vast power   
of the American Jews. It's a vital factor in the war picture." 
 
"Don't exaggerate that factor," Henry said. "You fellows tend to, and it's a form of kidding   
yourselves." 
 
"My dear Victor, I've been in the United States    nine times    and I lived for a year    in San   
Francisco.    Who's your Minister of the Treasury? 
 
The Jew Morgenthau.    Who sits on your highest court, wielding the most influence?    The Jew   
Frankfurter." 
 271 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
He proceeded to reel off a list of Jewish officials in Washington, stale and boring to Pug from   
endless repetition in Nazi propaganda; and he made    the usual assertion that the Jews had   
American finance, communications, justice, and even the Presidency in their pockets. 
 
Steller delivered all this calmly and pleasantly.    He kept repeating 'Der jude, tier jude' without a   
sneer.    There was no glare in his eye, such as Pug had now and then observed when Rhoda   
challenged some vocal anti-Semite.    The banker presented his statements as though they were   
the day's stock market report. 
 
"To begin with," Pug replied, a bit wearily, "the Treasury post in our country has little power.   
It's a minor political reward. 
 
Christians hold all the other cabinet posts.    Financial power lies with the banks, the insurance   
companies, the oil, rail, lumber, shipping, steel, and auto industries, and such.    They're wholly   
in Christian hands.    Always have been."    "Lehman is a banker," said Dr. 
 
Knopfmann. 
 
"Yes, he is. The famous    exception." Pug went on with his stock answers to stock anti- 
Semitism:    the all but solid Christian ownership of newspapers, magazines,    and publishing   
houses, the Christian composition of Congress, the cabinet, and the executive branch, the eight   
Christian judges out of rune on the Supreme Court, the paramount White House influence of a   
Christian, Harry Hopkins, and all the rest. 
 
On the faces of his hearers appeared the curious universal smirk of Germans when discussing   
Jews: condescending, facetious, and cold, with superior awareness of a very private inside   
joke. 
 
Steller said in a kindly tone, "That's always the Jewish line, you know, how unimportant they   
are."    'Would you recommend that we take away what businesses they do have?    Make Obiekte   
of them?" 
 
Steller looked surprised and laughed, not in the least offended. 
 
"You're better informed than many Americans, Victor.    It would be an excellent idea for the   
health of your economy.    You'll come to it sooner or later." 
 
"Is it your position," the actor said earnestly, "that the Jewish question really has no bearing on   
America's entry into the war?"    'I didn't say that.    Americans do react sharply to injustice and   
suffering."    The smirk reappeared on the three faces, and Knopfmann said, "And your Negroes   
in the South?" 
 
Pug paused, "It's bad, but it's improving, and we don't put them behind barbed wire." 
 
The actor said in a lowered voice, "That's a political penalty. A Jew who behaves himself   
doesn't go to a camp." 
 
lighting a large cigar, his eyes on the match, Steller said, "Victor speaks very diplomatically.   
 272 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
But his connections are okay.      One man who's really in the picture is Congressman Ike   
Lacouture of Florida. He fought a great battle against revising the Neutrality Act."    With a sly   
glance at Pug, he added, "Practically in the family, isn't he?" 
 
This caught Pug off guard, but he said calmly, "You're pretty well informed.    That's not exactly   
public knowledge." 
 
Steller laughed.    "The air minister knew about it.    He told me. 
 
He admires Lacouture.    What happened to the dance music?    Ach, look at the time.    How did it   
get to be half past one? There's a little supper on, gentlemen, nothing elaborate-" He rose,   
puffing on the cigar.    'The American Jews will make the greatest possible mistake, Victor, to   
drag in the United States.    Lacouture is their friend, if they'll only listen to him.    You know   
what the Fuhrer said in his January speech-if they start another world war, that will be the end   
of them.    He was in deadly earnest, I assure you." 
 
Aware that he was butting a stone wall, but unable to let these things pass, Pug said, 'Peace or   
war isn't up to the Jews.    And you grossly misunderstand Lacouture." 
 
"Do I?    But my dear Captain, what do you call the British guarantee to Poland?    Politically and   
strategically it was frivolous, if not insane. All it did was bring in two big powers against   
Germany on the trivial issue of Danzig, which was what the Jews wanted. 
 
Churchill is a notorious Zionist.    All this was clearly stated between the lines in Lacouture's   
last speech.    I tell you, men like him may still manage to restore the peace and incidentally to   
save the Jews from a very bad fate they seem determined to bring on themselves. 
 
Well-how about an omelette and a glass of champagne?" 
 
On    Christmas Eve,    Victor Henry    left the    embassy    early    to    walk home.    The weather was   
threatening, but he wanted air and exercise. 
 
Berlin was having a lugubrious Yuletide.    The scrawny newspapers had no good war news, and   
the Russian attack on Finland was bringing little joy to Germans.    The shop windows offered   
colorful cornucopias of appliances, clothing, toys, wines, and food, but people burned sullenly   
along the cold windy streets under dark skies, hardly glancing at the mocking displays.    None   
of    the stuff    was    actually    for    sale.      As    Pug    walked,    evening    fell    and    the blackout   
began.   
Hearing muffled Christmas songs from behind curtained windows, he could picture the   
Berliners sitting in dimly fit apartments in their overcoats around tinsel-draped fir trees, trying   
to make merry on watery beer, potatoes, and salt mackerel. At Abendruh, the Henrys had   
almost forgotten that there was a war on, if a dominant one, and that serious shortages existed.   
For Wolf Steller there were no shortages. 
 
Yielding to Rhoda's urging, he had accepted an invitation to come back to Abendruh in   
January, though he had not enjoyed himself there. 
 
More and more, especially since his glimpse of the National Socialist leaders at Karinhall, he   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thought of the Germans as people he would one day have to fight.    He felt hypocritical putting   
on the good fellow with them.    But intelligence opportunities did exist at Steller's estate. Pug   
had sent home a five-page account just of his talk with General von Roon.    By pretending he   
agreed at heart with Ike Lacouture-something Steller already believed, bel-ause he wanted to- 
he    could increase    those opportunities.    It meant    being    a liar,    expressing ideas    he thought   
pernicious, and abusing a man's hospitality-a hell of a way to serve one's country! But if   
Steller was trying games with the American naval attache, he had to take the risks. Victor   
Henry was mulling over all this as he strode along, muffled to his eyes against a sleety rain that   
was starting to fall, when out of the darkness a stooped figure approached and touched his arm. 
 
'Captain Henry?"    "Who are you?" 
 
"Rosenthal.    You are living in my house." 
 
They were near a corner, and in the glow of the blue streetlight Pug saw that the Jew had lost a   
lot of weight; the skin of his face hung in folds, and his nose seemed far more prominent.    He   
was stooped over, and his confident bearing had given way to a whipped and sickly look. It   
was a shocking change.    Holding out his hand, Pug said, "Oh, yes. Hello." 
 
"Forgive me.    My wife and I are going to be sent to Poland soon. 
 
Or at least we have heard such a rumor and we want to prepare, in case it's true.    We can't take   
our things, and we were just wondering whether there are any articles in our home you and   
Mrs.    Henry would care to buy.    You could have anything you wished, and I could make you a   
very reasonable price." 
 
Pug had also heard vague stories of the "resettlement" of the Berlin Jews, a wholesale   
shipping-off to newly formed Polish ghettos, where conditions were, according to the reports   
you chose to believe, either moderately bad or fantastically horrible.    It was disturbing to talk   
to a man actually menaced with this dark misty fate. 
 
"You have a factory here," he said. "Can't your people keep an eye on your property until   
conditions get better?" 
 
"The fact is I've sold my firm, so there's nobody."    Rosenthal held up the frayed lapels of his   
coat against the cutting sleet and wind. 
 
"Did you sell out to the Steller bank?" 
 
The Jew's face showed astonishment and timorous suspicion.    "You know about these matters?   
Yes, the Steller bank.    I received a very fair price.    Very fair."    The Jew permitted himself a   
single ironic glance into Henry's eyes.    "But the proceeds were tied up to settle other matters.   
My wife and I will be more comfortable in Poland with a little ready money. 
 
it always helps.    So-perhaps the carpets-the plate, or some china?" 
 
"Come along and k it ov m taler with my wife.    She makes all those decisions.    Maybe you can   
have dinner with us." 
 274 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rosenthal sadly smiled.    'I don't think SO, but you're very kind." 
 
Pug nodded, remembering his Gestapo-planted servants.    "Herr Rosenthal, I have to repeat to   
you what I said when we rented your place. 
 
I don't want to take advantage of your misfortune."    'Captain Henry, you can't possibly do me   
and my wife a greater kindness.    I hope you will buy something." 
 
Rosenthal put a card in his hand and melted into the blackout. 
 
When Pug got home Rhoda was dressing for the charge's dinner, so there was no chance to talk   
about the offer. 
 
The embassys Christmas party had none of the opulence of an Abendruh banquet, but it was   
good enough.    Nearly all the Americans left in Berlin were there, chatting over eggnogs and   
then assembling at three long tables for a meal of roast goose, pumpkin pie, fruit, cheese, and   
cakes, all from Denmark. Diplomatic import privileges made this possible, and the guests   
grew merry over the unaccustomed abundance. Victor Henry loved being back among   
American faces, American talk, offhand open manners, laughter from the diaphragm and not   
from the face muscles; not a bow or a clicked pair of heels, not a woman's European smile,   
gleaming on and off like an electric sign. 
 
But trouble broke out with Rhoda.    He heard her raising her voice at Fred Fearing, who was   
sucking his corncob pipe and glaring at her far down the table. Pug called, "Hey, what's it   
about, Fred?" 
 
'The Wolf Stellers, Pug, the loveliest people your Wife has ever met." 
 
'I said the nicest Germans," Rhoda shrilled, "and it's quite true. 
 
You're blindly prejudiced." 
 
"It's time you went home, Rhoda," Fearing said. 
 
'And just what does that mean?"    she snapped back, still much too loud. At Abendruh Rhoda   
had loosened up on her count of drinks, and tonight she app ar fuer ong than usual. Her   
gestures were e ed to berth al getting broad, she was holding her eyes half-closed, and her   
voice tones were going up into her nose. 
 
"Well, kid, if you think people like Wolf Steller and his wife are nice, You'll believe next that   
Hitler just wants to reunite the German folk peacelily.    About that time you need to go back for   
a while on American chow and the New York Times." 
 
'I just know that Germans are not monsters with horns and tails," said Rhoda, "but ordinary   
people, however misgidded.    Or did one of your frauleins show up in bed with cloven hoofs,   
dear?"    The crude jibe caused a silence.    Fearing was an ugly fellow, tall, long-faced, curly- 
beaded, with a narrow foxy nose; upright, idealistic, full of rigid liberal ideas, and severe on   
injustice and political hypocrisy. 
 275 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
But he had his human side.    He had seduced the wife of his collaborator on a best seller about   
the Spanish Civil War.    This lady he had recently parked in England with an infant daughter,   
and he was now-so the talk ran-making passes at every available German woman, and even   
some American wives.    Rhoda had once half-seriously told Pug that she had had trouble with   
Freddy on the dance floor.    All the same, Fred Fearing was a famous, able reporter.    Because   
he detested the Nazis, he tried hard to be fair to them, and the propaganda ministry understood   
this.    Most Americans got their picture of Nazi Germany at war from Fearinles broadcasts.  
 
Victor Henry said, as amiably as he could, to break the silence, "It might be easier to navigate   
in this country, Rhoda, if the bad ones would sprout horns or grow hair in their palms or   
something."    nWhat Wolf Steller has in his palms is blood, lots of it," Fearing said, with a swift   
whiskeyed-up pugnacity, 'He acts unaware of it.    You and Rhoda encourage this slight color   
blindness, Pug, by acting the same way." 
 
it's Pug's job to socialize with people like Steller," said the charge mildly, from the head of the   
table. "I propose a moratorium tonight on discussing the Germans." Colonel Forrest was   
rubbing his broken nose, a mannerism that signalled an itch to argue, though his moon face   
remained    placid. He put in, nasally,    'Say,    Freddy,    I happen to think Hitler just wants to   
reorganize central Europe as a German sphere, peacefully if he can, and that he'll call off the   
war if the Allies will agree.    Think I should go home, too?"    Fearing en-dtted a column of blue   
smoke and red sparks from his pipe. 
 
"What about Mein Kampf, Bill?"    'Campaign document of a thirty-year-old hothead," snapped   
the military attache, "written eighteen years ago in jail.    Now he's the head of state.    He's never   
moved beyond his strength.    Mein Kampf's all about tearing off the southern half of Russia and   
making a German breadbasket of it.    That's an old Vienna coffeehouse fantasy.    It went out of   
the window once and for all with the pact.    The Jewish business is bad, but the man's doing his   
job with the crude tools at hand.    That unfortunately includes anti-Semitism.    He didn't invent   
it.    It was big on the German scene before he was born." 
 
"Yes, time for you to go home," said Fearing, gulping Moselle. 
 
"Well, what's your version?"    Now plainly irritated, the military attache put on an imitation of   
the broadcaster's voice. "Adolf Hitler the mad house painter is out to conquer the world?"   
"Oh, hell, Hitler's revolution doesn't know where it's going, Bill, any more than the French or   
Russian revolutions did," exclaimed Fearing, with an exasperated wave of his corncob- "it's   
just raging along the way those did and it'll keep going and spreading till it's stopped.    Sure he   
moves    peacefully where he    can. Why not?    Everywhere    he's    pushed in there    have    been   
welcoming groups of leading citizens, or traitors, you might say. In Poland they swarmed,   
Why, You know that France and England have parties ready right this second to cooperate with   
him.    He just has to strike hard enough in the west to knock out the ins and bring in the outs.   
He's already got Stalin cravenly feeding him al ssi ii I the Ru an o and wheat he needs, in   
return for the few bones he threw him in the Baltic." 
 
With swinging theatrical gestures of the smoking pipe, Fearing went on, "By 1942, the way   
things are going, you may see a world in which Germany will control the industries of Europe,   
 276 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
the raw materials of the Soviet Union, and the navies of England and France.    Why, the French   
fleet would go over to him tomorrow if the right admiral sneezed. He'll have a working deal   
with the japs for exploiting Asia and the East Indies and ruling the Pacific and Indian oceans.  
 
Then what? Not to mention the network of dictatorships in South America, already in the   
Nazis' pocket. 
 
YOu know, of course, Bill, that the United States Army is now two hundred thousand strong,   
and that Congress intends to cut it." 
 
"Well, I'm against that, of course," said Colonel Forrest. 
 
'I daresay! A new bloody dark age is threatening to engulf the whole world and COngress   
wants to cut down the Arinyl" 'An interesting vision," smiled the charge.      "Slightly   
melodramatic." 
 
Rhoda Henry raised her wineglass, giggling noisily.    "Lawks a mercy me! I never heard such   
wild-eyed poppycock. Freddy, you're the one who should go home. Merry Christmas.Fred   
Fearinies face reddened. 
 
He looked up and down the table. 
 
"Pug Henry, I like you.    I guess I'll go for a walk." 
 
As the broadcaster strode away from the table, the charge rose and hurried after him, but did   
not bring him back. The Henrys went home early. Pug had to hold up Rhoda as they left,   
because she was halfasleep, and unsteady at the knees. 
 
The next pouch of Navy mail contained an Alnav listing changes of duty for most of the new   
captains.    They were becoming execs of battleships, commanding officers of cruisers, chiefs of   
staff to admirals at sea. For Victor Henry there were no orders.    He stared out of the window at   
Hitler's chancellery, at the black-clad SS men letting snow pile on their helmets and shoulders   
like statues.    Suddenly, he had had enough. He told his yeoman not to disturb him, and wrote   
three letters.    The first expressed regret to the Stellers that, due to unforeseen official problems,   
he and Rhoda would not be coming back to Abendruh.    The second, two formal paragraphs to   
the Bureau of Personnel, requested transfer to sea duty.    In the third, a long handwritten letter   
to Vice-Admiral Preble, Pug poured out his disgust with his assignment and his desire to go   
back to sea.    He 
 
ended up: 
 
I've ed twenty-five years for combat at sea.    I'm miserable, Admiral, and maybe for that reason   
my wife is miserable.    She's falling apart here in Berlin.    it's a nightmarish place.    This isn't the   
Navy's concern, but it's mine.    If I have been of any service to the Navy in my entire career, the   
only recompense I naw ask, and beg, is a transfer to sea duty. 
 
A few days later another White House envelope came with a scrawl in black, thick, slanting   
pendl.    The postmark showed that it had crossed his letter. 
 277 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
PugYour report is really grand, and gives me a helpful picture. 
 
Hitler is at rybody's reaction is a little different.    I'm destrange one, isn t he?    Eve lighted that   
you are where you are, and I have told C.N.O that.    He says you want to return briefly in May   
for a wedding- That will be arranged sure to drop in on me when you can spare a moment. 
 
FDR 
 
Victor Henry bought two of Rosenthal's C)riental    carpets, and a set of English china that   
Rhoda particularly loved, at the prices the man named.    His main motive was to cheer her up,   
and it worked; she gloated over the bargains for weeks, and never tired of saying, truly enough,   
that the poor Jewish man's thankfulness to her had been overwhelming. Pug also wrote the   
Stellers about this time that, if e invitation held, he and Rhoda would come back to Abendruh   
after all. 
 
If his job was intelligence, he adedded, he had better get on with it; moreover, the moral gap   
between him and Steller seemed to have narrowed. 
 
Notwithstanding Rosenthal's pathetic gratitude for the deal, his possessions were Obiekte. 
 
New Year's Eve Midnight Briny dearI can't think of a better way to start 1940 than by writing   
to you. I'm home, typing away in my old bedroom, which seems    one-tend, as large as I   
remembered it.    The whole house seems so cramped and cluttered, and God, how that sen,ll of   
insecticide wipes away the years. 
 
Oh, my love, what a Marvelous place the United States is!      I had forgotten, completely   
forgotten. 
 
When I reached New York, my father was already out of the hospital -I learned this by phoning   
home-so I blew two hundred of my hundred dollars on a 1934 Dodge upend ve to 0 da I y   
dmiedn. 
 
tViYaes,WIaswhainntgton.    I wan co I tiro Fl ri i really oo- More of that later, but let me assure   
ed to see Sltoetde tto see the Capitol dome and the you that he got little comfort out of the   
meeting.    But so help me, Briny, I mainly wanted to get the feel of the country again. 
 
Well, in dead of winter, in lousy weather, and despite the tragic Negro shantytowns that line   
the ds down South, t roa he Atlantic states are beautiful, spacious, raw, clean, full of wilderness   
still, exploding with energy and life.    I loved every billboard, every filling station. it's really the   
New World Old World's might Th pretty in its rococo fashion, but it's rotten-ripe and going   
insane.    Ilank God I'm out of it. Take Miami Beach.    ive always loathed this place, y It's a 
 
measure of my present frame of mind that I regard evenou know. 
 
Miami Beach with affection.    I left here a raging anti-Semite.    It jars me even now to see these   
sleek Jews without a care in the world, ambling about in their heavy wearing furs, or pearls and   
tans and outlandish sun clothes-often diamonds, my dear with pink or orange shirts and shorts.   
The Miami Beachers don't believe in hiding what they've got.    I think of Warsaw, and I get   
 278 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
angry, but it passes. 
 
They're no different, in their obliviousness to the war, from the rest of the Americans. 
 
much 
 
The doctors say my father's coming along fine after a heart attack that all but did him in.    I   
don't like his fragile look, and he doesn't do but sit in the sun in the garden and listen to the   
news o, the radio. He's terribly worried about Uncle Aaron.    He never used to speak much of   
him (actually he used to avoid the subject) but now he goes on and on about Aaron.    My father   
is terrified of Hitler. He thinks he's a sort of devil who's going to conquer the world and   
murder all the Jews. 
 
But I guess you're waiting to hear about my little chat with Leslie Slote-eh, darling? 
 
Well-he was definitely not expecting the answer I brought back to his proposal!    When I told   
him I'd fallen head over ears in love with you, it literally staggered him.    I mean he tottered to a   
chair and fell in it, pale as a ghost.    Poor old Slote!    A conversation ensued that went on for   
hours, in a bar, in a restaurant, in my car, in half a dozen circuits on foot around the Lincoln   
Memorial in a freezing wind, and finally in his apartment. 
 
Lord, did he carry on!    But after all, I had to give him his say. 
 
The main heads of the dialogue went something like this, round and round and round: Slote:   
It's just that you were isolated with him for so long. 
 
Me: I told Briny that myself.    I said it's a triumph of propinquity. 
 
That doesn't change the fact that I love him now. 
 
Slote: You can't intend to marry him.    It would be the greatest possible mistake.    I say this as a   
friend, and somebody who knows you better than anyone else. 
 
Me: I told Byron that too.    I said it would be ridiculous for me to marry him, and gave him all   
the reasons. 
 
Slote: Well, then, what on earth have you in mind? 
 
Me: I'm just reporting a fact to you.    I haven't anything in mind. 
 
Slote: You had better snap out of it.    You're an intellectual and a grown woman.    Byron Henry   
is a pleasant light-headed loafer, who managed to avoid getting an education even in a school   
like Columbia. 
 
There can't be anything substantial between you. 
 
ME: I don't want to hurt you, dear, but-(this is the way I walked on eggs for a long while, but   
in the end I came flat out with it) the thing between Byron Henry and me is damned   
substantial. In fact by comparison, just now, nothing else seems    very substantial.    (Slote   
 279 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vlunged in horrid gloom.) Slote (he only asked this once): Have you slept with him? 
 
ME: None of your business.    (Jastrow not giving Slote any cards to play she can help.    Slote   
sunk even deeper in g.) SLo-rE: Well, 'la coeur a ses raisons," and all that, but I truly don't   
understand.      He's a boy. He's very good-looking, or rather, charming-looking, and he is   
certainly courageous.    Perhaps That's assumed an outsize importance for you. 
 
ME (ducking that sore , who needs trouble?): He has other nice qualities.    He's a gentleman.    I   
never knew the animal really existed outside of books any more. 
 
Slote: I'm not a gentleman, then? 
 
ME: I'm not saying you're a boot or a cad.    I mean a gentleman in the old sense, not somebody   
who avoids bad manners. 
 
SLOTIR: You're talking like a shopgirl.    You're obviously rationalizing a temporary physical   
infatuation.    'That's all right. 
 
But the words you're choosing are corny and embarrassing. 
 
Me: All that may be.    Meantime I can't marry you.    (Yawn) And I must go to sleep now.    I   
want to drive four hundred miles tomorrow.      ( xit Jastrow, at long last.) E All things   
considered, he took it well. 
 
He calmly says we're getting married once I'm over this nuttiness, and he's going ahead with   
his plans for it.    He's remarkably sure of himself, to that extent he remains very much the old   
Slote.    Physically he's like a stranger now.    I never kissed him, and though we spent an hour in   
his apartment, very late, he never laid a hand on me.    I wonder if the talk about gentlemen had   
anything to do with it? 
 
He never used to be like that, I assure you. (I daresay I've changed too!) Maybe he's right   
about me and you.    I choose not to look beyond the present moment, or more truly beyond the   
moment when we stood by the fire in my bedroom and you took me in your arms.    I'm still   
overwhelmed, I still love you, I still long for you.    Separated though we are, I've never been so   
happy in all my life.    If only you were here right this minute! 
 
I said you see things too simply, but on one point you were just plain right.    Aaron should leave   
that stupid house, let it fall down and rot, and come back to this wonderful land to live out his   
days. 
 
His move there was stupid- His remaining there is ii becilic. If yon u can convince him of   
itand I'm writing him a letter too-I'd feel a lot better about your coming back.    But don't just   
abandon him, sweetheart. 
 
Not yet.    Wait till my plans jell a bit. 
 
Happy New Year, and I hope to God that 1940 brings the end of Hitler and this whole grisly   
nightmare, and brings us together again. 
 280 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
I adore you. 
 
Natalie Three letters came straggling in during the next few weeks. The first two were shallow   
awkward scrawls: I'm the world's worst letter writer- sure miss you more than I can say things   
are pretty dull around here now without you... 
 
sure wish I could have been there with you in Lisbon.... Well, got to get back to work now... 
 
She read Byron's embarrassing banalities over and over. Here on paper was just the young   
featherweight sloucher she had first seen, Plopped against a red Siena wall in the noon sun.   
Even his handwriting fitted the picture: slanting, undistinguished, the letters small and   
flattened. 
 
The pathetically flourishing B of his signature stood out of the mediocre penmanship.    All of   
Byron's frustrated yearning to amount to something, to measure up to his father's hopes, was in   
that extravagant B. All his inconsequence was in the trailed-off, crushed "... Byron." 
 
Poor Briny! 
 
Yet Natalie found herself dwelling on the artless empty scribblings as though they were letters   
of George Bernard Shaw.    She kept them under her pillow.    They contrasted most cruelly with   
her other preoccupation, for to pass the time she had hauled out her master's thesis, already   
three quarters written in French: "Contrasts in the Sociologismic Critique of War: Durkheim's   
Writings on Germany, 1915 
 
1916 and Tolstoy's Second Epilogue to War and Peace, i869." 
 
She was giving thought to translating it, and enrolling in Columbia or NYU in the fall to finish   
it off and get her degree.    It was a good thesis.    Even Slote had read sections with approval, if   
now and again with a thin Oxonian smile.    She wanted not only to finish, but to revise it.    She   
had started with the anti-French, proGerman bias of most American university opinion between   
the wars. Her experiences in Poland had inclined her to agree much more with Durkhelm   
about Germany. 
 
These things were as far beyond the writer of the letters under her pillow as the general theory   
of relativity.    It would give Briny a headache just to read her title.    But she didn't care.    She was   
in love. 
 
Popular songs were sweetly stabbing her: songs about women infatuated with worthless men,   
whining cowboy laments    about absent sweethearts. It was as though she had developed a   
craving    for penny candy.    She was    ashamed    of gratifying    her fancy,    but she couldn't    get   
enough of these songs.    She bought records and played them over and over.    If Byron Henry   
wrote stupid letters, too bad.    All judgments fell away before her remembrance of his eyes and   
his mouth and his arms, her delight at contemplating a few ill-written sentences because they   
came from his hand. 
 
A much better letter came along: the answer to her first long one from Miami Beach, several   
 281 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
pages typed with Byron's odd offhand clarity. 
 
He somehow    never struck a wrong key in his quick rattling,    and his pages looked like a   
stenographer's work. 
 
Natalie darling: Well, that's more like it.    A real letter.    God, I waited a long time. 
 
I skipped all that stuff about the USA and Miami, to get to the Slote business, but then I went   
back and read it all. Nobody has to tell me how good the United States is, compared to   
Europe.    I'm so homesick at this point, I could die.    This is quite aside from my yearning for   
you, which remains as strong as if you were in the room downstairs.      I'm beginning to   
understand how iron filings must feel around a magnet. Sometimes, sitting in my room   
thinking about you, the pull gets so strong, I have the feeling if I let go of the arms of my chair   
I'd float out of the window and across France and over the Atlantic, straight to your house at   
'316 Normandie Drive. 
 
Natalie was enchanted with this imaginative little conceit, and read it over and over. 
 
Slote only thinks he's going to marry you.    He had his chance. 
 
By the way, I'm more than one-third through Slote's list of tomes about the Germans.    Some of   
them aren't available in English, but I'm slogging along with what I can get.    here's not much   
else to do here. 
 
The one reward of my isolation in this godforsaken town is the one-man seminar that A.J. is   
conducting with me.    His view is more or less like Slote's, and I'm getting the picture.    The   
Germans have been the corners in Europe ever since Napoleon, because of their geographical   
place, their numbers, and their energy, but they're a strange dark people. 
 
All of these writers Slote listed eventually come out with the pedantic destructiveness, the   
scary sureness that they're right, that the Germans have been gypped for centuries, that the   
world's got to be made over on their terms.    What it boils down to so far for me is that Hitler is,   
after all, the soul of presentday Germany-which is self-evident when you're there; that the   
Germans can't be allowed to rule EuroPe because they have some kind of mass mental   
distortion, despite their brilliance, and can't even nile themselves; and that when they try for   
mastery,    somebody's    got to beat the living daylights out of them or you,ll have barbarism   
triumphant.    A.J. adds his own notion about the "good GermanY" of Progressive liberals and   
the "bad Germany" of Slote's romantics and nationalists, all tied in with geographical location   
and the Catholic religion, which sort of loses me. (Wonder if any of this will get past the   
censors?    I bet it Will.    The Italians fear and loathe the Germans. There's a word that passes   
around here about Mussolini.    They say he's the monkey that opened the tiger's cage.    Pretty   
good.) Getting A.J. out of here seems to be a bit of a project, after all. 
 
There was a minor technical foul-up in his naturalization, way, way back. I don't know the   
details, but he never bothered to correct it. The new consul general in Rome is a sort of prissy   
bureaucrat, and he's creating difficulties.    All this will straighten out, of course-they've said as   
much in Rome-but it's taking time. 
 282 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
So I won't abandon A.J. now.    But even if your plans aren't clear by mid-april, I must come   
home then and I will, whether A.J. does or not. 
 
Aside from my brother's wedding, my father's on fire to get me into submarine school, where   
the next officer course starts May 27. 
 
The course lasts    six months,    and then there's    a year    of training    in subs operating    around   
Connecticut.    So even in the unlikely event that I do enroll-I'll only do it if the war breaks wide   
open-we could be together a lot. 
 
Siena's gotten real dumpy.    The hills are brown, the vines are cut to black stumps.    The people   
creep around the streets looking depressed. The Palio's off for 1940- It's cold.    It rains a lot.   
But in the lemon house, anyway, the trees are still blooming, and A.J. and I still have our   
coffee there. 
 
I smell the blossoms and I think of you.    I often go in there just to take a few breaths, and I   
close any eyes and there you are, for a moment.    Natalie, there has to be a God or I wouldn't   
have found you, and He has to be the same God for both of us.    There's only one God. 
 
I love you. 
 
Briny "Well, well," Natalie said aloud, as tears sprang from her eyes and dropped on the flimsy   
airmail paper.    "You miserable chestnut-haired devil."    She kissed the pages, smearing them   
orange-red.    Then she looked at the date again: February 10, and this was April 9-almost two   
months for an airmail letter!    There was no point in answering, at that rate.    He might be on his   
way back now. 
 
But she seized a pad and began writing. 
 
She couldn't help it. 
 
Natalie's father was listening to the radio in the garden. They had just eaten lunch and her   
mother had gone off to a committee meeting. 
 
As Natalie poured loving words on paper, a news broadcast came drifting in on the warm air   
through the open window.    The announcer, with rich dramatic doom in his voice, spoke words   
that arrested her pen: "The 'phony war' has ended.    A fierce air, sea, and land battle is ra ging   
for Norway.    NBC brings special bulletins from the war capitals that tell the story. 
 
'London. In a lightning attack, without warning or provocation, Nazi Gernwny has invaded   
neutral Norway by sea and air, and German land forces have rolled into Denmark. Fierce   
resistance is reported by the Norwegian government at Oslo, Narvik, Trondheim, and other key   
points along the coast, but German reinforcenxnts are continuing to pour in. 
 
The Royal Navy is moving rapidly to cut off the invasion.    Winston Churchill, First Lord of the   
Admiralty, declared this morning, 'All German vessels entering the Skagerrak will be sunk-"   
Putting aside the pad and pen, Natalie went to the window.    Her father, sitting with his back to   
her in blazing sunshine, his bald, sunburned head with its gray fringe tilted to one side, was   
 283 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
listening with motionless intensity to this shattering development. 
 
"Paris.    In an official communique, the French government anno,itnced that the Allies would   
rally to the cause of democratic Norway, and would meet the German onslaught quote with   
cold steel unquote. 
 
Pessimistic commentators pointed out that the fall of Norway and Denmark would put more   
than a thousand additional miles of European coastline in German hands and that this 'would   
mean the collapse of the British blockade. 
 
"Berlin.    The propaganda ministry has issued the following bulletin. 
 
Forestalling a British plan to seize Scandinavia and deny Germany access to Swedish iron ore   
and other raw materials, the German arnwd forces have peaceably taken Denmark under their   
protection and have arrived in Norway by sea and air, where the population has enthusiastically   
welcomed them.    Oslo is already in German hands, and the life of the capital is returning to   
normal.    Scattered resistance by small British-bribed units has been crushed.    The Fuhrer has   
sent the following message of congratulation to. 
 
Natalie    came    out into the garden to talk to her father about the shocking news, and was   
surprised to find him sleeping through it, his head dropped on his chest.    The radio was blaring;   
and her father usually hung on the news broadcasts. The shadow from his white linen cap   
obscured his face, but she could see a queer expression around his mouth. His upper teeth   
were protruding ludicrously over his lip. 
 
Natalie came to him, and touched his shoulder.    'Ta?"    He did not respond.    He felt inert.    She   
could see now that his upper plate had worked loose.    "Pal' As she shook him his head lolled   
and the cap fell off. She thrust her hand inside his loose flowered sport shirt; there was no   
heartbeat under the warm clammy skin. 
 
In the instant before she shrieked and ran inside to telephone the doctor, she saw on her dead   
father's face a strong resemblance to Aaron Jastrow that in his lifetime she had never observed.  
 
She walked through the next weeks in a fog of shocked grief. 
 
Natalie had stopped taking her father seriously at about the age of twelve; He was just a   
businessman, a sweater manufacturer, a temple president, and she was then already a brash   
intellectual snob.    Since then she had become more and more aware of how her father's sense   
of inferiority to Aaron Jastrow, and to his own daughter, permeated his life. Yet she was   
prostrated when he died.    She could not eat.    Even with drugs she could 'lot sleep.    Her mother,   
a conventional woman usually preoccupied with Hadassah meetings and charity fund-raising,   
for many years completely baffled by her daughter, pulled out of her own grief and tried in   
vain to comfort her.      Natalie lay in her room on her bed, wailing and bawling, almost   
constantly at first, and in spells every day for weeks afterward.    She suffered agonies of guilt   
for neglecting and despising her father.    He had loved her and spoiled her. 
 
When she had told him she wanted to go to the Sorbonne for two years, that had been that.    She   
 284 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
had never even asked whether he could afford it.      She had felled him with her bizarre   
misadventures and had experienced no remorse while he was alive.    Now he was gone, and she   
was on her own, and it was too late.    He was unreachable by love or regret. 
 
The radio news-disaster on disaster in Norway, German drives succeeding, Allied landings   
failing, the remnants of the Norwegian army retreating into the mountains where the Germans   
were hunting them down-came to her as dim distant rumors.    Reality was only her wet pillow,   
and the stream of middle-aged sunburned Jews paying condolence calls, and all the endless talk   
about money problems. 
 
She was shocked back into her senses by two events, one on top of the other: Byron's return   
from Europe, and the German attack on France. 
 
The Great Assault 
 
Modern war is characterized by sudden swift changes on the grand scale. 
 
In the spring of 1940, seven days sufficed for our German armed forces to upset the world   
order.    On May 10, the English and French were still the victors of Versailles, still masters of   
the seas and continents.    By May 17 France was a beaten, almost helpless nation, and England   
was hanging on for her life. 
 
On paper, the odds had been heavy against Fall Gelb ("Case Yellow"), our plan for attacking   
France.    The figures of the opposing forces had certainly comforted the L-nemy and disturbed   
us.    But put to the test, Case Yellow (revised) brought a big victory.    Our soldiers man for man   
proved superior to the best the democracies had.    Our High Command used well the lessons of   
massed armor and gasoline-engine mobility learned ;n.    the defect of A/,rid War I at the hands   
of British tank battalions. The Anglo-French world hegemony stood unmasked as a mere   
historical husk.    it still commanded the seas and the access to raw materials; its resources for a   
long war were superior to ours; but without the will to use them these advantages were   
meaningless.    Persia had greater resources than Alexander the Great. 
 
In judging Hitler, historians must recognize that he sensed this weakness of the other side, and   
that we of the General Staff erred.      We assumed that our professional opponents were   
preparing with due urgency to wage war.    But in fact their countrymen would not face realities,   
and their politicians would not tell the people unpleasant truths. 
 
Adolf Hitler gambled the future of Germany, and therefore of Europe, and therefore of the   
existing world order, on one heavy armed thrust. 
 
It succeeded beyond anybody's expectation, including his own. Besides ordering the attack   
over the pessimistic objections of our staff, Hitler also, almost at the last minute, adopted the   
bold Manstein Plan for an 
 
(IT 
 
asic jelljafti 
 285 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
(from WORLD EMPIRE LOST) 
 
armored strike in force through the bad Ardennes terrain, to turn the left flank of the Maginot   
Line.      This departure from    the classic Schlieffen Plan achieved total surprise, and led to   
Rundstedt's magnificent race across northern France to the sea. It split the Allies, sent the   
British fleeing across the Channel in an improvised flotilla of pleasure yachts, coal scows, and   
fishing boats, and ended the shaky French will to fight.    Thereafter we marched south to Paris   
against fastcrumbling resistance.    And so Germany achieved in a few weeks, under a former   
corporal, what it had failed to do in four years of desperate combat under Kaiser Wilhelm 11. 
 
The technical key to our victory in France was simply that we massed our armor into whole   
spearhead divisions, like iron cavalry, thus restoring speed and movement to the battlefields of   
the industrial age, supposedly paralyzed forever into trench warfare by the strength and range   
of mechanical firepower. 
 
We learned this from the works of the English tactician Fuller and the French tactician de   
Gaulle, analyzing the lessons of World War I. 
 
The French army, with armored strength superior to our own, ignored these Allied thinkers,   
and scattered thousands of tanks piecemeal among the infantry divisions.    This question of how   
to use the new self-propelled armor had been much disputed between the wars. 
 
We took the right path of Fuller, de Gaulle, and our own Guderian. 
 
Our opponents took the wrong one.    The coordination of dive-bombing with these new ground   
tactics hastened the victory. 
 
The Maginot Line 
 
The world was stunned. For months Western newspapers and magazines had been printing   
maps of Europe, showing imaginary battle lines for the coming campaign.      The French   
commander-in-chief, Generalissimo Maurice Gamelin, "the world's foremost professional   
soldier," as the Western journalists called him, was supposed to have a masterly plan to beat   
us. 
 
In modern war, according to this rumored "Gamelin Plan," industrial firepower gave the   
defense an advantage over the offense of ten or fifteen to one. 
 
France had spent one and a half million soldiers' lives in World War I proving that the massed   
infantry attacks of Napoleon no longer worked against machine guns and cannon.    There would   
be no more Verduns. The new concept was to build in peacetime    a great wall of linked   
fortresses with the strongest modern firepower.    No matter how many millions of men a future   
enemy might hurl against this wall, they would all drown in their own blood. 
 
On this theory, France had constructed a chain of fortresses united by underground tunnels, the   
Maginot Line.    If we Germans did not attack, then between the land wall of the Maginot Line   
and the British sea blockade, the economic life would be choked out of us.    Finally the Allied   
 286 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
armies would sally forth from the Line to deliver the coup de grace, if revolution did not topple   
Hitler first, and bring our generals crawling for peace terms, as we had in 1918.    So ran the   
newspaper talk in the West during the sitzkrieg. 
 
Informed military men had a question or two about this Maginot Line. it was indeed a marvel   
of engineering, but was it not too short? 
 
Beginning at the Swiss Alps, it ran along the French-German border for more than a hundred   
miles    to a place called    Longuyon.    There it    stopped. Between    Longuyon    and the English   
Channel, therp, still remained a hole of open level country, the boundary between France and   
Belgium, at least as long as the Line itself.    In 1914, we bestial Germans had attacked through   
Belgium precisely because this hole offered such a flat fine road to Paris.    Couldn't we just go   
around the famous Maginot Line and come down by that route again? 
 
The proponents of the Gamelin Plan met such questions with ironic smiles. 
 
Yes, to run the Line straight through Belgium to the sea would have been very fine, they said.   
But that was up to the Belgians, who insisted on preserving their neutrality instead. A for   
cornpletinq thr" I;the in French territory, it WOLII , had to cut through a hundred thirty miles   
of important industrial areas.    Moreover, at the time when it might have been done, a mood of   
economy had come over the government. The people wanted shorter hours and higher pay.   
The cost would have been astronomical. Also, subsurface water in the area made a tunnel   
system    difficult.      Also,    by then    Hitler was in    power,    and    extending the    Line    might 
have   
provoked the bellicose Fuhrer to do something rash. 
 
In short, the wisest military brains in France had decided not to finish the Maginot Line.   
Instead, there was the Gamelin Plan. If war came, the French and British armies would be   
poised along the unfortified Belgian border. If the Germans did try to come through there   
again, the Allies under Gamelin would leap forward and join the tough Belgian army of two   
hundred thousand men on a strong river line, Given the enormous advantage of defense in   
modern warfare, a German attack on such a narrow front would bloodily collapse. 
 
Outcome of the Plan 
 
We did attack, though not exactly where the Plan called for us to do so. 
 
Five days later, Generalissimo Gamelin was fired.    We were pouring around the north end of   
the Maginot Line through the supposedly "impassable" Ardennes country, and flooding   
westward across France. 
 
Thus we cut off the French and British armies which, following the Gamelin Plan, had duly   
leaped forward into Belgium.    Our Eighteenth Army under KOchler was also coming at them   
from Holland to the north. 
 
They were trapped.    On the morning of May 15, the prime minister of France telephoned his   
defense minister to ask what countermeasures Gamelin was proposing.    The minister answered,   
according to history, "He has none." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
At an urgent conference in Paris next day at the Quai d'Orsay, Winston Churchill, who had   
desperately flown over from London, asked Generalissimo Gamelin, "General, where is the   
reserve-the masse de manoeuvre-to bring up against the German breakthrough?" 
 
The world's foremost professional soldier replied, according to Churchill's memoirs, "Aucune."   
(There isn't any.) General Weygand relieved him.    We took the Maginot Line from behind with   
no trouble, since the guns pointed the other way; marched off to captivity sferred all the the   
French armies found sitting inside the forts and tunnels; tran cannon to the English Channel for   
use against the British; took all the stored food and equipment in the labyrinth; and left a few   
light bulbs to illuminate the empty concrete passageways.    So the Maginot Line remains to this   
day. 
 
The French passed from the stage of historical greatness. 
 
Germany's implacable enemy of the centuries had at last come to grief. 
 
Strategically, they had guessed wrong on the use of industrial power in war, and had wasted   
their national energy and treasure on an enormous tragic joke in steel and concrete: half a wall.   
Tactically, when General Gamelin said, "Aucune," the military history of France was over.  
 
Shadows on the Victory 
 
In the headquarters of the Supreme Command, the victory over France, while welcome and   
exhilarating, had its worrisome aspects. 
 
Some of us who were present at the signing of the armistice watched with heavy hearts as the   
Fuhrer danced his little jig of triumph in the sunshine of Compagne.    We were torn between   
pride in this feat of German arms, this virile reversal of the 1918 
 
defeat, and our inside knowledge of tragic errors the capering Dictator had made or tried to   
make.    These were completely covered up for the world at large by the rosy glow of success.   
Germany in that hour was like a virgin at a military ball, all radiant with the blushes aroused in   
her by the admiring eyes of handsome officers, and all unaware of a fatal cancer budding inside   
her. 
 
The cancer already afflicting Germany at that hour, unfelt by all but a handful in the innermost   
circle of command, was amateur military leadership-We had watched the symptoms crop up in   
the minor Norway operation. Our hope was that our inexperienced    warlord, having been   
blooded in that victory, would steady down for the great assault in the west. 
 
But, six days after the breakthrough, when Rundstedt was rolling to the sea, with Guderion's   
panzers in the van and all enemy forces in flight, Hitler had a bad fit of nerves, fearing a   
French counterattack from the south-no more likely at that moment than a Hottentot   
counterattack-and halted Rundstedt's army group for two precious days. 
 
Fortunately Guderion wangled permission for a "reconnaissance in force" westward.   
Thereupon he simply ignored the Fuhrer and blitzed ahead to the coast. 
 288 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Then followed an incredible tactical blunder.    With the British expeditionary force helplessly   
retreating toward the sea, but far behind in the race and about to be cut off by Guderion's   
massed tanks, the Fuhrer halted Guderion on the River Aa, nine miles from Dunkirk, and   
forbade the tank divisions to advance for three days/ To this day nobody has factually   
ascertained why he did this.    Theories are almost as abundant as military historians, but they   
add little to the facts. 
 
During these three days the British, rescued their armies from the Dunkirk beaches.    That is the   
long and short of the miracle of Dunkirk." 
 
Had Hitler not halted Guderian, the panzers would have beaten the foe to Dunkirk and cut him   
off.    The British would have lost over three hundred thousand men and officers, the bulk of   
their trained land force, in the Flanders cauldron.      I discuss in detail, under my section   
"Fantastic Halt at the River Aa," the preposterousness of the excuse that the terrain around   
Dunkirk was too marshy, and too crisscrossed by hedges and canals, for tank operations.    The   
fact is that finally Guderion did advance, after seventy-two mortal hours in which the first   
golden chance for quick victory in World War II slipped from our grasp. 
 
Hermann Goering's Luftwaffe, was supPoed to take over from the halted armored divisions and   
finish off the British.    Perhaps Hitler relished this notion of letting a Nazi air marshal in at the   
kill, instead of the distrusted Army General Star4.      History records what Goering   
accompliehed. 
 
But if final victory was denied us, at least we had vanquished France; that much seemed   
indisputable.    Yet on June 6 even this was momentarily cast in doubt when Hitler had another   
brainstorm.    Paris, he suddenly declared, was not the objective; what our armies should do next   
was cut southeast in force and capture the Lorraine basin, so as to deny France its coal and   
armaments industries!    Fortunately the momentum of operations was beyond even the Fuhrer's   
power' to meddle. 
 
We took Paris even while a number of divisions went wheeling needlessly into Lorraine. 
 
His Worst Mistake 
 
But worse than all these mistakes-so bad that history will forever stand amazed at the fact-the   
Wehrmacht arrived at the English Channel without any Plan of what to do next! There we   
were cit the sea, millions strong, crammed to the teeth, flushed with victory, facing beaten,   
disarmed, impotent enemy across a ditch forty miles wide; but our infallible Leader, who had   
all staff activitie, so firmly in his grip that nobody could make a move without his nod, had   
somehow overlooked the slight detail of how one got to England. 
 
Here    nevertheless    was    a    moment for    greatness,    such    as comes    once in    a    thousand 
years.   
Alexander, Caesar, and Napoleon in their time had made mistakes as major as any of Hitler's.   
What they possessed to balance and outweigh these was generalship: the ability to divine and   
seize a favoring moment with the utmost speed and audacity.    Yes, we had no plan for invading   
England, but had the British had a plan for crossing the Channel from Dunkirk in a   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scropedtogether flotilla of cockleshells? Under the spur of necessity, despite the total   
disorganization of defeat, despite fierce Luftwaffe bombardment, they had moved three   
hundred thousand men across the water.    Why then could not we, the strongest armed force on   
earth in the full tide of victory,    do a "Dunkirk in reverse," and throw a force of armored   
divisions across the Channel to an undefended, helpless shore? There was nothing on the   
ground in England to oppose our march to London. The rescued expeditionary force was a   
disarmed rabble; all its equipment lay abandoned in Flanders.    The Home Guard was a pathetic   
raggle-raggle of old men and boys. 
 
Opposing our invasion would have been the Royal Air Force and the British fleet, two   
formidable fighting organizations.    But had Hitler seized the first moment in June, using every   
available vessel afloat in western and northern Europe-there were thousands-to hurl an   
invasion body across the Channel, the fleet would have been caught by surprise, as it had been   
in the Norway operation.    We would have been across before it could mass to counterattack. 
 
The aerial Battle of Britain would have been fought out in the skies over the Channel, under   
conditions vastly more favorable to the Luftwaffe. 
 
Assuredly we would have taken very heavy losses.    The attack phase and the supply problem   
would have cost dearly. Again we would have been staking all on one throw. But in the   
hindsight of history, what else was there to do?    I have several times requested in writing, from   
American and German archivists, a copy of a draft memorandum I wrote in June 1940,   
outlining for    headquarters discussion a    plan    for    exactly such an    immediate    cross-Channel   
assault.    My requests have gone unanswered. The memorandum is only a curiosity, and I have   
no way of knowing whether it has actually survived.    At the time Jodl returned it to me without   
a single word, and that was the end of it. 
 
The Aborted Invasion 
 
Seelwew (Sea Lion), the invasion scheme scrambled together in the ensuing months, proved an   
exercise in leisurely futility.    Forcing the Channel, once the British had caught their breath and   
fortified their coast, needed a complex buildup.    Hitler never really pushed it. 
 
Against England he had lacked the greatness to dare all; and we gradually saw that he lacked   
the stomach to dare much. 
 
He merely allowed Goering to waste his Luftwaffe over the British aerodromes far inland,   
while the army and the navy frittered away weeks that stretched through the summer, disputing   
over the operation plan, and passing the buck back and forth. In the end, "Sea Lion" was   
abandoned.    Germany certainly had A the industrial plant and the military strength to mount   
the invasion, but not the leadership.    Wen an ounce more of boldness in battle might have won   
a worlci, Hitler faltered; and the professional generals were all in impotent subjection to this   
amateur. 
 
That was the real "triumph" of the Fuhrerprinzip in the summer of 1940. In retrospect, the   
wrong leader danced the jig. 
 290 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTE: Roon's biting discussion of the Maginot Line and the French   
leadership leaves little more to be said. 
 
My friends in the Royal Navy stoutly deny that even in lune the Germans could have made it   
across the Channel.    They would have thrown in every last ship they had, of course, to drown   
the invaders.    It is a moot point, but in my judgment Roon makes out a fair case.    The U-boats,   
which    he    does    not    mention, would    have    wreaked    havoc    in    the    narrow Channel   
against    a   
defensively positioned fleet.    Roon is on weaker ground in blaming Hitler for the lack of staff   
plans for an invasion. Had they had a feasible one ready, he might have activated it, as he did   
the Manstein Plan.    Apparently, there was in the files a sketchy naval staff study, and nothing   
more.    The German General Staff in World War II had a strange tendency not to see beyond   
the next hill, or maybe they preferred not to look.-V.H. 
 
BIG GERMAN BREAKTHROUGH IN BELGIUM! 
 
Still Not Our Fight, Declares Lacouture AssiNc a newsstand on the corner of Fifth Avenue and   
Fifty-seventh PStreet, where a fresh stack of afternoon papers fluttered under a cobblestone,   
Janice Lacouture said to Madeline, "Oh gawd, there's Daddy again, sounding off.    Won't your   
folks be impressed!"    Madeline was helping her shop for her trousseau. 
 
Rhoda, Pug, and Byron were due at three o'clock in the Brooklyn Navy Yard, aboard the   
cruiser Helena.    Janice's first encounter with Warren's mother was much on her mind, far more   
so than the bad war news. 
 
A rough May wind swooped along the avenue, whipping the girls skirts and hats.    Madeline   
clutched    a package with one hand and her hat with the other, peering    at the two-column   
photograph of Congressman Isaac Lacouture    on the Capitol    steps, with three microphones   
thrust in his face.    "He's handsome, you know," she said. 
 
"I hope you'll like him. He's really an awfully smart man," Janice said, pitching her voice   
above the wind.    "Actually the reporters have pushed him further than he ever intended to go.   
Now he's way out on a limb." 
 
Madeline had redecorated the little flat. The walls were pale green, with cream-and-green   
flowered draperies.      New Danish teak furniture, austere and slight, made the place seem   
roomier.    jonquils and irises in a bowl on the dining table touched the place with spring and   
youth, much as the two girls did when they walked in.    It was not a flat where one expected to   
find a Communist boyfriend. Indeed Madeline had long since discarded the poor popeyed   
trombone player in brown-something Janice had been relieved to learn.    Her current boyfriend   
was a CBS lawyer, a staunch Roosevelt man and very bright, but going bald at twenty-six. 
 
She called her telephone answering service, briskly jotted notes on a pad, and slammed the   
receiver down.    "Rats.    I can't go with you to meet my folks, Janice, after all.    Isn't that a pain?   
Two of the amateurs have loused out.    I have to spend the afternoon listening to replacements.   
Always something!"    She was clearly quite pleased with herself at being kept so busy.    "Now.   
Do you happen to know a man named Palmer Kirby?    He's at the Waldorf and he says he's a   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
friend of the family."    Janice shook her head. 
 
Madeline rang him and liked his voice with his first words; it had a warm humorous resonance.   
"You are Rhoda Henry's daughter?    I saw your name in the book and took a chance." 
 
"Yes, I am." 
 
"Good.    Your family was very hospitable to me in Berlin.    Your mother wrote me they'd be   
arriving today.    I just thought they might be tired and at a loose end, their first evening in New   
York.    I'd like to take all of you to dinner." 
 
"That's kind of you, but I don't know their plans.    They won't arrive till one or so." 
 
"I see.    Well, suppose I make the dinner reservations?    If your folks can come, I'll expect you   
all in my suite at six or so.    If not, just give me a ring, or your mother can." 
 
"I guess so, sure.    Thank you.    Warren's fiancee is visiting me, Mr. 
 
Kirby." 
 
"Ike Lacouture's daughter?    Excellent.    By all means bring her." 
 
Off Madeline went, brimming with zest for existence, while Janice changed into warmer   
clothes for the Navy Yard. 
 
Madeline was now the "program coordinator" of The Walter Field Anwteur Hour. Walter   
Field, an old ham actor, had stumbled into great radio popularity with the hackneyed   
vaudeville formula of amateur entertainment.    Suddenly made rich, he had gone into a whirl of   
big real estate deals, and just as suddenly dropped dead.    Hugh Cleveland had stepped in as   
master of ceremonies.    Madeline still fetched chicken sandwiches and coffee for him, but she   
now also interviewed the amateurs. 
 
She remained Cleveland's assistant for his morning show, and she was making more money   
than ever.    For Madeline Henry, May 1940 was as jolly a month as she had ever lived. 
 
In the Brooklyn Navy Yard the wind was stronger and colder.    The cruiser was already tied up   
at the pier, fluttering a rainbow of signal flags strung down from the mast to stem and stern.   
Amid a swarm of waving, shouting relatives on the pier, war refugees were streaming off the   
gangway.    Janice found her way to the customs shed, where Rhoda stood by a heap of luggage,   
blowing her nose.    The tall young blonde in a green wool suit and toque caught Rhoda's eye. 
 
"Well, isn't this Janice?    I'm Rhoda Henry," she said, stepping forward. "The snapshots didn't   
do you justice at ALL." 
 
"Oh, yes, Mrs.    Henry!    Hello!"    Rhoda's willowy figure, modish straw hat, and fuchsia gloves   
and shoes surprised Janice. Warren's father had struck Janice, during their brief meeting in   
Pensacola, as a coarse-grained weather-beaten man.    By contrast Mrs.    Henry seemed youthful,   
elegant, even sexy.    This was true despite the woman's reddened nose and frequent sneezing. 
 292 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Aren't you CLEVER to wear that suit. I dressed for spring and it's positively tropic here,"   
Rhoda said.    "Where's Madeline?    Is she all right?" 
 
Quickly Janice explained why the daughter hadn't come. 
 
"Well!    Hasn't Mad turned into the little career girl!    My dear, I want to kiss you, but I daren't.   
Don't come near me.    I'm virulent! 
 
I've got the cold of the ages.    They should quarantine me.    I'll infect the nation.    Well! 
 
How beautiful you are.    You're ravishing.    Lucky Warren!    How is he, anyway?" 
 
"all right, I hope.    He's sweating out carrier landings, down off Puerto Rico somewhere." 
 
Victor Henry, looking more impressive than Janice remembered in a gold-buttoned blue bridge   
coat and gold-encrusted cap, came through the crowd with a surly-looking customs inspector.   
After a brusque greeting to Janice and an inquiry about Madeline, he wanted to know where   
Byron had gotten off to. 
 
"Briny disappeared.    He had to make a phone call," the mother said. 
 
As the inspector glanced through the luggage, Janice told the Henrys about Palmer Kirby's   
invitation.    Between sneezes, Rhoda said, "Well, of all things.    His factory's in Denver.    What's   
he doing here? 
 
I don't think we can go, can we, Pug?    Of course dinner at the Waldorf would be a lovely way   
to start life in the USA again.    Take the taste of Berlin out of our mouths!    Janice, you just can't   
picture what Germany is like now.    It's gruesome.    I'm cured.    When I saw the Statue of Liberty   
I laughed and cried.    Me for the USA hereafter, now and forever." 
 
"Matter of fact, I have to talk to Fred Kirby," Pug said. 
 
"Oh, Pug, it's impossible, I have his filthy cold-and my HAm!" 
 
Rhoda said.    "What could I wear to the Waldorf, anyhow? 
 
Everything's a mass of wrinkles, except what I'm standing up in. 
 
If I could only get my pink suit pressed-and if I could get to a hairdresser for a couple of   
hours-" Byron came sauntering through the noisy crowd. 
 
"Hey, Janice!    I'm Warren's brother.    I thought you'd be here." 
 
He produced from his pocket a small box with a London label, and gave it to her. 
 
Janice opened it, and there lay a Victorian pin, a little golden elephant with red stones for eyes.   
"Good heavens!" 
 
"Anybody who marries one of us needs the patience of an elephant," said Byron.  
 293 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Ye gods, if that's not the truth," said Rhoda, laughing. 
 
Janice gave Byron a slow female blink.    He was even handsomer than Warren, she thought.   
His eyes had an eager aroused sparkle.    She kissed him. 
 
have nothing to offer," said the grainy strong singsong voice out of the radio, slurring the   
consonants almost like a drunken man, 'but blood, toil, tears, and sweat."    'y, he's a genius!"   
Rhoda exclaimed. 
 
She sat on the edge of a frail gilt chair in Kirby's suite, champagne glass in hand, tears in her   
eyes. 
 
"Where has he been till now?" 
 
Smearing caviar from a blue Russian-printed tin on a bit of toast, and carefully sprinkling   
onion shreds, Byron said, "He was running the British Navy when Prien got into Scapa Flow   
and sank the Royal Oak. 
 
And when the Germans crossed the Skagerrak to Norway." 
 
"Shut up and listen," Victor Henry said. 
 
Janice glanced from the son    to the father, crossed her long    legs, and sipped champagne.   
Palmer Kirby's eyes flickered appreciatively at her legs, which pleased her.      He was an   
interesting-looking old dog. 
 
... You ask, what is our policy?    I will say, it is to wage 'War, by sea, land, and air, with all our   
might and all the strength that God can give us: to wage war against a nwnstrous tyranny,   
never surpassed in the dark, lamentable catalogue of human crime. That is our policy. You   
ask, tvhat is our aim?    I can answer in one mid: Victory-victory at all costs, victory in spite of   
all terror... I take up my task with buoyancy and hope.    I feel sure that our cause will not be   
suffered to fail atwng men..." 
 
The speech ended.    An American voice said with a cough and tremor, 'Tow have just heard the   
newly appointed Prime Minister of Great Britain) Winston Churchill." 
 
After a moment, Rhoda said, "That man will save civilization. 
 
We're going to get in now.    The Germans overplayed their hand. 
 
We'll never let them conquer England.    There's something strangely thick about the Germans,   
you know? One must observe them close up for a long time to understand that. Strangely   
thick." 
 
Victor Henry said to Dr, Kirby, glancing at his watch, "Quite a speech. Can we talk now for a   
few minutes?" 
 
Kirby got to his feet and Rhoda smiled at him.    "Champagne, caviar, and business as usual.   
That's Pug."    "We're just waiting for Madeline," Pug said. 
 294 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Come along," Kirby said, walking into the bedroom. 
 
'Say, Dad, I'm going to have to mosey along," Byron said.    "There is this plane to Miami I have   
to catch.    It leaves La Guardia in about an hour." 
 
'What!    Dr.    Kirby thinks you're dining with him." 
 
'Vefl, see, I made the reservation before I knew about this dinner." 
 
"You're not waiting till Madeline comes?    You haven't seen her in two years.    She's taking us   
all to her show after dinner." 
 
"I think I'd better go, Dad."    Abruptly, Pug left the room. 
 
'Briny,    you're    impossible,"    his    mother    said.    "Couldn't you have    waited until tomorrow?"   
"Mom, do you remember what it's like to be in love?" 
 
Rhoda surprised him and Janice Lacouture by turning blood red. 
 
"Me? My goodness, Byron, what a thing to say! Of course not, I'm a million years old."   
'Thank you for my Marvelous pin."    Janice touched the elephant on her shoulder.    "That must   
be some girl, in Miami." 
 
Byron's blank narrow-eyed look dissolved in a charming smile and an admiring glance at her.   
'She's all right."    'Bring her to the wedding with you.    Don't forget." 
 
As Byron went to the door, Rhoda said, "You have a real talent for disappointing your father."   
'He'd be disappointed if I didn't disappoint him.    Good-bye, Mom." 
 
In the bedroom Dr.    Kirby sat at a desk, checking off a stack of journals and mimeographed   
reports that Victor Henry    had brought him from Germany.      As be scribbled in a yellow   
notebook, the little desk shook and two reports slid to the floor.    "They must rent this suite to   
midgets," he said continuing to write. 
 
Victor Henry said, "Fred, are you working on a uranium bomb?" 
 
Kirby's hand paused.    He turned, hanging one long loose arm over the back of his chair, and   
looked into Henry's eyes.    The silence and the steady look between the men lasted a long time.  
 
"You can just tell me it's none of my goddamn business, but"-Pug sat on the bed-'all that stuff   
there zeroes in on the uranium business. 
 
And some of the things I couldn't get, like the graphite figures, why, the Germans told me   
flatly that they were classified because of the secret bomb aspects.    The Germans are fond of   
talking very loosely about this terrible ultra-bomb they're developing. That made me think   
there was nothing much to it.    But that list of requests you sent gave me second thoughts." 
 
Kirby knocked out his pipe, stuffed it, and lit it.    The process took a couple of minutes, during   
which he didn't talk, but looked at Captain Henry.    He said slowly, "I'm not a chemist, and this   
 295 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
uranium thing is more or less a chemical engineering problem.    Electricity does come into it for   
production techniques.      A couple of months ago I was approached to be an industrial   
consultant." 
 
"What's the status of the thing?" 
 
"All theory.    Years away from any serious effort." 
 
"Do you mind telling me about it?" 
 
"Why not? It's in the college physics books. Hell, it's been in Life magazine. There's this   
process, neutron bombardment.      You expose one chemical substance and another to the   
emanations of radium, and see what happens.    It's been going on for years, in Europe and here.   
Well, these two Germans tried it on uranium ode last year, and they produced barium. Now   
that's transmutation of elements by atom-splitting.    I guess you know about the fantastic charge   
of energy packed in the mass of the atom.    You've heard about driving a steamship across the   
ocean on one lump of coal, if you could only harness the atomic energy in it, and so forth."   
Victor Henry nodded.    "Well, Pug, this was a hint that it might really be done with uranium.    It   
was an atom-splitting process that put out far more energy than they'd used to cause it.    These   
Germans discovered that by weighing the masses involved.    There'd been an appreciable loss   
of mass.    They published their finding, and the whole scientific community's been in an uproar   
ever since. 
 
"Okay, the next step is, there's this rare hot isotope of uranium, u-235.    This substance may   
Turn out to have gigantic explosive powers, through a chain reaction that gives you a huge   
release of energy from mass. A handful maybe can blow up a city, that sort of talk. The   
nuclear boys say it may be practicable right now, if industry will just come up with enough   
Pure U-235-" Pug listened to all this with his mouth compressed, his body tensed forward.   
"Uh-huh, uh-huh," he kept saying when Kirby puffed on his Pipe.    He pointed a stiff finger at   
the engineer.    "Well, I follow all that. 
 
This is vital military intelligence." 
 
Kirby shook his head. "Hardly. It's public knowledge. It may be a complete false alarm.   
These chemical engineers don't guarantee anything. 
 
And what they want will take one hell of a big industrial effort to deliver. 
 
Maybe the stuff will explode, maybe it won't.    Maybe as soon as you have enough of it, it'll all   
fly apart.    Nobody knows.    Five minutes of scratch pad work shows that you're talking about an   
expenditure of many many millions of dollars.    It could run up to a billion and then you could   
end up with a crock of horseshit.    Congress is on an economy rampage.    They've been refusing   
Roosevelt the money for a couple of hundred new airplanes." 
 
"I'll ask you a couple of more questions.    If I'm off base, tell me." 
 
"Shoot." 
 296 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Where do you come into it?" 
 
Kirby rubbed his pipe against his chin.    "Okay, how do you separate out isotopes of a very rare   
metal in industrial quantities? 
 
One notion is to shoot it in the form of an ionized gas through a magnetic field.    The lighter   
ions get deflected a tiny bit more, so you stream 'em out and catch them. 
 
The whole game depends on the magnetic field being kept stable, because any wavering   
jumbles up the ion stream.    Precise control of voltages is my business."    "Uh-huh.    Now.    One   
last point.    If an occasion arises, should I volunteer my valued opinion to the President that he   
should    get off    his ass    about    uranium?"    Kirby uttered    a short baritone laugh.    "The real   
question here is the Germans. How far along are they? This cuteness of theirs about pure   
graphite disturbs me. 
 
Graphite comes into the picture at a late stage.    If Hitler gets uranium bombs first, Pug, and if   
they happen to work, that could prove disagreeable." 
 
A doorbell rang. 
 
'I guess that's your daughter," Kirby said.    "Let's go down to dinner." 
 
Madeline arrived in a black tailored suit with a flaring jacket and a tight sheath skirt, dark hair   
swept up on her head.    It was hard to think of her as only twenty.    Possibly she was putting on   
the young career woman a bit, but she did have to leave the table in the Empire Room twice,   
when the headwaiter came and said with a bow that CBS was on the telephone.    Victor Henry   
liked her confident, demure manner and her taciturnity.    With alert eyes darting from face to   
face, she listened to the talk about Germany and about the wedding plans, and said almost   
nothing. 
 
In the studio building, at the reception desk, a stiff, uniformed youngster awaited them.    "Miss   
Henry's party?    This way, please."    He took them to a barren low-ceilinged green room where   
Hugh Cleveland and his staff sat around a table. Briskly cordial, Cleveland invited them to   
stay in the room till the show started.    He was looking at cards, memorizing spontaneous jokes   
he would make later, and discussing them with his gagman. 
 
After a while he snapped a rubber band around the cards and slipped them in his pocket.   
"Well, five minutes to go," he said, turning to the visitors.    "I hear this fellow Churchill gave a   
pretty good speech. Did you catch it?" 
 
"Every word," Rhoda said.    "It was shattering- That speech will go down in history." 
 
"Quite a speech," Pug said. 
 
Madeline said, "Darn, and I was so busy I missed it."    The show's producer, who looked forty- 
five and dressed like a college boy, put a manicured hand to the back of his head.    "It was fair.   
It needed cutting and punching up.    Too much tutti-frutti.    There was one good line about blood   
and sweat." 
 297 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"There was?    How would that go with the butcher who plays the zither?" Cleveland said to the   
joke writer at his elbow, a melancholy young Jew who needed a haircut.    "Could we throw in   
something about blood and sweat?"    The joke writer sadly shook his head.    "Bad taste." 
 
"Don't be silly, Herbie.    Try to think of something.    Captain Henry, how's the war going?    Will   
the Gamelin Plan stop the Krauts?" 
 
"I don't know what the Gamelin Plan is."    Madeline put her guests in privileged seats on the   
stage of the studio, near the table where Cleveland interviewed the amateurs before a huge   
cardboard    display    extolling    Morning    Smile    pink laxative    salts.      She posted herself    in 
the   
glassed control booth.    A large audience, which to Victor Henry seemed composed entirely of   
imbeciles, applauded the stumbling amateurs and roared at Cleveland's jokes. 
 
Cleveland ran the program with smooth foxy charm; Pug realized now that Madeline had   
latched herself to a corner.    But the show disgusted him. One amateur identified himself as a   
line repairman.    Cleveland remarked, "Well, haw haw, guess they could use you in France right   
about now." 
 
"France, Mr.    Cleveland?" 
 
"Sure.    On that Maginot Line." 
 
He winked at the audience; they guffawed and clapped. 
 
"Does this amuse you?"    Pug said across Rhoda, in a low tone, to Palmer Kirby. 
 
"I never listen to the radio," said the engineer.    "It's interesting. Like a visit to a madhouse." 
 
"That Cleveland's cute, though," Rhoda said. 
 
Madeline came to them after the show, as the audience swarmed on stage around Hugh   
Cleveland seeking his autograph. "Damn, two of our best bits got cut off the air by news   
bulletins.    They're so high-handed, those news people!" 
 
"What's happening?"    Victor Henry asked. 
 
"Oh, it's the war, naturally. just more of the same. The Germans have overrun some new   
town, and the French are collapsing, and so on. 
 
Nothing very unexpected.    Hugh will have a fit when he hears they cut the butcher with the   
zither." 
 
"Miss Henry?"    A uniformed page approached her. 
 
"Yes?" 
 
"Urgent long-distance call, miss, in Mr.    Cleveland's office, for Miss Lacouture.    From Puerto   
Rico." 
 
On the flying bridge of the fishing boat Blue Bird, rocking gently along at four knots in the   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gulf Stream, Byron and Natalie lay in each other's arms in the sun.      Below, the jowly   
sunburned skipper yawned at the wheel over a can of beer, and the ship-to-shore telephone   
dimly crackled and gobbled. From long poles fixed in sockets at the empty fighting chairs,   
lines trailed in the water.    Sunburned, all but naked in swimming suits, the lovers had forgotten   
the fish, the lines, and the skipper. They had forgotten death and they had forgotten war. 
 
They lay at the center of a circle of dark blue calm water and light blue clear sky.    It seemed   
the sun shone on them alone. 
 
The deck echoed with loud rapping from below, four quick knocks like a Morse code V. "Hey,   
Mr.    Henry!    You awake?" 
 
"Sure, what is it?"    Byron called hoarsely, raising himself on an elbow. 
 
"They're calling us from the beach.    Your father wants you to come on in." 
 
"My father?    Wrong boat.    He's in Washington."    "Wait one-Hello, hello, Blue Bird calling Bill   
Thomas-" They heard the squawking of the ship-tshore again. "Hey,    Mr. Henry.    Your   
fatheris he a naval officer, a captain?" 
 
"That's right." 
 
"Well, the office has your girl's mother on the telephone.    Your father's at her house and the   
message is to get back there pronto." 
 
Natalie sat up, her eyes wide and startled. 
 
Byron called, "Okay, let's head back." 
 
"What on earth?"    Natalie exclaimed. 
 
"I haven't the foggiest idea." 
 
The boat, scoring a green-white circle on the dark sea, picked up speed and started to pitch.   
The wind tumbled Natalie's long free black hair. She pulled a mirror from a straw basket.    "My   
God, look at me. 
 
Look put the back of her hand to her lips.    "Well, no use trying to patch up this at that mouth.    I   
look gnawed.    As though the rats had been at me!"    She Gorgon's head till we come in.    What   
ran your father want, Briny?" 
 
"y are you so alarmed?    Probably he's here with my mother, and she wants a look at you.    I   
can't blame her, the way I shot down here. 
 
If so, I'm going to tell them, Natalie." 
 
Her face turned anxious.    She took his hand.    "Angel, there's sonic Jewish law about not getting   
married too soon after a parent dies. 
 
Possibly for as long as a year, and-good heavens!    Don't make such a face!    I'm not going to   
 299 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
observe that.    But I can't distress my mother at this point.    I need some time to figure this out." 
 
"I don't want you violating your religion, Natalie, but lord, that's a blow." 
 
"Sweetie, I wasn't planning on marrying you until about an hour ago." She shook her head and   
ruefully laughed.    "I feel weird.    Almost disembodied.    Too much sun, or maybe I'm just drunk   
on kisses.    And now your father suddenly showing up!    Isn't it all like a fever dream?" 
 
He put his arm around her shoulders, holding her close as the boat pitched and rocked more.   
"Not to me.    It's damned real, and the realest thing of all is that we're getting married.    Reality   
just seems to be starting." 
 
"Yes, no doubt.    I certainly don't look forward to writing to LeslieJehosephat, that scowl again!   
You put it on and off like a Halloween mask, it's unnerving-Briny, he came down to see me   
right after Papa died.    He was remarkably helpful and kind.    A new Slote, just a bit too late.   
He's been writing to his university friends to find me a teaching job.    I wish I knew what your   
father wanted!    Don't tell him about us, Byron.    Not till I've talked to my mother." 
 
'You'd better talk to her righi away, then.    My father has a way of getting at the facts." 
 
"Oh!    Oh!"    She put both hands to her hair.    "I'm so happy, and so confused, and so upset!    I'm   
dizzy.    I feel sixteen, which I'm not, God knows! 
 
"Better for you if I were." 
 
When the Blue Bird drew closer in, Byron got the binoculars and scanned the ragged row of   
skyscraper hotels along the beach.    "I thought so. There he is, waiting on the pier." 
 
Natalie, lounging in one of the chairs, sat bolt upright.    "Oh, no. 
 
You're sure?" 
 
"Right there, pacing back and forth.    I know that walk." 
 
She seized her basket and darted into the cabin, saying to the skipper, "Slow down, please."   
might, miss."    The bewhiskered man, with a grin, pulled back on the throttle. 
 
She closed the little door to the forward cabin.    Soon she emerged in a cotton skirt and white   
blouse, her black hair brushed gleaming and loose to her shoulders.    "I'm seasick," she said to   
Byron, wanly smiling. "Try putting on eyebrows and a mouth sometime in a rocking boat, in a   
hot little cabin.    Whew!    Am I green?    I feel green." 
 
"You look wonderful."    The boat was wallowing half a mile from the pier. Natalie could see   
the man in blue walking up and down. "Full steam ahead," she said shakily. "Damn the   
torpedoes." 
 
Victor Henry, leaning down from the tar-smelling pier, held out a hand as the boat stopped.   
"Hello, Natalie.    This is a helluva thing to do to you.    Watch it, don't step on that nail." 
 300 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Byron leaped ashore.    "What's up, Dad?    Is everybody all right?" 
 
"Have you two had lunch?"    Pug said. 
 
They looked at each other, and Natalie nervously laughed.    "I did pack sandwiches.    There in   
this basket.    We, well, I cion't know, we forgot. 
 
An amused look came and went in Victor Henry's eyes, though his face remained stern.    "Uh- 
huh.    Well, the smells from that joint there"-he pointed with his thumb at a dilapidated clam   
bar on the pier-"have been driving me nuts, but I thought I'd wait for you.    I haven't eaten yet   
tcday." 
 
'Please come to my house.    I'd love to fix you something."    "Your mother was kind enough to   
give me orange juice and coffee. 
 
D'you mind if we go in here?    These waterfront places can be pretty good." 
 
They sat in a tiny plywood booth painted bright red. Byron    and his father ordered clam   
chowder.    'I've never learned to like that stuff," Natalie said to the waiter.    'Can I have a bacon   
and tomato sandwich?" 
 
"Sure, miss."    Victor Henry looked oddly at her.    "What's the matter?" she said. 
 
"You're not fussy about what you eat."    She looked puzzled.    "Oh. 
 
You mean the bacon?    Not in the least, I'm afraid.    Many Jews aren't." 
 
"How about your mother?" 
 
"Well, she has some vague and inconsistent scruples.    I can never quite follow them." 
 
"We had quite a chat.    She's a clever woman, and holding up remarkably, after her loss.    Well!"   
Pug put cigarettes and lighter on the table. 
 
"It looks like France is really folding, doesn't it?    Have you heard the radio this morning?    In   
Paris they're burning papers.    The BEF is high-tailing it for the Channel, but it may already he   
too late. 
 
The Germans may actually bag the entire British regular army." 
 
"Good God," Byron said. "If they do that the war's over! How could this happen in three   
days?" "Well, it has. While I was waiting for you I heard the President on my car radio,   
making an emergency address to a joint session of Congress. 
 
He's asked them for fifty thousand airplanes a year." 
 
"Fifty thousand a year?"    exclaimed Natalie.    "Fifty thousand? 
 
Why, that's just wild talk." 
 301 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"He said we'd have to build the factories to Turn 'em out, and then start making 'em.    In the   
mood I saw in Washington yesterday, he's going to get the money, too.    The panic is finally on,   
up there. 
 
They've come awake in a hu " rryByron said, "None of this can help England or France." 
 
"No.    Not in this battle.    What COngress is starting to think about is the prospect of us on our   
own, against Hitler and the Japanese. 
 
Now." 
 
Pug lit a cigarette, and began ticking off points against spread stiff fingers. 
 
"Warren's thirty-day leave has been cancelled.    The wedding's been moved up. Warren and   
Janice are getting married tomorrow. They'll have a oneday honeymoon, and then he goes   
straight out to the Pacific Fleet. So. 
 
Number one: You've got to get to Pensacola by tomorrow at ten." 
 
With a hesitant look at Natalie, who appeared dumbfounded, Byron said, "All right, I'll be   
there." 
 
"Okay.    Number two: If you want to get into that May 27 class at sub school, you've got to   
report to New London and take the physical by Saturday." 
 
"Can't I take a physical at Pensacola?" 
 
The father pursed his lips.    "I never thought of that.    Maybe I can get Red Tully to stretch a   
point.    He's already doing that, holding this place open for you.    The applications are piling up   
now for that school." 
 
"May 27?"    Natalie said to Byron.    "that's eleven days from now! 
 
Are You going to submarine school in eleven days?" 
 
"I don't know.    it's a possibility." 
 
She turned to his father.    "How long is the school?" 
 
"It's three months." 
 
'What will become of him afterward?" 
 
My guess is he'll go straight out to the fleet, like Warren.    The n",? 
 
lubs are just starting to come on the line." 
 
"Three months!    And then you'll be gone!"    Natalie exclaimed, "Well, we'll talk about all that,"   
Byron said.    "Will you come with me to the wedding tomorrow?" 
 
"Me?    I don't know.    I wasn't invited." 
 302 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Janice asked me to bring you." 
 
"She did?    When?    You never told me that." 
 
Byron turned to his father, "Look, when does the submarine course after this one begin?" 
 
'I don't know.    But the sooner you start, the better.    It takes you thirteen more months at sea to   
get your dolphins.    There's nothing tougher than qualifying in submarines, Briny.    A flier has   
an easier job." 
 
Byron took one of his father's cigarettes, lit it, inhaled deeply, and said as he exhaled a gray   
cloud, 'Natalie and I are getting married." 
 
With an appraising glance at Natalie, who was biting her lower lip, Victor Henry said, "I see.   
Well, that might or might not affect your admittance to the school.    I hadn't checked that point,   
not knowing of this development.    In general, unmarried candidates get the preference in such   
situations.    Still, maybe the thing to do-' Natalie broke in, "Captain Henry, I realize it creates   
many difficulties.    We only decided this morning.    I myself don't know when or how. 
 
It's a fearful tangle." 
 
Looking at her from under his eyebrows as he ate, Pug nodded. 
 
"There are no difficulties that can't be overcome," said Byron. 
 
"J-isten, darling," Natalie said, "the last thing I'll ever do is stop you from going to submarine   
school.    My God, I was in Warsaw!" 
 
Byron smoked, his face blank, his eyes narrowed at his father. 
 
Victor Henry looked at his wristwatch and gathered up his cigarettes and lighter.    "Well, that's   
that.    Great chowder.    Hits the spot.    Say, there's a plane to Pensacola that I can still make this   
afternoon." 
 
"Why didn't you just telephone all this?" Byron said. "It would have been simple enough.   
Why did you come here?" 
 
Victor Henry waved the check and a ten-dollar bill at the waiter. 
 
"You took off like a rocket, Byron.    I didn't know your plans or your state of mind.    I wasn't   
even sure you'd agree to come to the wedding." "Why, I wouldn't have heard of his staying   
away," Natalie said. 
 
"Well, I didn't know that either.    I thought I ought to be available to talk to both of you, and   
maybe answer questions, and use a little persuasion if necessary."    He added to Natalie, "Janice   
and Warren do expect you.    That I can tell you." 
 
She put a hand to her forehead.    "I just don't know if I can come." 
 
"We'll be there," Byron said flatly.    "Or at least I will.    Does that take care of everything?" 
 303 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pug hesitated.    "What about sub school?    I told Red I'd call him today." 
 
"If Captain Tully has to know today, then I'm out.    All right?" 
 
Natalie struck the table with her fist.    "Damn it, Byron.    Don't make decisions like that." 
 
"I don't know any other way to make decisions." 
 
"You can talk to me.    I'm involved." 
 
Victor Henry cleared his throat.    "Well, I've spoken my piece and I'll shove off.    We can pick   
this topic up tomorrow." 
 
"Oh?"    Byron's tone was acid.    'Then you don't really have to call Captain Tully today, after   
all." 
 
Victor Henry's face darkened.    He leaned back in the hard seat. 
 
"See here, Byron.    Hitler and the Germans are creating your problem. 
 
I'm not. 
 
I'm calling it to your attention." 
 
"Well, all this bad news from Europe may be highly exaggerated, and in any case, no   
American submarine will ever fail to sail because I'm not in it." 
 
"Oh, be quiet, Briny," Natalie said in a choked voice.    "Let your father catch his plane." 
 
"Just keep remembering I didn't start this war, Byron," Victor Henry said, in almost the tone he   
had used on the waiter in Wannsee, picking his white cap off a peg while looking his son in the   
face.    "I think you'd make a good submariner.    They're all a bunch of goofy individualists.    On   
the other hand, I can't hate you for wanting to marry this brilliant and beautiful young lady.   
And now I'm getting the hell out of here."    Victor Henry stood.    "See you in church.    Get there   
early, you'll be best man.    Wear your dark suit.-Good-bye, Natalie. 
 
Sorry I broke up your day on the boat. 
 
Try to come to Pensacola." 
 
"Yes, sir."    A sad little smile lit her worried face.    Thank you." 
 
When he went out, she turned to Byron. "I have always loathed the smell of cooking fish.   
Let's get out of here.    I was half sick during all that. 
 
God knows how I've kept from shooting my cookies." 
 
Natalie strode seaward along the wharf, taking deep gulps of air, her skirt fluttering on her   
swinging hips, the thin blouse wind-flattened on her breasts, her black hair flying. Byron   
hurried after her.    She stopped short at the end of the wharf, where two ra gged Negro boys sat   
 304 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
fishing, and turned on him, her arms folded. 
 
'y the devil did you treat your father like that?" 
 
"Like what?    I know why he came here, that's all," Byron returned with equal sharpness.    "He   
came to separate us."    His voice rang and twanged much like Victor Henry's. 
 
'Oh, take me home.    Straight home.    He was utterly right, you know. 
 
You're blaming him for the way the war is going. That's the essence of immaturity. I was   
embarrassed for you.    I hated that feeling." 
 
They walked back up the pier to her father's new blue Buick sedan, glittering and baking in the   
sun, giving off heat like a stove.    "Open an the doors, please.    Let some air blow through, or   
we'll die in there!" 
 
Byron said as he went from door to door, "I have never wanted anything before, not of life, not   
of him, not of anybody.    Now I do." 
 
"Even if it's true, you still have to look at reality, not throw tantrums.)' "He did quite a job on   
you," said Byron.    "He usually gets anything done that he intends to." 
 
They climbed into the car. 
 
"That's how much you know," she said harshly, slamming her door as he whirred the motor.   
'I'm coming to Pensacola with you.    All right? 
 
I love you.    Now shut up and drive me home." 
 
IL 
 
With a groan, to the clatter of an old tin alarm clock, Lieutenant Warren Warren Henry woke at   
seven on his wedding day.    Until four he had been in the sweet arms of his bride-to-be in a   
bedroom of the Calder Arms Hotel, some twenty miles from Pensacola.    He stumbled to the   
shower and turned on the cold water in a gush. As the needling shock brought him to, he   
wearily wondered whether spending such a night before his wedding morning hadn't been   
somewhat gross, Poor Janice had said she would have to start dressing and packing as soon as   
she got home. 
 
Yes, certainly gross, but ye gods!    Warren laughed aloud, hemid up his face to the cold water,   
and started to sing.    It was rough, after all-a rushed wedding, a one-night honeymoon, and then   
a separation of thousands of miles!    Too much to ask of human nature. 
 
Anyway, it wasn't the first time. 
 
Still-Warren was drying himself with a big rough towel, and cheering up by the 'minute-there   
was such a thing as propriety. Such doings on the wedding eve were ill-timed. But it was   
rotten luck to be torn away from her like this. It was just one of those things, and Hitler's   
invasion of France was the real cause, not any looseness in himself or Janice. 
 305 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Truth to tell, the prospect of parting from Janice was not bothering Warren much.    She would   
be coming along to Pearl Harbor in due course. 
 
The sudden orders to the Pacific had put him in an excited glow. 
 
Cramming in a premature night with Janice had been an impulse of this new bursting love of   
life he felt.    He was rushing to fly a fighter plane from the U-S-S.    EnterPrise, because war   
threatened.    It was a star-spangled destiny, a scary ride to the moon.    For all his mental motions   
of regret at leaving Janice, and remorse at having enjoyed her a little too soon and a little too   
much, Warren's spirit was soaring. 
 
He called the mess steward, ordered double ham and eggs and a jug of coffee, and gaily set   
about dressing for his nuptials. 
 
Byron, standing in the hall outside his brother's room, smiled at a rlude cartoon tacked to the   
door: Father Neptune, a lump throbbing on his pate, wrathuly rising from the sea ahead of an   
aircraft carrier, brandishing his trident at an airplane with dripping wheels, out of which the   
pilot leaned, saluting and shouting, "So sorry!"    "Come in!" 
 
Warren called to his knock. 
 
"'Wet Wheels' Henry, I presume?"    Byron quoted the cartoon caption. 
 
"Briny!    Hey!    My Christ, how long has it been?    Well, you look great! 
 
God, I'm glad you made it for the wedding."    Warren ordered more breakfast for his brother.   
"Listen, you've got to tell me all about that wild trip of yours.    I'm supposed to be the warrior,   
but Jesus, you're the one who's had the adventures.    Why, you've been bombed and strafed by   
the Nazis! 
 
My buddies will sure want to talk to you." 
 
"Nothing heroic about getting in the way of a war, Warren." 
 
"Let's hear about it.    Sit down, we have a lot to catch up on." 
 
They talked over the food, over coffee, over cigars, and as Warren packed they kept talking,   
awkwardly at first, then loosening up.    Each was taking the other's measure.    Warren was older,   
heavier in the face, more confident, more than ever on top of the world and ahead of his   
brother: so Byron felt.    Those new gold wings on his white dress uniform seemed to Byron to   
spread a foot.    About flying Warren was relaxed, humorous, and hard.    He had mastered the   
machines and the lingo, and the jokes about his mishaps didn't obscure the leap upward. 
 
He still spoke the words naval aviator" with pride and awe. To Byron, his own close calls   
under fire had been stumblebum episodes, in no way comparable to Warren's disciplined rise to   
fighter pilot. 
 
For his part, Warren had last seen Byron setting off to Europe, a hangdog slouching youngster   
with a bad school record and not a few pimples, already cooling off about a career in fine arts.   
 306 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Byron's skin now stretched brown and clear over a sharpened jaw; his eyes were deeper; he sat   
up straighter.    Warren was used to the short haircuts and natural shoulder lines of the Navy.   
Byron's padded dark Italian suit and mop of reddish hair gave him a dashing appearance that   
went with his saga of roaming in Poland under German bombs with a beautiful jewess. Warren   
had never before envied his younger brother anything. 
 
He envied the red stitch-marked scar on his temple-his own scar was a mishap, not a war   
wound-and he even somewhat envied him the jewess, sight unseen. 
 
"What about Natalie, Byron?    Did she come?" 
 
"Sure.    I parked her at Janice's house.    That was decent of Janice, telephoning her last night.   
Did Dad put her up to it?" 
 
"He just said the girl wasn't sure she was expected.    Say, that thing's serious, is it?"    Warren   
paused, suitcase hanger in one hand and a uniform jacket in the other, and looked hard at his   
brother. 
 
'We're getting married." 
 
"You are?    Good for you." 
 
"Do you mean that?" 
 
"Sure.    She sounds like a Marvelous girl." 
 
"She is.    I know the religious problem exists-21 
 
Warren grinned and ducked his head to one side.    "Ah, Byron, now-a-days-does it really?    if   
you wanted the ministry-or politics, say-you'd have to give it more thought.    Christ, with the   
war on and the whole world coming apart, I say grab her - I look forward to meeting that girl.   
Isn't she a PhD.    or something?" 
 
"She was going for an M.A. at the Sorbonne." 
 
"Brother!    I'd be more scared of her than of a carrier landing at night in a line squall." 
 
Byron's grin showed possessive pride. "I was around her six months, and never opened my   
mouth, hardly.    Then she up and said she loved me. 
 
I'm still trying to believe it." 
 
'Why not?    You've gotten damned handsome, my lad.    You've lost that string-bean look.    You   
marrying up now, or after sub school?" 
 
'I"o the devil says I'm going to sub school?    Don't start that.    I get enough from Dad." 
 
Warren deft]Y moved clothes from bureau to a foot locker.    "But He's right, Byron.    You don't   
want to wait till you get called up.    If you do they'll shove you around, rush you through, and   
you may not even draw the duty you want. You can pick your spot now and get decent   
 307 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
training. Say, have YOu given naval aviation any thought?    Why do You want to go crawling   
around at four knots, three hundred feet underwater, when you can fly? 
 
I get claustrophobia just thinking about subs.    You might make a great flier.    One thing you are   
is relaxed." 
 
"I got interested in subs."    Byron described Prien's talk in Berlin on the sinking of the Royal   
Oak. 
 
'That was a brave exploit," said Warren.    "A real score.    Even Churchill admitted that.    Very   
romantic.    I guess that's what attracts you.    But this s an air war, Briny.    Those Germans haven't   
got that much of an edge on the ground. The papers keep talking panzers, panzers, but the   
French have more and better tanks than the Germans. 
 
They're not using them. 
 
They've been panicked by those Stukas, which just use our own divebombing tactics." 
 
"That's what got me, a Stuka," Byron said.    "It didn't look that scary. 
 
Fixed wheels, single engine, medium size, kind of slow and awkward." 
 
Tossing ByrOn a large gray book, Warren said with a grin, "Take a look through The Flight   
jacket.    I'm there in Squadron Five, tying on my solo flags.    I've got to pay some bills, then   
we're off to church." 
 
Byron was still looking through the yearbook when his brother returned. 
 
"Holy cow, Warren, number one in ground school!    How'd you do that and court Janice, too?"   
"It took a toll."    Warren made an exhausted face, and they both laughed.    'Bookwork is never   
too tough when you organize it." 
 
Byron held up the yearbook, pointing to a black-bordered page. 
 
"These fellows all got it?" 
 
Warren's face sobered.    "Yep.    Frank Monahan was my instructor, and a great flier."    He sighed   
and looked around the barren room, hands on hips.    "Well, I'm not sorry to leave this room.   
Eleven months I've sweated in here."    Pensacola might look small and sleepy, Warren said as   
they drove into town, but it had perfect climate, great water sports, fine fishing, good golf and   
riding clubs, and up-and-coming industries. 
 
This was the real Florida, not that Brooklyn with palm trees called Miami.    These rural western   
counties were the place to get a political start.    Congressman Ucouture had had no competition.   
He had recently decided to run for the Senate in the fall, and his chances were considered   
excellent.    Warren said he and Janice might well come back here one day. 
 
'When you retire?"    Byron said.    "That's looking far ahead." 
 308 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'Possibly before then." With a side glance, Warren took in Byron's astonishment. 'Listen,   
Briny, the day I soloed, President Roosevelt fired the Commander-in-Chief of the United States   
Fleet. 
 
Some dispute over policy for the Asiatic Fleet.      Made him ambassador to Turkestan, or   
something, but actually just kicked him out.    CinCus himself!    In the Navy you're just a hired   
man, my lad, right on up that big climb through the bureaus and the shore stations and the sea   
billets.    Right to the top.    Don't ever tell Dad I talked like this. 
 
Janice is an only child and the Lacouture firm does twenty million a year.    Of course, as long   
as I can fly, that's all I want to do." 
 
Inside the pink stone church topped by a square bell tower, two men in smocks were finishing   
up a huge flower display, and an unseen organist was rippling a Bach prelude.    "Nobody can   
say I kept her waiting at the church," Warren said.    "Almost an hour to go.    Well, we can talk.   
It's cool in here."    They sat halfway down the rows of empty purple-cushioned pews. 
 
The music, the odor of the flowers, the unmistakable childhood smell of church, hit Byron   
hard.    He felt again what it was like to be a reverent boy, sitting or standing beside his father,   
joining in the hymns, or trying to follow the minister's talk about the misty and wonderful Lord   
Jesus. 
 
Marrying Natalie, there would be no such wedding as this.    What kind could they have?    A   
church was altogether out of the question. 
 
What was it like to be married by a rabbi?    They had not discussed that part at all. 
 
The two brothers sat side by side in a long silence.    Warren was again regretting, in a fashion,   
last night's indulgence, and making half-hearted pious resolves.    The feelings of a bridegroom   
were coming over him. 
 
"Briny, say something. I'm getting nervous. Who knows when we'll have a chance to talk   
again?" 
 
Byron wistfully smiled, and it struck Warren once more how goodlooking his brother had   
become.    "Long time since you and I went to church together."    "Yes.    Janice likes to go.    I   
guess if these walls aren't falling in on me now, there's still hope for me.    You know, Briny, all   
this may work out pretty well.    If you do get into subs, you can put in for duty at Pearl.    Maybe   
the four of us will end up there together for a couple of years.    Wouldn't that be fine?" 
 
Natalie had often visited the homes of wealthy college friends, but she was not prepared for the   
Lacouture mansion, a rambling stone house on the bay, in a private section guarded by a mossy   
stucco wall, an ironfenced entrance, and an iron-faced gatekeeper.      Gentility, seclusion,   
exelusion, were all around her. The rooms upon rooms of antique furniture, Persian rugs,   
grandfather clocks, large oil portraits, heavy worn draperies, ironwork, gilt-framed big   
nidrrors, old-fashioned photographs-the whole place unsettled her.    Janice scampered to meet   
her in a fluttery pink housecoat, her blonde hair tumbling to her shoulders. 
 309 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'Hi!    So sweet of you to come on this short notice.    Look at me. 
 
I didn't sleep all night. I'm so tired I can't see. I'll never be ready. Let's get You some   
breakfast." 
 
"Please, just put me in a corner somewhere till we go.    I'm fine." 
 
Janice scanned her with weary but keen big hazel eyes. This happy girl, all pink and gold,   
made Natalie the more conscious of her own dark eyes, dark hair, wrinkled linen suit, and sad   
dowdy look. 
 
"No wonder Byron fell for you.    My God, you're pretty.    Come along." 
 
Janice took her to a breakfast alcove fating the water, where a maid brought her eggs and tea in   
old blue-and-white china on a silver tray. She ate and felt better, if no more at home.    Outside,   
sailboats tacked here and there in the sunshine.    Clocks struck nine in the house, one after the   
other, bonging and chiming.    She could hear excited voices upstairs. 
 
She took the letter from her purse, where it had seemed a lump of lead all the way from Miami:   
five single-space pages so faintly typed that her eyes ached to read them.    Obviously A.J. was   
not going to learn to change a typewriter ribbon till he died. 
 
It was a long tale of woe.    He had a fractured ankle.    With a French art critic, an old friend, he   
had gone on a tour of cathedrals the week after Byron had left.    At Orvieto, mounting a ladder   
to look at an inaccessible fresco, he had slipped and fallen to the stone floor.    To make matters   
worse, there was his mixed-up citizenship problem, which for the first time he was taking   
seriously. 
 
He had "derivative citizenship' from his father's naturalization around igoo; but because of his   
long residence out of the country,    difficulties had arisen. There seemed to be conflicting   
records of his age at the time of his father's naturalization.    The man in Rome, a decent enough   
person to talk to but an obsessive bureaucrat, had pressed searching questions and demanded   
more and more documents, and Aaron had left Rome in deep confusion.    Aaron wrote: I may   
have made a mistake at that point, but I decided to drop the whole thing.      This was in   
December of last year.    It seemed to me that I was like the fly blundering into a spider web; the   
more I'd struggle, the tighter I'd become enmeshed.    I didn't really want to go home just then.    I   
assumed that if I let the thing cool off and asked for the passport renewal later-especially if   
some other consul general were appointed meantime -I'd get it. it's a question of a purple   
stamp and a two,-dollar fee. 
 
It seemed unthinkable to me then, and still does now, that I could actually be denied   
permission to return to my own country, where I am even listed in Who's Who!    During the   
spasm of alarm over Norway, he had once visited the Florence consulate.    There a "shallow but   
seemingly affable crew-cut type' had conceded that these were all silly technicalities, that Dr.   
Jastrow was certainly an eiwnent and desirable person, and that the consular service would   
somehow solve the difficulty. Much relieved, Jastrow had gone off on the cathedral tour,   
fractured his ankle, and thus missed an appointment to return to the consulate two weeks later.   
 310 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The letter    continued:    What comes    next I still cannot understand. It was either    incredible   
stupidity or incredible malevolence. Crew-cut wrote a letter    to me.    The tone was polite   
enough.    The gist was that as a stateless person in wartime I faced serious complications, but he   
thought he had found a way out. 
 
Congress has recently passed a law admitting certain special classes of refugees.    If I were to   
apply under that law, I probably would have no further trouble, being a prominent Jew.    That   
was his recommendation. 
 
Do you realize the ill depth of the stupidity and the damage in his letter?    I received it only five   
days ago. I'm still boiling. To begin with he wants me to abandon all claim to being an   
American-which I am, whether my papers are in order or not-and to enlist myself in the mob of   
clamoring Jewish refugees from Europe seeking admittance as hardship cases! 
 
But that isn't the worst of it.    He put all this on paper and he put it in the mail. 
 
I cannot believe that even such a dullard doesn't know that a letter from the consular office to   
me would be opened and read by the Italians. 
 
I'll never know why Crew-cut did it, but I'm forced to suspect a trace of anti-Semitism.    That   
bacfflus is in the European air, and in in personalities it lodges and flourishes. The Italian   
authorities now know my problem.    That alarmingly increases my vulnerability here. 
 
I've been sitting in the lovely sunshine of the terrace day after day, in a wheelchair, alone   
except for Italian servants, growing more and more perturbed. Finally I decided to write to   
you, and give the letter to my French friend to mail. 
 
Natalie, I have certainly been heedless about a serious matter.    I can only plead that before the   
war these things seemed of no consequence. To you I'm sure they still don't.    You were born on   
American soil.    I was born on the banks of the Vistula.    I am getting a late lesson in the vast   
difference that makes, and in the philosophy of personal identity. I really should straighten my   
situation out. 
 
Happily, there's no desperate urgency in it.    Siena's tranquil, food's plentiful again, my ankle's   
healing, and the war is distant summer thunder. 
 
I am getting on with my work, but I had better clarify my right to go home.    One can never   
know when or where the villain with the mustache will make his next move. 
 
Now will you tell all this to Leslie Slote?    There he sits in Washington, at the heart of things.   
A hangman's noose of red tape can be cut by one word spoken in the right place.    If he still has   
a shred of regard for me, let him look into this.    I could write him directly but I know we'll get   
faster action if you go to him.    I beg you to do this. 
 
Jastrow wrote a touching pAragraph about Natalie's father.    He blamed their estrangement on   
himself.    The scholarly temperament was a sejf-absorbed one.    He hoped that he could treat her   
as a daughter, though a father's place could never really be filled.    Then came the passage about   
 311 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Byron which had prevented Natalie from showing him the letter. 
 
Have you seen Byron yet?      I miss him.      He has a curiously charming Presence-triste,   
humorous, reserved, virile.    I've never known a more winning boy, and I've known hundreds.   
A young fellow in his twentis shouldn't seem a boy, but he does.    An aureole of romance plays   
about him.    Byron might be all right if he had any talent, or a vestige of drive. 
 
Sometimes he shows doggedness: and he has a way of coming out with bright Hashes.    He said   
Hegel's world-spirit was just God minus Christianity. That's commonplace enough, but he   
added it was much easier to believe in God's sacrificing him for mankind, than in His groping   
to understand Himself    through the unfolding of mankind's    stupidities. I rather liked that.   
Unhappily it was the one good thing amid many banalities such as, "This Nietzsche was just   
some kind of a nut," and 'Nobody would bother reading Fichte, if anybody could understand   
him." If I'd marked Byron for our seminar on the Slote Reading List, he'd have made a C   
minus. 
 
Often I came upon him reading your letters over and over in the lemon house.    The poor lad   
has a terrible crush on you.    Are you at all aware of that?    I hope you won't inadvertently hurt   
him, and I rather wonder at your writing him so often. 
 
For all my troubles, I've been a reasonably good boy, and stand on manuscript page 847 Of   
ConstantineA clock chiming the half hour brought Natalie back with a start from the terrace in   
Siena-where in her mind's eye she could see A.J. sitting wrapped in his blue shawl, writing   
these words-to the Lacouture mansion on Pensacola Bay. 
 
'Oh God," she muttered, "oh my God." 
 
Feet trampled on a staircase; many voices called, laughed, chattered. 
 
The bride came sailing down the long dining room, wheat-colored hair beautifully coiffed and   
laced with pearls, cheeks pink with pleasure. "Well, l did it.    Here we go. 
 
Natalie jumped to her feet, cramming A.J."s pages into her purse. 
 
"Oh, you're enchanting!    You're the loveliest sight!" 
 
Janice pirouetted clear around on a toe.    "Bless you." 
 
The white satin, clinging to Hanks and breasts like creamy skin, rose demurely to cover her   
throat.    She moved in a cloud of white lace. 
 
This blend of white chastity and crude fleshy allure was devastating; it shook Natalie with   
envy.    The bride's eye had an ironic gleam. 
 
After her wild pre-wedding night, Janice Lacouture felt approldmately as virginal as Catherine   
of Russia.    It didn't bother her.    Rather, it appealed to her sense of humor. 
 
"Come," she said.    "You'll ride with me."    She took the Jewish girl's "You know, if I weren't   
marrying Warren Henry, I'd give you a run arm. 
 312 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
for that little Briny.    He's an Adonis, and so sweet.    Those Henry men!" 
 
Rhoda arrived at the hotel in a flurry, and frantically bathed and dressed, pulling cosmetics   
from one valise, underwear from another, her new Bergdorf Goodman frock from a third.    Dr.   
Kirby had chartered a & small plane and had flown down with her and Madeline.    'He saved   
our Lives!"    trilled Rhoda, dashing about in a sheer green slip.    "The last plane we could get   
from New York didn't leave us any time to finish shopping. 
 
Your daughter and I would have come to this wedding in OLD RAGS. 
 
This way, we had a whole extra afternoon and, Pug, you never sAw such fast shopping.    Isn't   
this a cunning number?" She held the green frock against her bosom.    "Found it at the last   
second.    Honestly, a small plane is such FUN.    I slept most of the way, but when I was awake it   
was RREAT.    You really know you're flying."Damn nice of him," Pug said. 
 
"Is Fred that rich?" 
 
"Well, of course, I wouldn't hear of it, but then he said it was all charged to his company.    He's   
taking the plane on to Birmingham today. Anyway, I wasn't going to argue too much, dear.    It   
was a deliverance. 
 
Fasten me up in back.    Pug, did Briny really bring that Jewish girl here? 
 
Of all things.      Why, I've never even laid eyes on her.      She'll have to sit with us, and   
everybody'll think she's part of the family." 
 
"Looks like she will be, Rhoda." 
 
"I don't believe it.    I just don't.    y, how much older is she? 
 
Four years?    That Briny!    just enjoys giving us heart failure. 
 
Always has, the monster.    Pug, what's taking you so long?    My land, it's hot here." 
 
'She's two years older, and terrifically attractive." 
 
"Well, YOu've got me curious, I'll say that. I pictured her as one of these tough Brooklyn   
chickens who shove past you in the New York department stores.    Oh, stop fumbling, I'll finish   
the top ones. 
 
Mercy, I'm roasting!    I'm PerSpiring IN rivers.    This dress will be black through before we get   
to church." 
 
Natalie knew in thirty seconds that the handsome woman in green chiffon and rose-decorated   
white straw hat didn't like her.    The polite handshake outside the church, the prim smile, told   
all. Pug presented Natalie to Madeline as "Byron's sidekick on the Polish jaunt," obviously   
trying with this clumsy jocula make up for his fe's e rity to wiEr ere "Oh, yes, wow!    Some   
adventure!" Madeline Henry smiled and looked Natalie over. Her pearl-gray shantung suit   
was the smartest outfit in sight.    "I want to hear all about that, some time.    I still haven't seen   
 313 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Briny, YOu know, and it's been more than two years." "He shouldn't have rushed down to   
Miami the way he did," Natalie said, feeling her cheeks redden. 
 
"Why not?"    said Madeline, with a slow Byron-like grin.    It was strange to    echoes of his traits   
in his family.    Mrs.    Henry held her head as Byron did, erect on a long neck.    It made him seem   
more remote. 
 
He wasn't just himself any more, her young companion of Jastrow's library and of Poland, or   
even the son of a forbidding father, but part of a quite alien group. 
 
The church was full.    From the moment she went in, Natalie felt uncomfortable.    Cathedrals   
gave her no uneasiness. They were just sights to see, and Roman Catholicism, though she   
could write a good paper about it, was like Mohammedanism, a complex closed-off structure. 
 
A Protestant church was the place of the other religion, the thing she would be if she weren't a   
Jew.    Coming into one, she trod hostile territory.    Rhoda didn't make quite enough room for her   
in the pew, and Natalie had to push her a little, murmuring an excuse, to step clear of the aisle.  
 
All around, women wore bright or pastel colors. Officers and air cadets in white and gold   
abounded.    And there Natalie stood at a May wedding in black linen, hastily selected out of a   
vague sense that she was still in mourning and didn't belong here.    People peered at her and   
whispered. It wasn't her imagination; they did.    How charming and fine the church was, with   
its dark carved wooden ceiling arching up from pink stone walls; and what stunning masses of   
flowers!    How pleasant, comfortable, and normal to be born an Episcopalian or a Methodist,   
and how perfect to be married this way!    Perhaps A.J. was right, and encoura ging Byron had   
been irresponsible. Leslie Slote was an and bookish pagan like herself, and they had even   
talked of being married by a judge. 
 
The robed minister appeared, book in hand, and the ceremony began. 
 
As the bride paced down the aisle on the congressman's arm, moving like a big beautiful cat,   
Rhoda started to cry.    Memories of Warren as a little boy, memories of her own wedding, of   
other weddings, of young men who had wanted to marry her, of herself-a mother before twenty   
of the baby who had grown into this handsome groom-flooded her mind; she bowed her head   
in the perky hat and brought out the handkerchief. 
 
For the moment she lost her awareness of the melancholy Jewish girl in black beside her, and   
even of Palmer Kirby towering above people three rows back.    When Victor Henry softly took   
her hand, she clasped his and pressed it to her thigh. What fine sons they had, standing up   
there together! 
 
And Pug stood slightly hunched, almost at attention, his face sombre and rigid, wondering at   
the speed with which his life was going, and realizing again how little he allowed himself to   
think about Warren, because he had such inordinately high hopes for him. 
 
Standing up beside his brother, Byron felt many eyes measuring and comparing them.   
Warren's uniform, and the other uniforms in the church, troubled him.    His Italian suit with its   
 314 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
exaggerated lines, beside Warren's naturally cut whites, seemed to Byron as soft and frivolous   
as a woman's dress. 
 
As Janice lifted her veil for the kiss, she and Warren exchanged a deep, knowing, intimately   
amused glance. 
 
"How are you doing?"    he murmured. 
 
"Oh, still standing up.    God knows how, you doing?" 
 
And with the minister beaming on them, they embraced, kissed, and laughed, there in the   
church in each other's arms, over the war-born joke that would last their whole lives and that   
nobody else would ever know. 
 
Cars piled up in front of the beach club, only a few hundred yards from the Lacouture house,   
and a jocund crowd poured into the canopied entrance for the wedding brunch. 
 
"I swear, I must be the only Jew in Pensacola," Natalie said, hanging back a little on Byron's   
arm.    "When I walk through that door, I'm going to set off gongs." 
 
He burst out laughing.    "It's not quite that bad." 
 
She looked pleased at making him laugh.    "Maybe not.    I do think your mother might be a wee   
bit happier if a wall had fallen on me in Warsaw." 
 
At that moment, Rhoda, half a dozen paces behind them, was responding to a comment by a   
Washington cousin that Byron's girl looked striking. "Yes, doesn't she?    So interesting.    She   
might almost be an Armenian or an Arab.    Byron met her in Italy."    Champagne glass in hand,   
Byron firmly took Natalie around the wedding party from room to room, introducing her.   
"Don't say I'm your fiancee," Natalie ordered him at the start. "Let them think what they   
please, but don't let's get into all that." She met Captain Henry's father, an engineer retired   
from the lumber trade, a short withered upright man with thick white hair, who had travelled in   
from California and who looked as though he had worked hard all his life; and his surprisingly   
fat brother, who ran a soft-drink business in Seattle; and other Henrys; and a knot of Rhoda's   
kin, Grovers of Washington.    The clothes, the manners, the speech of the Washington relatives   
set them off not only from the California people, but even from Lacouture's Pensacola friends,   
who by comparison seemed a Babbitty lot. 
 
Janice and Warren came and stayed, joking, eating, drinking, and dancing. Nobody would   
have blamed them, in view of their limited time, for vanishing after a round of handshakes, but   
they evinced no impatience for the joys of their new state. 
 
Warren asked Natalie to dance, and as soon as they were out on the floor, he said, "I told Byro n   
this morning that I'm for you.    That was sight unseen. 
 
"Do you always take such blind risks?    A flier should be more prudent." "I know about what   
you did in Warsaw.    That's enough." 
 
 
 315 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"You're cheering me up.    I feel awfully out of place here." 
 
"You shouldn't.    Janice is as much for you as I am.    Byron seems changed already," Warren   
said.    "There's a lot to him, but nobody's ever pressed the right button.    I've always hoped that   
some day a girl would, and I think you're the girl." 
 
Rhoda Henry swooped past, champagne glass in hand, and gathered them up to join a large   
family table by the window. Possibly because of the wine, she was acting more cordial to   
Natalie. At the table Lacouture was declaring, with rebsh for his own pat phrases, that the   
President's request for fifty thousand airplanes a year was "politically hysterical, fiscally   
irresponsible, and industrially inconceivable." Even the German air force didn't have ten   
thousand planes all told; and it didn't have a single bomber that could fly as far as Scotland, let   
alone across the Atlantic.    A billion dollars! 
 
The interventionist press was whooping it up, naturally, but if the debate in Congress could go   
on for more than a week, the appropriation would be licked.    "We have three thousand miles of   
good green water between us and Europe," he said, "and that's better protection for us than half   
a million airplanes.    Roosevelt just wants new planes in a hurry to give to England and France.   
But he'll never come out and say that. 
 
Our fearless leader is slightly deficient in candor." 
 
'You're wring to see the British and French go down, then," Pug Henry said.    p "That's how the   
question s usually put," said Lacouture. 
 
'Ask me if I'm willing to send three million American boys overseas against the Germans, so as   
to prop up the old status quo in Europe. 
 
Because that's what this is all about, and don't ever forget it." 
 
Palmer Kirby put in, "The British navy's    propping up our own status quo free of charge,   
Congressman.    If the Nazis get hold of it, that'll extend Hitler's reach to Pensacola Bay." 
 
Lacouture said jovially, "Yes, I can just see the Rodney and the Nelson right out there, flying   
the swastika and shelling our poor old beach club."    this raised a laugh among the assorted in- 
laws around the table, and Rhoda said, "What a charming thought."    Victor Henry said, 'This   
isn't where they'll come." 
 
'They're not coming at all," Lacouture said.    "That's New York Times stuff.    If the British get in   
a jam, they'll throw out Churchill and make a deal with Germany.    But naturally they'll hang on   
as long as they think there's a chance that the Roosevelt administration, the British   
Sympathizers, and the New York Jews will get us over there." 
 
"I'm from Denver," said Kirby, 'and I'm Irish."    He and Victor Henry had glanced a t Natalie   
when Lacouture mentioned the Jews. 
 
"Well, error is contagious," said the congressman with great good nature, "and it knows no   
boundaries.n This easy amused war talk over turkey, roast beef, and champagne, by a broad   
 316 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
picture window looking out at beach umbrellas, white sand, and heeling sailboats, had been   
irritating Natalie extremely.    Lacouture's last sentence stung her to say in a loud voice, "I was   
in Warsaw during the siege." 
 
Lacouture calmly said, "That's right, so you were.    You and Byron. 
 
Pretty bad, was it?" 
 
"The Germans bombed a defenseless city for three weeks.    They knocked out all the hospitals   
but one, the mine I worked in.    The wounded were piled up in our entrance hall like logs.    In   
one hospital a lot of pregnant women burned up." 
 
The table became a hole of quiet in the boisterous party.    The ngers. "That sort of thing has   
been going on in Europe for centuries, my dear. It's exactly what I want to spare the American   
people." 
 
'Say,    I heard a good one yesterday,"    spoke up a jolly-faced man    in steel-rimmed    glasses,   
laughing.    "Abey and his family, see, are driving down to Xfiami, and about Tampa they run   
out of gasoline.    Well, they drive into this filling station, and this attendant says, 'Juice?"    And   
old Abey he says, 'Veil, vot if ve are?    Dunt ve get no gess?"$ The jolly man laughed again,   
and so did the others.    Natalie could see he meant no harm; he was trying to ease the sober   
Turn of the talk. 
 
Still she was very glad that Byron came up now and took her off to dance. 
 
"How long does this go on?"    she said.    "Can we go outside?    I don't want to dance."    'Good.    I   
have to talk to you." 
 
They sat on the low wall of the terrace in blazing sun, by stairs leading to the white sand, not   
far from the picture window, behind which Lacouture was still holding forth, shaking his   
white-thatched head and waving an arm. 
 
Byron leaned forward, elbows on knees, fingers clasped together. 
 
"Darling, I think I'm getting organized here. I may as well fly up to New London today or   
tomorrow and take that physical, so that-what's the matter?" 
 
A spasm had crossed her face.    "Nothing, go on.    You're flying to New London." 
 
"Only if you agree.    I'll do nothing that we both don't concur on, from now on and for ever.  
 
"All right." 
 
"Well, I take the physical.    I a check the situation, and make very sure that a married applicant   
has a chance, and that if he's admitted he gets to spend time with his wife.    That takes care of   
our first few months, maybe our first year.    I'll eventually go to one submarine base or another,   
if I get through, and you'll come along, the way Janice is doing.    We all might end up at Pearl   
Harbor together. 
 317 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
There's a university in Hawaii. 
 
You might even teach there." 
 
'Goodness, you've been thinking with might and main, haven't you?" 
 
Victor Henry came through the doors to the terrace. Byron looked up, and said coolly and   
distantly, "Hi, looking for me?" 
 
'Hi.    I understand you're driving Madeline to the airport.    Don't leave without me.    I just talked   
to Washington and I've got to scoot back. Your mother's staying on." 
 
"When's the plane?"    Natalie said. 
 
"One-forty."    "Can you lend me some money?"    she said to Byron. 
 
"I think I'll go to Washington on that plane." 
 
Pug said, "Oh?    Glad to have your company," and went back into the club. 
 
'You're going to Washington!"    Byron said.    "Why there, for crying out loud?" 
 
She put a cupped palm to Byron's face.    "Something about Uncle Aaron's citizenship.    While   
you're in New London, I can take care of it. 
 
My God, what's the matter?    You look as though you've been shot." 
 
"You're mistaken.    I'll give you the fare." 
 
"Byron, listen, I do have to go there, and it would be plain silly to fly down to Miami and then   
right back up to Washington.    Can't you see that?    It's for a day or two at most." 
 
"I said I'd give you the fare."    Natalie sighed heavily. 
 
"Darling, listen, I'll show you Aaron's letter. 
 
He asked me to talk to Leslie Slote about his passport problem, it's beginning to worry him."   
She opened her purse. 
 
"What's the point?"    Byron stile[y stood up.    "I believe you." 
 
Warren insisted on coming to the airport, though Pug tried to protest that the bridegroom surely   
had better things to do with his scanty time. 
 
"How do I know when I'll see all of you again?"    Warren kept saying. 
 
Rhoda and Janice got into the argument, and the upshot was that the Henrys plus the bride and   
Natalie all piled into Lacouture's Cadillac. 
 
Rhoda on the way out had snatched a bottle of champagne and some glasses.    "This family has   
been GYPPED by this miserable, stupid war," she declared, handing the glasses around as   
 318 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Byron started up the car. 
 
"The first time we're all together in how many years? And we can't even stay together for   
twelve hours!    Well, I say, if it's going to be a short reunion it's damn well going to be a merry   
one.    Somebody sing something!" 
 
So they sang "Bell Bottom Trousers" and "She Wore a Yellow Ribbon" and "I've Got   
Sixpence" and "Auld LangSyne" as the Cadillac rolled toward the airport.    Natalie, crowded   
between Rhoda and Madeline, tried to join in, but "Auld LangSyne" was the only song she   
knew. 
 
Rhoda pressed a glass on her, and filled it until wine foamed over the girl's fingers.    "Oops,   
sorry, dear.    Well, it's a mercy your suit's black," she said, mopping at Natalie's lap with her   
handkerchief.    When the car drove through the airport entrance they were singing one Natalie   
had never even heard, a family favorite that Pug had brought from California: Tillwe meet, till   
we meet Tilltve meet at Jesus' feet Till we meet, till we meet God be with YOU till 'we meet   
again and Rhoda Henry was crying into her champagne-soaked handkerchief, stating that these   
were tears of happiness over Warren's wonderful marriage. 
 
PART TWO i Pairnela I i ;l ,i i i i 
 
mill The France was caving in, people began at last to perceive that a main Aturn of mankind's   
destiny now hung on flying machines.    Of these there were only a few thousand on the planet.   
The propeller warplanes Of 1940 were modestly destructive, compared to aircraft men have   
built since.    But they could shoot each other down, and unopposed, they could set fire to cities   
far behind battle lines. 
 
Massive bombing of cities from the air had, for some years after the First World War, been   
considered war's ultimate and unthinkable horror. 
 
But by 1940, the Germans had not only thought of it, but had twice done it: in the Spanish   
Civil War and in Poland.    The Japanese, too, had bombed China's cities from the air. 
 
Evidently the ultimate horror was quite thinkable, though the civilized term for it, strategic   
bombing, was not yet in vogue.    The leaders of England therefore had to face a bitter decision:   
whether to send their few precious planes to fight over France against the Germans, or hold   
them back to defend the homeland's cities and shores. 
 
The French had even fewer planes.    In the years before the war, instead of constructing an air   
fleet, the French had built their Maginot Line. 
 
Their military thinkers had argued that aircraft were the scouts and stinging insects of war,   
useful, annoying, hurtful, but incapable of forcing a decision.    As the French state, under the   
punch of German dive bombers, flew to pieces like a Limoges vase hit by a bullet, its premier   
issued a sudden frantic public appeal to President Roosevelt to send "clouds of airplanes."    But   
there were no clouds to send.    Maybe the French premier did not know what a paltry air force   
America had, or that even then, no fighter plane in existence could travel more than a couple of   
 319 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
hundred miles.    The level of information among French politicians at the time was low. 
 
Meantime, over the fields of Belgium and France, British lots had learned something   
important.    They could knock down German flying machines.    They knocked down many; but   
many British planes fell too. 
 
As the Battle of France went on, the French implored their retreating allies to throw in all their   
aircraft.    This the British did not do. Their air commander, Dowding, told Winston Churchill   
that twenty-five squadrons had to be kept intact to save England, and Churchill listened to him. 
 
The French collapse thus became foredoomed, if it had ever been anything else. 
 
At the height of the debacle, on June 9, in a letter to old General Smuts, Winston Churchill   
explained himself.    The military sage had reproved him for failing to observe a first principle   
of war: Concentrate    everything    at the decisive point. Churchill    pointed out that with the   
shortranged fighter planes then in the air on both sides, the side that fought nearer its airdromes   
had a big advantage. 
 
"The classical principles are in this case modified by the actual quantitative."    he wrote.    'I see   
only one way through now, to 'Wit, that Hitler should attack this country, and in so doing break   
his air -weapon.    If this happens, he will be left to face the winter with Europe writhing under   
his heel, and probably with the United States against him after the presidential election is   
over."      Winston Churchill, today an idealized hero of history, was in his time variously   
considered a bombastic blunderer, an unstable politician, an intermittently inspired orator, a   
reckless self-dramatizer, a voluminous able writer in an old-fashioned vein, and a   
warmongering drunkard. 
 
Through most of his long life he cut an antic, brilliant, occasionally absurd figure in British   
affairs.    He never won the trust of the people until 1940, when he was sixty-six years old, and   
before the war ended they dismissed him.    But in his hour he grasped the nature of Hitler, and   
sensed the way to beat him: that is, by holding fast and pushing him to the assault of the whole   
world, the morbid German dream of rule or ruin, of dominion or Gdtterdiimmerung.    He read   
his man and he read the strategic situation, and with the words of his mouth he inspired the   
British people to share his vision.    By keeping back the twenty-five squadrons from the lost   
Battle of France, he acted toughly, wisely, and ungallantly; and he turned the war to the course   
that ended five long years later, when Hitler killed himself and Nazi Germany fell apart. This   
deed put Winston Churchill in the company of the rare saviors of countries, and perhaps of   
civilizations. 
 
With France and the Low Countries overrun, and the Germans at the Channel, England now   
lay within range of the Luftwaffe's fighter planes. The United States was safe from air attack in   
1940,    but the    onrolling    conquest of    Europe    by the Germans,    combined    with the    growing   
menace of japan, posed a danger to the future safety of the United States.    The question arose:   
if selling warplanes to the British would enable them to go on knocking down German aircraft,   
killing German pilots, and wrecking German bomber factories, might not that be, for American   
security, the best possible use of the aging craft while new, bigger, and stronger machines were   
 320 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
built in the inaccessible sanctuary across the ocean? 
 
The answer, from the United States Navy, the Army, the War Department, the Congress, the   
press, and the public, was a roaring NO! 
 
Franklin Roosevelt wanted to help the British, but he had to reckon with that great American   
NOI Churchill, with the power of a wartime chief of state, had not sent planes to France,   
because the survival of England depended on them.    Roosevelt, presiding over a wealthy huge   
land at peace, could not even sell planes to England without risking impeachment. 
 
It was a shock for Victor Henry to see Franklin Roosevelt out from behind the desk in a   
wheelchair.    The shirt-sleeved President was massive and powerful-looking down to the waist;   
below that thin seersucker trousers hung pitifully baggy and loose on his fleshless thigh bones   
and slack lower legs.    The crippled man was looking at a painting propped on a chair.    Beside   
him stood the Vice Chief of Naval Operations for Air, whom Victor Henry knew well: a spare   
withered little naval aviator, one of the surviving pioneers, with a lipless mouth, a scarred red   
face, and ferocious tangled white eyebrows. 
 
'Hello there!' The President gave Victor Henry a hearty handshake, his grip warm and damp.    It   
was a steamy day, and though the windows of    the oval study    were open,    the room was   
oppressively hot.    "You know Captain Henry, of course, Admiral?    His boy's just gotten his   
wings at Pensacola.    How about this picture, Pug?    like it?" 
 
Inside the heavy ornate gold frame, a British man-o'-war under full sail tossed on high seas   
beneath ' a storm-wracked sky and a lurid moon. 
 
,it's fine, Mr.    President.    Of course I'm a sucker for sea scenes." 
 
'So am I, but do you know he's got the rigging wrong?"    The President accurately, pointed out   
the flaws, with great relish for his own expertise. 
 
"Now how about that, Pug?    all the man had to do was paint a sailing ship-that was his whole   
job-and he got the rigging wrong! It's positively unbelievable what people will do wrong,   
given half a chance. 
 
Well, that thing's not going to hang in here." 
 
During all this, the admiral was training His eyebrows like weapons at Victor Henry.    Years   
ago, in the Bureau of Ordnance, they had violently disagreed over the deck plating on the new   
carriers. 
 
Junior though he was, Henry had carried his point, because of his knowledge of metallurgy. 
 
The President now turned his chair away from the painting, and glanced at a silver clock on his   
desk shaped like a ship's wheel. 
 
"Admiral, what about it?    Are we going to put Pug Henry to work on that little thing?    Will he   
do?" 
 321 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Well, if you assigned Pug Henry to paint a square-rigger, Mr. 
 
President," the admiral replied nasally,    with a none too kind look at Pug, "you might not   
recognize it, but he'd get the rigging right. 
 
As I say, a naval aviator would be a far more logical choice, sir, but-" He gestured reluctant   
submission, with an upward chop of a hand. 
 
The President said, "We went through all that.    Pug, I assume some body competent is tending   
shop for you in Berlin?" 
 
"Yes, sir." 
 
Roosevelt gave the admiral a glance which was a command.    Picking his white hat off a couch,   
the admiral said, "Henry, see me at my office tomorrow morning at eight." 
 
"Aye aye, sir." 
 
Victor Henry was left alone with the President of the United States. 
 
Roosevelt sighed, smoothed his thin rumpled gray hair, and rolled himself to his desk.    Victor   
Henry now noticed that the President did not use an ordinary invalid's wheelchair, but an odd   
piece of gear, a sort of kitchen chair on wheels, in and out of which he could easily slide   
himself.    "Golly, the sun's going down, and it's still sweltering in here."    Roosevelt sounded   
suddenly weary, as he contemplated papers piled on the desk.    "Isn't it about time for a drink?   
Would you like a martini?    I'm supposed to mix a passable martini." 
 
"Nothing better, sir." 
 
The President pressed a buzzer.    A ed tall Negro in a gray gabardine jacket appeared and deftly   
gathered papers and folders out of various trays, while Roosevelt pulled wrinkled papers from   
one pocket and another, made quick pencilled notes, jabbed papers on a spike and threw others   
in a tray.    'Let's go," he said to the valet.    "Come along, Pug." 
 
All down one long hall, and in the elevator, and down another hall, the President glanced at   
papers and scrawled notes, puffing at the cigarette holder in his teeth.    His gusto for the work   
was evident, despite the heavy purple fatigue smudges under his eyes and the occasional deep   
coughs racking his chest.    They arrived in a small dowdy sitting room hung with sea paintings.   
"That thing isn't going to end up in here either," said the President.    "It's going in the cellar."   
He handed all the papers to the valet, who wheeled a chromium-stripped bar beside his chair   
and left. 
 
"Well,    how was the wedding, Pug? Did your    boy get himself    a pretty bride?" said the   
President in chatty and warm, if faintly lordly tones, measuring out gin and vermouth like an   
apothecary.    Henry thought that perhaps the cultured accent made him sound more patronizing   
than he intended to be. Roosevelt wanted to know about the lacouture    house, and wryly   
laughed at Victor Henry's account of his argument with the congressman.    "Well, that's what   
we're up against here.    And Ike Lacouture's an intelligent man.    Some of them are just contrary   
 322 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
and obstinate fools. 
 
If we get Lacouture in the Senate, he'll give us real trouble." 
 
A very tall woman in a blue-and-white dress came in, followed by a small black dog.    "Just in   
time!    Hello there, doggie!"    exclaimed the President, scratching the Scottie's head as it trotted   
up to him and put its paws on the wheelchair.    "This is the famous Pug Henry, dear." 
 
"Oh?    What a pleasure."    Mrs.    Roosevelt looked worn but energetic: an imposing, rather ugly   
woman of middle age with fine skin, a wealth of soft hair, and a smile that was gentle and   
sweet, despite the protruding teeth stressed in all the caricatures. She firmly shook hands,   
surveying Pug with the astute cool eyes of a flag officer. 
 
"The Secret Service has an unkind name for my dog," Roosevelt said, handing his wife a   
martini.    "They call him The Informer.    They say he gives away where I am.    As though there   
were only one little black Scottie in the world.    Eh, Fala?" 
 
"What do you think of the way the war's going, Captain?"    said Mrs. 
 
Roosevelt straight off, sitting in an armchair and holding the drink in her lap. 
 
"It's very bad, ma'am, obviously." 
 
Roosevelt said, "Are you surprised?" 
 
Pug took a while to answer. "Well, sir, in Berlin they were might    sure that the western   
campaign would be short. Way back in January, all their government war contracts had a   
terminal date of July first. 
 
They thought it would all be over by then and they'd be demobilizing." 
 
Roosevelt's eyes    widened. 'That fact was never brought to my attention. That's extremely   
interesting."    Mrs.    Roosevelt said, 'Meantime, are they suffering hardships?" 
 
Victor Henry described the "birthday present for the Fuhrer" drive, collecting household tin,   
copper, and bronze; the newsreel of Goering adding busts of himself and Hitler to a mountain   
of pots, pans, and irons, and washtubs; the death penalty announced for collectors    caught   
taking anything for their own use; the slogan, One pan per house; ten thousand tons for the   
Fuhrer. He talked of snowbound Berlin, the lack of fuel, the food rationing, the rule,that a   
spoiled frozen potato had to be bought with each good one.    It was against the law, except for   
foreigners and sick people, to bail a tad in Berlin. 
 
Russian food deliveries were coming in slowly, if at all, so the Nazis were wrapping butter   
from Czechoslovakia in Russian-printed packages to foster the feeling of Soviet support.    The   
"wartime beer," a uniform brew reduced in hops and alcohol content, was undrinkable, but the   
Berliners drank it. 
 
"They've got a 'wartime soap' too," Pug said.    'Einheitsseife. 
 323 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
When you get into a crowded German train it's not much in evidence." 
 
Roosevelt burst out laughing.    "Germans are getting a bit ripe, eh? I love that.    Einheitsseifel'   
Pug told jokes circulating    in Berlin. In line with the war effort speedup, the Fuhrer had   
announced that the period of pregnancy henceforth would be three months.      Hitler and   
Goering, passing through conquered Poland, had stopped at a wayside shrine.    Pointing to the   
crucified Christ, Hitler asked Goering whether he thought that would be their final fate. 
 
"Mein Fiih, we are perfectly safe," Goering said.    "When we are through there win be no wood   
or iron left in Germany." 
 
Roosevelt guffawed at the jokes and said that there were far worse ones circulating about   
himself.    He asked animated questions about Hitler's mannerisms in the meeting at Karinhall.  
 
Mrs.    Roosevelt interjected in a sharp serious tone, 'Captain, do you think that Mr.    Hitler is a   
madman?" 
 
"Ma'am, he gave the clearest rundown on the history of central Europe I've ever heard.    He did   
it off the cuff, just rambling along. 
 
You might think his version entirely cockeyed, but it all meshed together and ticked, like a   
watch."    'Or like a time bomb," said the President. 
 
Pug smiled at the quick grim joke, and nodded.    "This is an excellent martini, Mr.    President.    It   
sort of tastes like it isn't there.    Just a cold cloud." 
 
Roosevelt's eyebrows went up in pride and delight. "You've described the perfect martini!   
Thank you."    "You've made his evening," said Mrs. Roosevelt. 
 
Roosevelt said, "Well, my dear, even the Republicans would agree that as a President, I'm a   
good bartender." 
 
It wasn't much of a joke, but it was a presidential one, so Pug Henry laughed.    The drink, the   
cosiness of the room, the presence of the wife and the dog, and the President's naive pleasure in   
his trivial skill, made him feel strangely at home.    The little black dog was the homiest touch; it   
sat worshipping the crippled President with a bright stare, now and then running a red tongue   
over its nose or shifting its look inquiringly to Pug. 
 
Sipping his martini, his pose in the wheelchair as relaxed as before, but the patrician tones   
subtly hardening for business, Roosevelt said, "Do you think the British will hold out, Pug, if   
the French collapse?" 
 
"I don't know much about the British, sir."    observer?    Possibly 
 
"Would you like to go there for a spell as a naval after you've had a month or so back in   
Berlin?" 
 
Hoping that Franklin Roosevelt was in as pleasant a mood as he seemed, Victor Henry took a   
plunge.    "Mr.    President, any chance of my not going back to Berlin?" 
 324 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roosevelt looked at the naval Captain for an uncomfortable five or ten seconds, coughing hard.   
His face sobered into the tired gravity of the portraits that hung in post offices and naval   
stations. 
 
"You go back there, Pug." 
 
"Aye aye, sir." 
 
"I know you're a seafaring man.    You'll get your sea command." 
 
"Yes, Mr.    President." 
 
"I'd be interested in your impressions of London." 
 
"I'll go to London, sir, if that's your desire." 
 
"How about another martini?" 
 
"Thank you, sir, I'm fine." 
 
"There's the whole question of helping the British, you see, Pug." 
 
The President rattled the frosty shaker and poured. "No sense sending them destroyers and   
planes if the Germans are going to end up using them against us." 
 
Mrs.    Roosevelt said with a silvery ring in her voice, "Franklin, you know you're going to help   
the British." 
 
The President grinned and stroked the Scottie's head.      Over his face came the look of   
complacent, devilish slyness    with which he had suggested buying the Allied ocean liners- 
eyebrows raised, eyes looking sidewise at Pug, mouth corners pulled far up.    "Captain Heny   
here doesn't know it yet, but he's going to be in charge of getting rid of those old, useless,   
surplus Navy dive bombers.    We badly need a housecleaning there!    No sense having a lot of   
extra planes cluttering up our training stations.    Eh, Captain?    Very untidy.    Not shipshape." 
 
"Is that definite at last?    How wonderful," said Mrs.    Roosevelt. 
 
"Yes.    Naturally the aviators didn't want a 'black shoe' to handle it." 
 
Roosevelt used the slang with self-conscious pleasure.    "So naturally I Picked one.    Aviators all   
stick together and they don't like to part with planes. Pug will pry the machines loose, Of   
course it may be the end of me if word gets out. That'll solve the third-term question! Eh?   
What's your guess on that one, Pug?    is that man in the White House going to break George   
Washington's rule and try for a third term? Everybody seems to know the answer but me.   
Victor Henry said, "Sir, what I know is that for the next four years Roosevelt's mobile pink   
face turned grave and tired again, and he this country is going to need a strong Commander-in- 
Chief." 
 
coughed, glancing at his wife.    He pressed a buzzer.    "Somebody the people aren't bored with,   
 325 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pug.    A politician exhausts his welcome after a while. 
 
Like an actor who's been on too long.    The good will ebbs away and he loses his audience."    A   
Navy lieutenant in dress blues with gold shoulder loops appeared in the doorway.    Roosevelt   
offered his hand to Victor Henry.    "That Sumner Welles thing didn't come to anything, Pug,   
but our re very helpful." 
 
conscience is clear.    We made the effort.    You we "Aye aye, sir." 
 
"Welles wasn't as impressed with Hitler as you evidently were." 
 
"Sir, he's more used to being around great men." 
 
d A peculiar flash, not wholly pleasant, came and went in the Presienes tired eyes.    "Good-bye,   
Pug." 
 
A crashing thunderstorm, with thick rain hissing down from skies black as night, stopped   
Victor Henry from leaving the White House. 
 
He waited for a letup in a crowded open doorway marked Press, where a cool damp wind   
brought in a smell of rainy grass and flowers. 
 
All at once a heavy hand thwacked his shoulder. 
 
'I say, Henry, you've got yourself another stripe' Alistair Tudsbury, swelling in green   
gabardine, leaning on a cane, his moustached face purpler than before around the nose and on   
the cheeks, beamed down at him through thick glasses. 
 
'Hello there, Tudsbury!"    Why aren't you in Berlin, old cock?    And how's that magnificent wife   
of yours?"    As he spoke, a small black British car pulled up to the entrance in the streaming   
rain and honked. 
 
"That's Pamela.    What are you doing now? 
 
Why not come along with us?    There's a little reception at the British embassy, just cocktails   
and such.    You'll meet some chaps you ought to know." 
 
'I haven't been asked." 
 
"You just have been.    What's the matter, don't you like Pam? 
 
There she sits.    Come along now."    Tudsbury propelled Henry by the elbow out into the rain. 
 
"Of course I like Pamela," Henry managed to say as the father opened the car door and thrust   
him in. 
 
'Pam, look whom I bagged outside the press room!" 
 
'y, how wonderful."    She took a hand off the wheel and clasped Pug's, smiling familiarly as   
though not a week had passed since their parting in Berlin.    A small diamond sparkled on her   
 326 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
left hand, which before had been bare of rings.    "Tell me about your family," she said as she   
drove out of the White House grounds, raising her voice over the slap of the wipers and the   
drumming of the rain.    "Is your wife well? 
 
And what happened to that boy of yours who was caught in Poland?    Is he safe?") "MY wife's   
fine, and so's Byron.    Did I mention to you the name of the girl he travelled with to Poland?" 
 
"I don't believe you did." 
 
"It's Natalie Jastrow."Natalie!    Natdie Jastrow?    Really?" 
 
"Knows you, she says.Pamela gave Henry a quizzical little glance. 
 
"Oh, yes.    She was visiting a chap in your embassy in Warsaw, I should think. 
 
to get married.    Or so they say."    sh so "Exactly.    She went to see this fellow Slote, Now Leslie   
Slote." 
 
tend me and my n in "Oh? Bless me. Well, Natalie's quite a girl," said Pamela, looking   
straight ahead. 
 
"How do you mean that?" 
 
"I mean she's extraordinary. 
 
Intelligence, looks."    Pamela paused. 
 
"A handful, You mean," Pug said, remembering that Tudsbury had used the word to describe   
Pamela. 
 
"She's lovely,    actually.    And ten times    more    organized    than I'll    ever be." "Leslie Slote's   
coming to this party," Tudsbury said. 
 
"I know," Pamela said.    'Phil Rule told me." 
 
The conversation died there, in a sudden cold quiet.    When the traffic halted at the next red   
light, Pamela shyly reached out two fingers 10 touch the shoulder board of Henry's white   
uniform.    "What does one call you now?    Commodore?" 
 
"Captain, captain," boomed Tudsbury from the rear seat.    "Four American stripes.    Anybody   
knows that.    And mind your Protocol.    This man's becoming the Colonel House Of this war." 
 
"Oh, sure,#t Pug said, "An embassy papershuffler, you mean.    The lowest form of animal life.   
Or vegetable, more exactly." 
 
Pamela drove skillfully through the swarming traffic of Connecticut and Massachusetts   
Avenues.    As they came to the embassy, the rain was dvilidling- Late sunlight shafted under   
the black clouds, lighting up the "Willpower."    , r pink banks of blooyning rhododendron, the   
line of wet automobiles, and CPS.      Pamela's streaking arrival and the stream of guests   
mounting the steps skidding halt drew glares from several Washington policemen, but nothing   
 327 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
more. 
 
"Well, well, sunshine after the storm," said Tudsbury.    "A good omen for poor old England,   
eh? What's the news, Henry? Did you hear anything special at the White House? Jerry is   
really riding hell for leather to the sea, isn't he? The teletype says he's knocked the French   
Ninth Army apart.    I do think he's going to cut the Allied line right in two.    I told you in Berlin   
that the French wouldn't fight." 
 
"They're supposed to be counterattacking around Soissons," Pug said. 
 
Tudsbury made a skeptical face. As they went inside and fell into the long reception line   
extending up a majestic stairway, he said, "The bizarre thing to me is the lack of noise over   
Germany's invasion of Belgium and Holland. The world just yawns. This shows how far   
wetve regressed in twenty-five years.    Why, in the last war the rape of Belgium was an earth- 
shaking outrage.    One now starts by assuming total infamy and barbarity in the Germans.    That   
gives them quite an edge, you know.    Our side doesn't have that freedom of action in the least." 
 
At the head of the wide red-carpeted stairs, the guest of honor, a skinny, ruddy man of fifty or   
so, in a perfectly cut double-breasted black suit with huge lapels, stood with the ambassador,   
shaking people's hands under a large painting    of the King and Queen, and now    and then   
nervously touching his wavy blond hair. 
 
'How are you, Pam?    Hullo there, Talky," he said. 
 
"Lord Burne-Wilke, Captain Victor Henry," Tudsbury said.    Pamela walked on, disappearing   
into the crowd. 
 
Duncan Burne-Wilke offered Pug a delicate-looking but hard hand, smoothing his hair with the   
other. 
 
"Burne-Wilke is here to try to scare up any old useless aeroplanes you happen to have lying   
around," said Tudsbury. 
 
'Yes, best prices offered," said the ruddy man, briefly smiling at the American, then shaking   
hands with somebody else. 
 
Tudsbury limped with Pug through two large smoky reception rooms, introducing him to many   
people.    In the second room, couples shuffled in a corner to the thin music of three musicians.   
The women at the party were elegantly clad, some were beautiful; men and women alike   
appeared merry.    It struck Victor Henry as an incongruous scene, considering the war news.   
He said so to Tudsbury. 
 
"Ah well, Henry, pulling long faces won't kill any Germans, you know. Making friends with   
the Americans may.    Where's Pam?    Let , s sit for a moment, I've been on my feet for hours." 
 
They came upon Pamela drinking at a large round table with Leslie Slote and Natalie Jastrow.   
Natalie wore the same black suit; so far as Pug knew she had come to Washington in the   
clothes she stood up in, with no luggage but a blue leather sack. She gave him a haggard   
 328 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
smile, saying, "Small world." 
 
Pamela said to her father, "Governor, this is Natalie Jastrow. 
 
The girl who went tootling around Poland with Captain Henry's son." 
 
Slote said, rising and shaking hands with Tudsbury, "Talky, you may be the man to settle the   
argument.    What do you think the chances are that Italy will jump into the war now?"    "It's too   
soon.    Mussolini will wait until France has all but stopped twitching.    Why do you ask?" 
 
me to do it." 
 
Natalie said, "I've got an old Uncle infasmiielynab,uatnd somebody should go and fetch him   
out.    There's nobody in the Slote said, "And I tell you, Aaron Jastrow's quite capable of getting   
himself out." 
 
"Aaron Jastrow?"    said Tudsbury with an inquisitive lilt.    "A Jew's Jesus?    Is he your uncle?   
What's the story?" 
 
"Will you dance with me?"    Pamela said to Pug, jumping up. 
 
"Why, sure."    Knowing how much she disliked dancing, he was puzzled, but he took her hand   
and they made their way through the jam toward the musicians. 
 
She said as he took her in his arms, thanks. Phil Rule was coming to the table. I've had   
enough of him." 
 
"Who is Phil Rule?" 
 
"Oh-he was the man in my life for a long time.    Far too long.    I met him in Paris.    He was   
rooming with Leslie Slote.    He'd been at Oxford when Leslie was a Rhodes Scholar.    Phil's a   
correspondent, and an excellent one, but a monster.    They're much alike, "Really? 
 
Slote's the brainy quiet type, I thought."    pair of regular rips." 
 
Pamela's thin lips twisted in a, smile. "Don't You know they can be the worst?    They have   
Pressure-Cooker souls, those fellows."    They danced in silence for a while; she was as clumsy   
as ever.    She spoke up cheerily. 
 
'I'm engaged to be married." 
 
"I noticed your ring." 
 
"Well, it was a good job I didn't wait for that Navy flier son of yours, wasn't it?" 
 
it." "You didn't give me any enCOuragement, or I might have worked on Pamela laughed.   
"Fat lot of difference that would have made. 
 
And Natalie really has your other boy, has she?    Well, that's the end of the available Henrys,   
then.    I made my move in good time." 
 
 329 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Who is he, Pamela?" 
 
"Let's see. Ted's rather hard to describe. Teddy Gallard. From an old Northamptonshire   
family.    He's nice-looking and rather a lamb, and a bit mad.    He's an actor, but he hadn't got too   
far when he joined the R.A.F. He's only twenty-eight. That makes    him fairly ancient for   
flying. 
 
He's in France with a Hurricane squadron." 
 
After another silence Pug said, "I thought you didn't like to dance. 
 
Especially with Americans." 
 
"I don't.    But you're so easy to dance with and so tolerant.    The young ones are now doing an   
insane thing called the shag. One or two have got hold of me and fairly shagged my teeth   
loose." 
 
"Well, my style is straight 19i4-" 
 
"Possibly that was my year.    Or should have been.    Oh dear," she said, as the music changed   
tempo and some of the younger couples began ho ping up and down, "here's a shag now." 
 
They walked off the dance floor to a purple plush settee in the foyer, where they sat under a   
bright bad painting of Queen Mary. 
 
Pamela asked for a cigarette and took several puffs, leaning an elbow on her knee.    Her low-cut   
dress of rust-colored lace partly showed a small smooth white bosom; her hair, which on the   
Bremen had been pulled back in a thick bun, bung to her shoulders now in glossy brown   
waves. 
 
"I have a yen to go home and enlist in the W.A.A.FS."    He said nothing. 
 
She cocked her head sideways.    "What do you think?" 
 
"Me?    I approve." 
 
"Really?    It's rank disloyalty, isn't it?    Talky's doing a vital service to England here." 
 
'He can get another secretary.    Your lucky R.A.F man is there." 
 
She colored at the word lucky.    "It's not that simple.    Talky's eyes do get tired.    He likes to   
dictate and to have things read to him. 
 
He keeps weird hours, works in the bathtub, and so forth." "Then He'll have to indulge his   
eccentricities a bit less." 
 
"But is it right just to abandon him?" 
 
"He's your father, Pamela, not your son." 
 330 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pamela's eyes glistened at him. 
 
"Well, if I actually do it, we shall have Tudsbury in Lear, for a week or two.    'How sharper than   
a    serpent's    tooth it    is, to    them    a    thankless    child!'    -1    think    the    governor    will   
rather    enjoy   
throwing himself into the part, at that.    Perhaps we should return to him now, Captain Henry." 
 
He said as they stood and walked to the main reception room, "Why not call me Pug, by the   
way?    Everybody does who knows me."    "Yes, I heard your wife call you that.    What does it   
mean?"    "Well, at the Naval Academy, anybody named Henry usually gets called Patrick, the   
way a Rhodes gets labelled Dusty.    But there was a 'Patrick' Henry in the class above me, and I   
was a freshman boxer, so I got tagged Pug." 
 
"You boxed?"    Her glance travelled across his shoulders and arms. 
 
"Do you still?" 
 
He grinned.    "Kind of strenuous.    Tennis is my game, when I can get around to it." 
 
"Oh?    I play fair tennis." 
 
"Well, good.    If I ever get to London, maybe we can have a game." 
 
"Are you-2 She hesitated.    'Is there any chance of your coming to London?" 
 
-It's not impossible.    There they are, way down there," Pug said. 
 
"Gosh, this room's mobbed."Natalie seems miserable," Pamela said. 
 
Pug said, "She just lost her father."    "Oh?    I didn't know that. 
 
Well, she's grown more attractive, that's sure. Definitely marrying your boy, is she?" f(It   
seems so.    Maybe you can give me advice on that one.    I feel she's too old for him, too smart   
for him, and just about everything else is wrong with it, except that they're crazy about each   
other.    which is something, but not everything." 
 
"Maybe it won't come off.    There's many a slip," Pamela said. 
 
"You never have met BYron.    You'd see in a minute what I mean, if You did.    He's really still a   
baby." 
 
She mischievously glanced    at him    and tapped    his    arm.    "You do sound fatherly at    that."   
Tudsbury and Slote were in a lusty argument, with Natalie looking sombrely from one to the   
other. 
 
"I'm not talking about anything he owes England. That's beside the Point," Tudsbury said,   
striking his empty glass on the table. 
 
"It's his responsibility to the American people as their leader to ring the alarm and get them   
cracking, if they're to save their own hides. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"What about the Chicago quarantine speech?"    Slote said.    "That was over two years ago, and   
he's still trying to live down the warmonger charges. A leader can't dash ahead around the bend   
and out of sight. The People still haven't gotten over their disgust with the First World War. 
 
Now here's another one, brought on by stupid French and British policy. 
 
It's not the time for singjng 'Over There," Talky.    It just won't work." 
 
'And while Roosevelt watches his timing," said Tudsbury, "Hitler Will take half the world.   
Pamela, be a love and get me another drink. 
 
My leies killing me." 
 
"All right."    Pamela docilely walked to the bar. 
 
Tudsbury turned to Henry, "You know the Nazis.    Can Roosevelt afford to wait?" 
 
"What choice has he?    A few months ago Congress was fighting him just on selling you guns." 
 
"A few months ago," Tudsbury said, "Hitler wasn't overrunning Beiglum, Holland, and France,   
and directly facing you across the water."    "Lot of water," said Pug. 
 
Slote slowly beat two fingers with one, like a professor.    'Talky, let's review the ABC'S.    The   
old regimes are simply not competent for the industrial age.    They're dead scripts, molted skins.   
Europe's made a start on replacing them by a lot of wholesale murder-the usual European   
approach to problems, and that's all the First World War was about-and then by resorting to   
tyrannies of the left or the right. 
 
France has simply stagnated and rotted. England's played its same old upper-crust butterfly   
comedy, while soothing the workers, with gin and the dole.    Meantime Roosevelt has absorbed   
the world revolt into legislation.    He has made America the only viable modern free country. 
 
It was a stupendous achievement, a peaceful revolution that's gutted Maan theory. Nobody   
wholly grasps that yet.    They'll be writing books about it in the year 2,000. 
 
Because of it, America's the power reserve of free mankind. 
 
Roosevelt knows that and moves slowly.    It's the last reserve available, 'the last best hope."'   
Tudsbury was screwing all his heavy features into a mask of disagreement.    'Wait, wait, 'Wait.   
To begin with, none of the New Deal issued from this great revolutionary's brain.    The ideas   
Hooded into Washington with the new people when the administration changed. They were   
quite derivative ideas, mostly copied from us decadent butterflies.    We were a good deal ahead   
of you in social legislation.-Ah, thank you, Pam.-Now this slow moving can be good politics,   
but in war it's a tactic of disaster. 
 
Fighting Germany one at a time, we'll just go down one at a time. 
 
Which would be a rather silly end to the English-speaking peoples." 
 332 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'We have theatre tickets.    Come and have dinner with us," Slote said, standing and stretching   
out a hand to Natalie, who rose too. 
 
"We're going to L'Escargot."    "Thank you.    We're dining with Lord Burne-Wilke.    And hoping   
to inveigle Pug Henry into joining us." 
 
S love bought Natalie as luxurious a dinner as Washington offered, with champagne; took her   
to a musical comedy at the National Theatre; and brought her back to his apartment, hoping for   
the best.    In a common enough masculine way, he thought that if all went well he could Win   
her back in one night.    She had once been his slave; how could such a feeling disappear?    At   
first she had seemed just another conquest. 
 
He had long planned a prudent marriage in his thirties to some girl of a rich or wellconnected   
family, after he had had his fun. 
 
Natalie Jastrow now put him in a fever that burned up all prudent calculations. 
 
Leslie Slote had never wanted anything in his life as he wanted Natalie Jastrow.    Her distracted   
lean look of the moment was peculiarly enticing. He was quite willing to marry her, or do   
anything else, to have her again. 
 
He opened his apartment door and snapped on lights.    "ye gods, a quarter to one.    Long show.   
How about a drink?" 
 
'I don't know.      if I'm to search around tomorrow in New York courthouses for Aaron's   
documents, I'd better get to bed." 
 
"Let me see his letter again, Natalie.    You mix us a couple of shorties." 
 
"All right." 
 
Removing his shoes, jacket, and tie, Slote sank in an armchair, donned black-rimmed glasses,   
and studied the letter.    He took one book after another from the wall -heavy green government   
tomes-and drank, and read. The ice in both drinks tinkled in the silence. 
 
"Come here," he said. 
 
Natalie sat on the arm of the couch, under the light. Slote showed her, in a book, State   
Department rules for naturalized citizens living abroad more than five years.    They forfeited   
citizenship, but the book listed seven exceptions.    Some seemed to fit Aaron Jastrow's case-as   
when health was a reason for staying abroad, or when a man past    and retired had maintained   
his ties with the United States. 
 
"Aaron's in hot water on two counts," Slote said.      "There's this joker about his father's   
naturalization.    If Aaron actually wasn't a minor at the time, even by a week or a day, he isn't   
an American, technically, and never has been one.    But even if he was, he has the five-year   
problem.    I mentioned this to him once, You know.    I said he should go back to the United   
States and stay a few months.    I'd just seen too many passport messes crop up on this point,   
 333 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
ever since the Nazis took over Germany." 
 
Slote picked up the glasses, went to his kitchenette, and mixed more drinks, continuing to talk.   
"Aaron's been a fool.    But he's far from unique. 
 
It's unbelievable how careless and stupid Americans can be about citizenhip. In Warsaw a   
dozen of these foul-ups turned up every week. 
 
The best thing now-by far-is to get the Secretary of State to drop a word to Rome.    The day that   
word arrives Aaron will be in the clear." 
 
Padding to the couch in his stocking feet, he handed her a drink and sat beside her. 
 
"But trying to unravel any technical problem, however small, through channels scares me.   
There's a monumental jam of cases from Europe. It could take Aaron eighteen months. I   
therefore don't think there's much point in your digging around in Bronx courthouses for his   
alien registration and his father's naturalization records.    Not yet. 
 
After all, Aaron's a distinguished man of letters.    I'm hoping the Secretary will shake his head   
in amusement at the folly of absent-minded professors, and shoot off a letter to Rome.    I'll get   
on this first thing in the morning.    He's a thorough gentleman.    It ought to work." 
 
Natalie stared at him. 
 
He said, "What's the matter?" 
 
'Oh, nothing."    The girl drank off half her drink, all at once. 
 
'It certainly helps to know a man who knows a man, doesn't it? 
 
Well! 
 
If I'm to hang around Washington till the end of the week, we'll have to get me a hotel room,   
Leslie.    I'm certainly not going to stay here after tonight.    I feel damned odd even about that.   
Maybe I can still try a few of the hotels." 
 
"Go ahead.    I was on the phone for an hour.    Washington in May is impossible.    There are four   
conventions in town." 
 
'If Byron finds out, God help me." 
 
"Won't he believe that I slept on the couch?" 
 
'He'll have to, if he finds out.    Leslie, win you get me rmission to go to Italy?"    He compressed   
his mouth and shook his head. "I told you, the Departmenes advising Americans to leave   
Italy." 
 
"If I don't go, Aaron won't come home." 
 
"Why?    A broken ankle isn't disabling." 
 334 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"He just will never pull himself together and leave.    You know thatHe'll dawdle and potter and   
hope for the best."    Slote said with a shrug, "I don't think you want to go there to help Aaron.   
Not really. 
 
You're just running away, Natalie.    Running away, Hey, and shatcause you're in way over your   
head with your submarine ho tered by losing your father, and actually don't know what on   
earth to do next with yourself." "Aren't you clever!"    Natalie clinked the half-full glass down   
on the table.    "I leave in the morning, Slote, if I have to stay at the YWCA. But I'll make your   
breakfast first.    Do you still eat your eggs turned over and fried to leather?" 
 
"I've changed very little, altogether, darling." 
 
"Good-night."    She closed the bedroom door hard. 
 
Half an hour later Slote, dressed in pajamas and a robe, tapped at the door. 
 
"Yes?"    Natalie's voice was not unfriendly. 
 
"Open up." 
 
Her faintly smiling face was pink and oily, and over a nightgown she had bought that afternoon   
she wore a floppy blue robe of his.    "Hi. 
 
Something on your mind?" 
 
"Care for a nightcap?" 
 
She hesitated.    'Oh, why not?    I'm wide awake." 
 
Humming happily, Leslie Slote went to the kitchen and emerged almost immediately with two   
very dark highballs.    Natalie sat on the couch, arms folded, face shiny in the lamplight.  
 
"Thanks.    Sit down, Leslie.    Stop pacing.    That was a mean crack about Byron." 
 
"Wasn't it the truth, Natalie?" 
 
"All right.    If we're playing the truth game, isn't it simpler today than it was a year ago for a   
Foreign Service officer to have a Jewish wife, since the Nazis are now beyond the pale?"   
Slote's cheery look faded abruptly.    'qbat never once occurred to me." 
 
"It didn't have to occur to you.    Now listen, dear.    You can feed me stiff highballs, and play   
'This Can't Be Love' on the phonograph, and all that, but do ygu really want me to invite you   
into the bedroom? 
 
Honestly, it would be a sluttish thing to do.    I don't feel like it. 
 
I'm in love with somebody else." 
 
He sighed and shook his head.    "You're too damned explicit, Natalie. 
 335 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
You always have been.    It's coarse, in a girl." 
 
"You said that the first time I proposed, sweetie."    Natalie stood, sipping her highball.    "my   
goodness, what a rich drink.    I do believe you're nothing but a wolf."    She was scanning the   
books.    "What can I read?    Ah, Graham Wallas- The very man.    I'll be asleep in half an hour." 
 
He stood and took her by the shoulders.    'I love you, I'll love you forever, and I'll try every way   
I can to get you back." 
 
"Fair enough.    Leslie, I must go to Italy to get Aaron out. 
 
Honestly! 
 
I feel horrible about my father.    He was worrying over Aaron the very day he died.    Maybe this   
is irrational expiation, but I've got to bring Aaron home safe." 
 
"I'll arrange it, if it's arrangeable." 
 
"Now you're talking.    Thanks.    Good-night."    She kissed him lightly, went to the bedroom, and   
closed the door.    He did not rap again, though he read for a long time and had more drinks. 
 
HEVice Chief of Naval Operations for Air was drinking coffee with a blond man in a blue   
Royal Air Force uniform.    It was Lord Burne-Wilke; he nodded at Victor Henry, with a faint   
smile. During their long convivial dinner with the Tudsburys, Burne-Wilke had said not a   
word to Pug about this meeting. 
 
"Good morning, Henry.    I understand you know the Air Commodore." 
 
The admiral worked his eyebrows at Pug. 
 
"Yes, sir." 
 
"Good.    Have a cup of coffee."    The wiry old man bounced away from his desk to a map of the   
United States on the wall.    "And let's get at it. 
 
Here, here, and here"-his bony finger jumped to Pensacola, St. 
 
Louis, and Chicago-"we've got fifty-three old-type scout bombers, SBU-i's and 2,"s, that have   
been declared surplus.    We want to get them back to ChanceVought, in Stratford, Connecticut- 
that's the manufacturer-and get all U.S. Navy markings and special equipment removed.    Our   
British friends will then pick 'em up as is, and fly 'em to a carrier that's standing by in Halifax.   
That's the picture.      For obvious reasons"-the admiral contracted his brows fiercely at   
Pug-"involving the Neutrality Act, this is a touchy business. So the idea is to get this done   
without leaving a conspicuous trail of blood, guts, and feathers.    You can have a plane to take   
you around and you should get at it today." 
 
"Aye aye, sir." 
 
"We have sixty pilots on hand and waiting," said Lord Burne-Wilke. 
 336 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"How soon do you suppose you could have the planes, Captain Henry?" 
 
Victor Henry studied the map, then turned to the Englishman, "Day after tomorrow, sir, late   
afternoon?    Would that be convenient?    It'll take some time to get off those markings." 
 
The Englishman gave him a stare, and then smiled at the Vice Chief of Naval Operations.    The   
admiral remained impassive.    "Day after tomorrow?"    said Lord Burne-Wilke. 
 
"Yes, sir. The stragglers, if any, could come along on the deck of the next available cargo   
ship." 
 
"Actually, we were thinking in terms of a week from now," said Lord Burne-Wilke.    "We've   
given some of the fliers leave.    It would require a bit of rounding up.    How about Wednesday   
morning?    That gives you and us four days." 
 
"Very well, sir." 
 
Burne-Wilke said to the admiral, "You do think that's feasible?" 
 
"He says so." 
 
"Well, then, I had better get right at this." 
 
As the door closed, the admiral glared at Victor Henry, with a tinge of humor showing.    "Day   
after tomorrow, hey?" 
 
"Admiral, I didn't think those pilots were really on hand and waiting." 
 
The two men exchanged a look of insiders' amusement. The foreigner had demanded fast   
action; the U.S. Navy had offered him faster action than he could handle; very satisfying, and   
needing no words. 
 
"Well, Wednesday's cutting it close enough. Let's have some fresh coffee, hey? Now, this   
whole thing is a subterfuge."    The admiral pressed a buzzer.    "I suppose you grasp that.    The   
boss man wants it, so that's that. 
 
There are a few things you'd better understand, however." 
 
Showing a new grudging cordiality toward Victor Henry, the admiral explained that the   
President had elicited from the Attorney General -"probably by twisting his arm pretty damn   
hard"-the scheme and the reasoning for selling these planes to England despite the Neutrality   
Act. 
 
First, the Navy was declaring the aircraft surplus.    Second, Chance-Vought was accepting them   
for a trade-in on new F-4-U's, at a good high price. 
 
Chance-Vought could afford to do this, because it was turning around and selling the old   
planes to England at a profit. The catch was that the delivery of the F-4-U's lay far in the   
future. 
 337 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Undoubtedly President Roosevelt was evading the spirit of the Neutrality Law and the will of   
Congress, by allowing these planes out of the country now. The Army in particular would   
raise a howl.    It was very short of aircraft, and had a standing request in to the Navy for surplus   
flying machines of any description. 
 
"Now, Henry, there's no question here, and no hope, of concealment in the long run.    But if it   
were announced in advance, there'd be a big storm on the front pages.    It might not go through,   
which would be too bad.    Any Germans that the Limeys knock down with those old SBU's we   
won't have to fight later.    We're not going to stay out of this brawl. 
 
The boss man's idea is to get it done and then take what comes. 
 
The way the war news is breaking, it may not cause a whisper, after the fact. I hope not.   
However"-the admiral paused, squinting at Victor Henry over the rim of his coffee cup-"this   
does involve a chance of congressional investigation.    Somebody like you could end up a goat. 
 
The President thought you could get the job done, and I concurred, but this is a volunteer job   
Strictly volunteer." 
 
"Aye aye, sir," said Pug.    "I'd better get at it." 
 
Briny, my loveBrace yourself.    When you receive this letter I ought to be in Lisbon. 
 
I'm flying to Italy to fetch Uncle Aaron out of there.    With luck I'll be back in two months or   
less.    It depends on the earliest boat passage I can get for us, and for that damned library and all   
those research files. 
 
Sweetheart, don't be angry. It's good for both of us to catch our breaths. Your submarine   
school, and even Uncle Aaron's mess, are providential.    Your father's visit to Miami was an   
alarm clock, and it rang just in time. 
 
My ideas have altered, I must say, since my Radcliffe days when I started the Student Antiwar   
Committee!    I never realized there were people like you, Warren, and your father.    I'm sure the   
stereotyped military men do exist in droves, the hard-drinking narrow bigoted nincompoops.   
I've met a few of those.    The new thing is the Henrys. 
 
You're peculiarly unobtrusive on the American scene, I don't know just why, but thank God   
you're there! 
 
Darling-weren't you having sober second thoughts about me at Warren's wedding?    Honestly, I   
saw your mother's viewpoirrt and quite sympathized with her.    Why on earth should her little   
boy Briny want to marry this dusky old Jewess, with Rhine maidens like Janice Lacouture ]Ri   
so abundant in the United States? 
 
Now, mind you, I have not the slightest sense of inferiority. I value my intelligence and I   
know I'm a passably attractive Dark Lady. 
 
Being a Jew is an accident to me.    It's left little trace on my ideas or my conduct. 
 338 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Too little, I guess; we live in a secular age, and I'm a product of it. The question remains,   
should you and I try to bridge a big gap of background and interests because of a random   
encounter and a fantastic physical pull? 
 
I'm not backing out, Byron, I love you.    But a couple of months to think it over is no hardship,   
it's a godsend. 
 
Now let me quickly tell you what's been happening.    I enclose the letter Aaron sent me that you   
didn't want to look at. You can ignore his silly words about us. The whole picture of his   
problem is very clear in it. 
 
Leslie Slote has been absolutely Marvelous.    You mustn't be jealous of him, Briny.    The way   
you behaved when I left Pensacola was very upsetting to me.    I've rejected repeated, almost   
grovelling marriage proposals from this man.    I've told him that I love you, that I've promised   
to marry you, and that he is out.    He knows it.    Still he dropped everything to work on Aaron's   
stupid mess.    Never forget that. 
 
Word has gone out to Rome from the Secretary's oflice to expedite Aaron's return! 
 
It's less than two hours to plane time.    I'm dashing this off in the airport.    I didn't go home.    I   
stopped in New York for a day and bought enough things to see me through the trip. I'm   
travelling very light-one suitcase!    You'll be admitted to that submarine school, I'm positive of   
that. 
 
I know your father wants it desperately, and I think deep down you do too.    It's the right thing   
for you now.    When I come back, if you still want me, I'm yours.    Plain enough? 
 
So courage, and wish me luck.    Here I go. 
 
Love you, Natalie Three days before the start of the submarine course, Byron was sitting in a   
squalid furnished room over a Chinese laundry in New London, looking through the   
formidable reading list, when the postman rang. 
 
Natalie's    large hurried Special    Delivery scrawl on the thick    envelope promised    bad news.   
Slumped in a ragged armchair amid smells of soap and hot starch from below, Byron read her   
shocking letter over and over.    He was glancing through Aaron's faintly typed sheets when the   
telephone jarred him. 
 
"Ensign Henry? Chief Schmidt, commandant's office. Your father's here. He's gone with   
Captain Tully to inspect the Tambor over at Electric Boat.    If you want to join them they're at   
Pier Six, the commandant says.)) "Thank you." 
 
Sore at being followed even here by his father, hot to vent his anger and disappointment, Byron   
took ten minutes to dress and leave. 
 
Victor Henry, meanwhile, walking through the new submarine with his classmate, was in high   
good humor, though red-eyed with lack of sleep. 
 339 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The scout bomber job was done.    It had taken a lot of work and travel. 
 
A dozen aircraft had been in repair shops, the pilots had been scattered over the countryside,   
and there was no sense of urgency anywhere. Getting all-night work on the disabled planes,   
dragging those pilots out of their wives' arms or back from their fishing trips, had been a   
struggle. 
 
Some commandants had asked rough questions.    jiggs Parker at the Great Lakes Air Station,   
another classmate of his, had put up a fight to get a written record of the transfer, until Pug had   
told an outright lie about new top-secret equipment to be tested on the planes, which might be   
exPended in the process.    jiggs had eyed him for a long silent minute, and then given in.    Well,   
white lies were part of security, Victor Henry thought, and jiggs knew that. 
 
Byron caught up with his father and the commandant in the forward torpedo room of the   
Tambor, inspecting the new firing mechanisms. 
 
"Hello, Dad.    What brings you here?" 
 
The harsh voice, the look on Byron's face, told Pug something serious was wrong.    "Happened   
to be not far from here, so I thought I'd mosey over.    You met Byron yet, Red?" 
 
"Not yet.    I know he passed the physical and he's in the new class." 
 
Captain Tully offered his hand. "Welcome aboard, Byron. You're in for a rough couple of   
months." 
 
"I'll try to survive, sir." 
 
At the    almost    contemptuous    words, Red    Tully's    eyes    shifted    disapprovingly to    the father. 
Byron followed along on the tour without another word, his countenance white and angry. 
 
"Say, what the devil's the matter with you?"    Victor Henry snapped as he and his son came out   
of the conning tower on the breezy slippery black deck, leaving Captain Tully below talking to   
the skipper. "You'd do well to watch your tone toward your superiors. You're in the Navy   
now." 
 
"I know I'm in the Navy.    Read this." 
 
Pug saw Natalie's name on the envelope Byron thrust out.    "Isn't it personal?" 
 
Still Byron offered the letter. Victor Henry held the flapping pages in both hands and read   
them there on the submarine deck."His face was flushed as he handed them back to his son.   
"Quite a girl.    I've said that before." 
 
"If anything happens to her over there, I'll hold you responsible, Dad, and I'll never forget it." 
 
Pug frowned at his son.    "That's unrea,nable.    She's gone to Italy because of her uncle." 
 
"No.    You scared her off by saying I might not get admitted here if I were married.    It wasn't   
 340 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
true.    A lot of the students are married men. If you hadn't come to Miami I might be one by   
now." 
 
"Well, if I misled her, I'm sorry, I wasn't sure of the criteria, I thought that for hazardous duty   
they preferred single men, and for all I know, they do, and simply can't get enough.    Anyway,   
this is what you should be doing.    She's dead right about that, and I give her credit for realizing   
it. Possibly I should have butted out, but the decisions you're making now will shape your   
whole life, and I wanted to help. 
 
It was a wordy speech for Victor Henry, and he spoke without his usual firmness, disturbed by   
his son's fixed hostile expression.    He felt guilty, an unfaniiiiar sensation: guilty of interfering   
in his son's life and possibly of driving off the girl.    Even if Natalie had been wrong for Byron,   
her sudden flight was a blow that he could feel admost as his son did. 
 
Suppose she had been the best thing in the world for the drifting youngster?    Suppose, despite   
all good fatherly intentions, her being Jewish had made a difference? 
 
Byron's answer was as sharp and short as his father's had been apologetic and strung-out.   
"Yes, you helped.    She's gone.    I'll never forget, Dad." 
 
Red Tully emerged from the conning tower, looked around, and waved. "Hey, Pug?    Ready to   
go ashore?"    Victor Henry said rapicuy to his son, 'You're in this now, Briny.    It's the toughest   
school in the Navy. What's past is past.Byron said, 'Let's get off this thing," and he walked   
toward the gangway. 
 
On a hot beautiful evening early in June, when the newspaper headlines were roaring of the   
British evacuation from Dunkirk, and Churchill on the radio was promising to fight to the end,   
on the beaches, in the streets, and in the hills, Victor Henry left for Europe. Rhoda stayed   
behind, because of the worsening of the war, to make a home for Madeline in New York.    Pug   
had suggested this and Rhoda had rather enthusiastically agreed.    Madeline, a busy and happy   
young woman, put up no objection. 
 
Pug found it surprisingly easy to get a plane ticket at that time into the warring continent, as   
Natalie had.    The hard thing was to get out. 
 
ATALIIR tried for five days to fly from Lisbon to Rome.    She finally Nobtained a plane ticket,   
but at the last minute it was voided when a large party of boisterously laughing German army   
officers, obviously full of lunch and wine, streamed through the gate, leaving twenty excluded   
passengers looking at each other.    This soured her on the airlines. 
 
Railroad passage across collapsing France was far too risky.    She booked passage on a Greek   
freighter bound for Naples.    The wretched voyage took a week.    She shared a hot tiny cabin   
with a horde of black roaches and a withered Greek woman smelling of liniment; and she   
scarcely left it, horrid as it was, because on deck and in passageways the ship's officers and   
rough crewmen gave her disquieting looks.    She could scarcely eat the food.    The pitching and   
rolling kept her awake at i-iiglit. Enroute, her portable radio squawked the BBC stories of the   
French government's flight from Paris, of Italy's jump into the war, and of Roosevelt's words,   
 341 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"The hand that held the dagger has stuck it into the back of its neighbor." 
 
Natalie arrived in Italy nervous and exhausted, with a strong feeling that she had better get   
Aaron out of Siena at once, forgetting books, clothes, furniture-everything except the   
manuscript. 
 
But once on dry land, after a decent meal or two with good wine, and a long luxurious night's   
sleep in a large soft hotel bed, she wondered at her own panic.    Neither in Naples nor in Rome   
was there much sign that Italy was at war.    The summer flowers spilled purple and red over   
stucco walls in bright sunshine, and in crowded streets the Italians went their lively ways as   
usual. Jocular, sunburned young soldiers had always    abounded in Italian trains and cafes.   
They appeared as unbuttoned and placid as ever. 
 
After the long, hot, filthy train ride to Siena, her first distant glimpse of the old town, rising out   
of the vine-covered round hills, gave her a stifled bored feeling, almost as Miami streets did.   
"God, who ever thought I'd come back here?"    she said to herself.    The hills outside the town   
already showed the veiled dusty greenof midsummer. In Siena nothing had changed. The   
after-lunch deadness lay on the town; scarcely a dog moved in the empty red streets in the sun.   
It took her half an hour to find a working taxicab. 
 
Aaron, in his broad-briiniiied white hat and yellow Palm Beach summer stilt, sat in his old   
place in the shade of the big elm, reading a hook. 
 
Beyond    him,    over the    ravine,    the black-and-white    cathedral    towered above    the red-roofed   
town.    "Natalie!    You made it!    Splendid."    He came stumping toward her on a cane, with one   
foot in a metal-framed cast.    "I called and called for a taxicab, but when it was time for my nap   
none had come. 
 
I did have a wonderful nap.-Come inside, my dear, you'll want some refreshment.    Giuseppe   
will see to your things." 
 
The house looked the same, though the heavy foyer furniture noN? 
 
wore its green chintz slipcovers.    In his study the pile of manuscript, the pile of notes, the array   
of reference books, were all in the same places. 
 
His writing board lay on the desk, with the yellow    pages of his day's    work clipped to it,   
awaiting morning revision. 
 
"Why, Aaron, you haven't even begun to pack!" 
 
"We'll talk about it over tea," he said, with an embarrassed smile. "I suppose you'd like to have   
a wash first?" 
 
"But what's the situation, Uncle Aaron? Haven't you heard from Rome? Didn't word come   
from Washington?" 
 
"Word came from Washington.    That was fine of Leslie."    He sank into a chair.    "I really can't   
 342 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
stand on this ankle yet for more than a teNN, minutes.    I stupidly fell again m,ben it was almost   
healed. What a nuisance I am! But anyway, I reac ed page 967 today, and I do think it's   
goodish.    Now go and have a wash, Natalie, you look positively boiled, and you're caked with   
dust." 
 
The young consul in Florence received her affably, rising from behind a heavy carved black   
desk to escort her to a chair.    The room reeked of the rum-flavored tobacco he was smoking in   
a curved rough briar pipe. 
 
The Sherlock Holmes prop looked odd in his small hand.    He had a pinkand-white face, gentle   
bright blue eyes, and a childish thin mouth ",with the lower lip stilled in as though at some   
permanent grievance. 
 
His blond hair was thick, short, and straight.    His gray silk suit, pinned white collar, and blue   
tie were elegant and neat.    His desk name plate read AUC;UST VAN WINAKIER II. 
 
He said in a quavering voice, clearing it of hoarseness as he talked, "Well! The eminent   
author's niece, eh?    What a pleasure.    I'm sorry I couldn't see you this morning, but I was just   
up to my ears." 
 
"Perfectly all right," Natalie said. 
 
He waved his little hand loosely.    'People have been scurrying home in droves, you see, and   
just dumping everything on the consulate. 
 
There's an aw lot of commerce still going on, and I'm stuck with the paperwork.    I'm becoming   
a sort of broker and business agent for any number of American companies-unpaid, of course.   
I was in the most unbelievable snarl this morning over-of all things-a truckload of insecticidal   
Can you bear it?    And, of course, there still are Americans in Florence.    The screwier they are,   
the longer they stay." 
 
He giggled and rubbed his back hair.    'The trouble I've been having with these two girls, room- 
mates, from California! 
 
I can't mention names, but one of them is from a rich Pasadena oil family. 
 
Well!    She's gotten herself engaged to this slick little Florentine sheik, who calls himself an   
actor but actually is nothing but an overgrown grocery boy.    Well, this oily charmer has gone   
and gotten her roommate pregnant, my dear! The three of them have been having all-night   
brawls, the police have been in, and-oh, well.    You don't get rich in this work, but there's never   
a dull moment."    He poured water from a tall bottle into a heavy cut-glass goblet, and drank.   
"Excuse me.    Would you like some tvian water?" 
 
"No, thank you." 
 
'I have to drink an awful lot of it.    Some stupid kidney thing. 
 
Somehow it gets worse in the spring.    I actually think Italian weather leaves a lot to be desired,   
 343 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
don't you?    Well!"    His inquiring bland look seemed to add-'What can I do for you?"    Natalie   
told him about the new wrinkle in Jastrow's situation.    The day Italy had entered the war, a man   
from the Italian security police had visited Jastrow and warned him that, as a stateless person   
of Polish origin, he was confined to Siena until further notice.    She mentioned, as cordially as   
she could, that the OVRA undoubtedly knew this fact from intercepting Van Wmaker's letter. 
 
'Oh, my God, how perfectly awful," gasped the consul.    "Is t what's happened?    You're quite   
right, I didn't have my thinking cap on when I wrote that letter.    Frankly, Natalie-if I may call   
you that-I was floored when your name came in today.    I figured you'd have come and gone by   
now and taken your troublesome uncle home.    He has been a trial, you know.    Wellf This is a   
pretty kettle of fish. I thought the visa solved everything and that I'd seen the last of the   
Jastrow case." 
 
'What do we do now?"    Natalie said. 
 
"I'm blessed if I know, just offhand," said Van Wmaker, running his fingers through his hair   
upward from the back of his neck. 
 
"May I make a suggestion?"    Natalie spoke softly and sweetly. 
 
"Just renew his passport, Mr. Van Wmaker. That would stop the state icssilus", business.   
They couldn't hold him back then." 
 
Van Wmaker drank more rvian water.    "Oh, Natalie, that's so easy to say! People don't see the   
screaming directives we get, warning us agilinst abuse of the passport system.    People don't see   
departmental circulars about consuls who've been recalled and whose careers have gone Poof! 
 
because they were loose about these things.    Congress makes the immigration laws, Natalie.   
The Consular Service doesn't.    We're simply sworn to uphold them." 
 
"A4r.    Van Wmaker, the Secretary of State himself "7ants AIron cleared. You know that." 
 
"Let's get one thing straight."    Van Wmaker held up a stiff finger, his round blue eyes gone   
sober.    He puffed his pipe and waved it at her. 
 
"I have had no instructions from the Secretary. I'm extremely glad we're doing this face to   
face, Natalie, instead of on paper.    He couldn't go on record as intervening for one individual   
against another in matters involving equal treatment under law." The eyes relaxed in a sly   
twinkle. 
 
'(i did hear from Rome, between you and me, that his office asked us to expe(rite your uncle's   
departure.    I was stretching way over backwards, honestly, issuing that visa, jumping him to   
the head of a list of hundreds and hundreds of names," Van Wmaker knocked his pipe into a   
thick copper tray, and went on in a different, gossipy tone. 
 
"Actually, I think time will solve your uncle's problem.    The French are already asking for an   
armistice.    'The British won't fight on very long. They'd be mad to try. 
 344 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
If they do, the Luftwaffe will pound them to a jelly in short order. No, I fear me this round goes   
to Fritz.    No doubt they'll have another go t',Venty years bence, when I devoutly hope to be out   
to pasture." 
 
"But we can't count on the war ending," Natalie expostulated. 
 
"Oh, I think you can.    I expect peace by July first, if not sooner, Natalie.    The n these wartime   
exit regulations will lapse and your uncle can just pick up and go home.    Actually, this gives   
him the leisure to sort and crate his books.    He seemed so concerned about his books." 
 
"I want to take Uncle Aaron home tomorrow, and abandon books and everything.    Please give   
him the passport." 
 
"My dear, the contradiction in dates is right there in your uncle's expired book.    It's incredible   
how those things used to slip through, but I've seen a hundred such cases if I've seen one.   
People used to be mighty careless!    Now that it's been detected and made a matter of record, he   
has no more claim to America citizenship, technically speaking, than Hitler does.    I couldn't be   
sorrier, but it's my duty to tell you the law." 
 
This man was getting on Natalie's nerves.    The use of Hitler's name disgusted her.    "It strikes   
me that your duty is to help us, and that you're not really doing it." 
 
He opened his eyes very wide, blinked, drank more P-vian, and slowly stuffed his pipe, staring   
at the tobacco.    "I have a suggestion. 
 
It's off the record, but I think it'll work." 
 
"Tell me, by all means." 
 
He pushed his hair straight up.    "Just go." 
 
She stared at him. 
 
"I mean that!    He's got his visa.    You've got your passport.    Hop a bus or train, or hire a car,   
and scoot to Naples.    Ignore the confinement to Siena.    The Italians are so sloppy!    Get on the   
first boat and just leave.    You won't be stopped.    Nobody's watching your uncle." 
 
"But won't they ask for an exit permit?" 
 
,it's a trivial formality, dear.    Say you lost it!    Fumbling for it, you happen to take out a few   
thousand lire and put it on the table." He blinked humorously.    "Customs of the country, you   
know." 
 
Natalie felt her self-control giving way.    Now the man was advising them to bribe an official,   
to risk arrest and imprisonment in a Fascist country.    Her voice rose to shrillness.    "I think I'd   
rather go to Rome and tell the Consul General that you're thwarting the desire of the Secretary   
of State."    The consul drew himself up, smoothed his hair with both hands, put them on the   
table, and said slowly and primly, "That is certainly your privilege.    I'm prepared to take the   
consequences of that, but not of breaking the law. As it happens, I'm exceptionally busy,   
 345 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
several other people are waiting, w-" Natalie understood now how her uncle had fallen foul of   
this man. 
 
With a quick change to a placating smile, she said, 'I'm sorry. 
 
I've been travelling for two straight weeks, I've just lost my father, and I'm not in the best of   
shape.    My uncle's disabled and I'm very troubled about him." 
 
At once the consul responded to the new manner. 'I entirely understand, Natalie. Tell you   
what, I'll comb his file again.    Maybe I'll come up with something.    Believe me, I'd like nothing   
better than to see Men go." 
 
"You will try to find a way to give him a passport?" 
 
"Or to get him out.    That's all you want, isn't it?" 
 
"Yes." 
 
"I'll give it my serious attention.    That's a promise.    Come back in a week." 
 
(from WORLD EMPIRE LOST) 
 
The False Legend The British have always been brilliant at war propaganda.    Their portrayal of   
the so-called Battle of Britain was their supreme triumph of words.    For uninformed people,   
their    propaganda has hardened into history.    A serious    military discussion has to start by   
clearing away the fairy tales. 
 
After the fall of France, Germany was incomparably stronger than England on the ground,   
about equally matched in the air, and gravely inferior at sea. 
 
Our surface navy was weak and meager; only the U-boat arm had real weight. 
 
The vhole problem in the summer of 1940 was to force a decision across a sea barrier.    In a set- 
piece invasion campaign, therefore, the British held the crucial advantage. 
 
I have already stated, in my outline of Case Yellow, my belief that had we improvised a   
surprise crossing in June, when the    disarmed    British land    forces    were reeling    home    from   
Dunkirk, and their fleet was on far-flung stations, we might have conquered England in a short   
fierce campaign.    But Hitler had passed up that chance.    The resilient English had caught their   
breaths, instituted drastic anti-invasion measures, and marshalled their powerful navy to block   
a channel crossing, At that point,    Germany could only attack in the air, either    to force a   
decision or to blast a path for invasion. 
 
At the start one must compare the opposed air forces.    Ninety-nine out of a hundred people,   
including Germans, still believe that a vast and powerful Luftwaffe was defeated by a valorous   
handful of Thermopylae defenders in R.A.F uniformsr, in the words of the great phrasemaker,   
"Never in the field of human conflict was so much owed by so many to so few."    In fact, both   
Germany and England had about a thousand fighter planes when the contest began.    Germany's   
bomber command was larger than England's, but the English bombers, at least the newer ones,   
 346 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
were heavier, longer-ranged, and more powerfully armed. 
 
Hitler and Goering, of course, voiced the most extravagant boasts about the Luftwaffe, to   
induce the British to make peace.    Churchill, on the other hand, played up the fact that England   
was outnumbered and alone, so as to pull the United States into the war. As a result, the   
contest took on a false aspect of David against Goliath. 
 
British Advantages 
 
Not only is the conventional picture distorted on the comparison of forces; it takes no account   
of the handicaps under which the Luftwaffe operated. 
 
Most of the battle was fought over the British air bases.    Every German pilot shot down over   
land was lost, either dead or a prisoner. 
 
But a downed British pilot, if he were unharmed, could soon take another plane into the skies.   
The German pilot had only a few minutes of flying time in which to do battle, for our fighters   
had a fuel limit of ninety minutes or so, most of which was consumed simply in getting to the   
scene and returning to base.    The British pilot, as soon as he had climbed to combat altitude,   
could fight until he ran out of bullets or gas. 
 
Because of our fighter planes' short range, we could reach only the southeast corner of   
England.    The Luftwaffe was like a tethered falcon, with London at the far end of  the tether.   
The rest of the United Kingdom was,fairly safe from air attack, because unescorted bombers   
ran a high risk of annihilation.    The Royal Air Force could retire beyond range at will for rest   
and repair; and for beyond the firing line could keep fresh reserves and could rush the building   
of new planes. 
 
Our fighters were further handicapped by orders to fly in close formation with the bombers,   
like destroyers screening battleships.    No doubt this gave the bomber pilots a sense of security,   
but it hobbled the fighters.    In air combat, "seek out and destroy" is the rule of rules.    Fighter   
pilot teams should be free to roam the air space, spot the enemy, and strike first.    Goering could   
never grasp this elementary point, though his fighter aces kept urging it on him.    As our   
bomber losses climbed, he insisted more and more violently that the fighters should nursemaid   
the bombers, almost wingtip to wingtip.      This seriously depressed pilot morale, already   
strained by prolonged combat and the death of many comrades. 
 
Finally, the British in 1940 had one lucky scientific edge. They were first in the field with   
bottleworthy radar and the fighter control it made possible.    They could follow our incoming   
flights and speed their fighters straight at us.    No fuel was wasted in patrol, nor were forces   
dispersed in search. If not for this factor alone, the Luftwaffe fighter command might have   
won a quick knockout victory. 
 
For in the end the Luftwaffe did all but shoot the Royal Air Force out of the skies. 
 
Churchill himself-and he is not interested in praising the German efort-states that in September   
the battle tilted against his fighter command. 
 347 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Our attack at that point shifted to strategic bombing of London. 
 
Churchill asserts tho' ns G,), mina' "all mistne.    In the provocative terror-bombing of our cities   
which required stern immediate retaliation, and the fact that invasion had to be tried before   
October 1 or not at all, the shift was almost mandatory.    I discuss this point in detail in my day- 
byday analysis of the campaign. 
 
The Purpose of "Eagle Attack" 
 
Adierangriff, the Luftwaffe's "Eagle Attack" on England in the summer of 1940, was   
essentially a peacemaking gesture.    It was a limited effort, intended to convince the British that   
to prolong the war would serve no purpose.    The effort had to be made before the attack on   
Russia, to protect our rear to the westward. 
 
That it failed was of course a tragedy for Germany, since we were condemned to carry on this   
climactic world battle on two fronts. 
 
Historians are curiously slow to realize that it was more tragic for England. 
 
Germany, after all, entered the war with little to lose, but in 1939 England was the world's first   
power.    As a result of the war, though a supposed victor, she lost her world-girdling empire and   
shrank to the size of her home islands. 
 
Had the Adieranqriff induced her to make peace with Germany in 1940, that empire would   
almost surely still be hers, so it is hard to understand why the so-called Bottle of Britain was   
her "finest hour." 
 
Her pilots performed with dash and valor, like'their German racial cousins.    But England threw   
away her last chance to prolong her world role, linked to a vigorous rising continental power;   
after that, she allied herself with Bolshevism to crush that power, Europe's last bastion against   
barbaric Asia; and she become as a result a weak withered satellite of the United States. 
 
This debacle was all the work of the visionary adventurer Churchill, to whom the people had   
never before given supreme office. 
 
Churchill cost himself in the role of St.    George saving the world from the horrible, German   
dragon.    He had the pen and the tongue to push this legend.    He himself always believed it.  
 
The English believed it long enough to lose their empire, before becoming disillusioned and   
voting him out. 
 
Hitter and England 
 
Of all things, Hitler wanted no war with England.    To this, I can personally testify.    I do not   
need to, for it is written plainly in his turgid and propagandistic self-revelation, Mein Kampf.    I   
saw his face at a staff conference on the day that England gave its strategically insane   
guarantee to Poland.    I saw it again by chance in a corridor of the chancellery, on September 3,   
when contrary to Rib aive,) t.eons (--t of bad weather, bentrop's assurances, England marched.   
 348 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
That time, it was the face of a shattered man.    It is impossible to understand what happened in   
1940 without having this fact about Adolf Hitler firmly in mind, for from the start of the war to   
the end, German strategy, German tactics, and German foreign policy were never anything but   
this man's personal will. 
 
No world-historical    figure, when entering the scene, ever made his aims    and his program   
clearer. By comparison, Alexander, Charles XII, and Napoleon were improvisers, moving   
where chance took them.    In Mein Kampf, Hitler wrote in bombastic street-agitator language   
what he intended to do upon attaining power; and in the twelve years of his reign he did it.    He   
wrote that the heart of German policy was to seize territory from Russia.    That effort was the   
fulcrum of the Second World War, the sole goal of German arms.    He also wrote that before   
this could be attempted, our traditional enemy France would have to be knocked out. 
 
In discussing England, Hitler in Mein Kampf praises the valor of the race, its historical   
acumen, and its excellent imperial administration. Germany's grand aim, he says, must be a   
Nordic racial alliance in which England maintains its sea empire, while Germany as its equal   
partner takes first place on the continent and acquires new soil in the east. 
 
From this conception Hitler never departed.    When Churchill spurned his many peace offers,   
he felt a frustrated fury, which he vented on the Jews of Europe, since he felt that British Jewry   
was influencing Churchill's irrational policy.    Almost to the hour of his suicide, Hitler hoped   
that England would see the light and would come to the only sensible arrangement of the world   
that was possible, short of abandoning one half to Bolshevism, and the other half to the dollar- 
obsessed Americans-the outcome the world must now live with. 
 
In these considerations lies the secret of the failure of Adierangriff; of our arrival at the coast,   
facing panicky England, without an operational plan for ending the war; and of the persistently   
unreal air about the Sea Lion plan, which, after elaborate and costly preparations, never came   
off. In the last analysis, the set-piece invasion did not sail because Hitler had no heart for   
beating England, and somehow our armed forces sensed this. 
 
The Air Battle 
 
The battle went in several stages.    The Luftwaffe first attempted to make the British fight over   
the Channel, by attacking shipping. 
 
When the R.A.F would not come out and fight for the ships, Goering bombed the fighter bases.   
This forced the British fighter planes into the air. After knocking them about pretty badly,   
Goering-pushed by Hitler because of unconscionable British bombing of our civilians-sent in   
his bombers in the great Valhalla waves against London and other major cities, hoping to cause   
the people to depose Churchill and make peace. 
 
Hitler's July 19 speech, though perhaps a little blustery in language, had set forth very generous   
terms.    But all was in vain, and the October rains and fogs closed gray curtains on the weary   
stalemate in the air. So ended the "Battle of Britain," with honors even, and England badly   
battered but gallantly hanging on. 
 349 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Most military writers still blame Goering for our "defeat" over England. But this falls into the   
trap of the Churchillion legend that the Luftwaffe was beaten. 
 
That Germany's sparkling air force could do no better than fight a draw, I do, however, lay to   
Goering's charge.    Despotic political control of an armed force, here as in Case Yellow, again   
meant amateurism in the saddle. 
 
Hermann Goering was a complicated mixture of good and bad qualities. 
 
He was clever and decisive, and before he sank into stuporous luxury, he had the brutality to   
enforce the hardest decisions.    All this was to the good.    But his vanity shut his mind to reason,   
and his obstinacy and greed crippled aircraft design and production.    Until Speer come into the   
picture, the Luftwaffe was worse hit by bad management and supply on the ground than by any   
enemy in the air, including the Royal Air Force in 1940.    Goering vetoed excellent designs for   
heavy bombers, and built a short-range air force as a ground support tool. 
 
Then in 1940 he threw the lightly built Luftwaffe into a strategic bombing mission beyond its   
capabilities, which nevertheless almost succeeded.    As a ground support force, the Luftwaffe   
shone in Poland and France and in the opening attack on the Soviet Union.    It fell off as our   
armies got further and further away from the air bases; ut for quick knockout war on land, its   
achievements have yet to be surpassed. 
 
In popular history-which is only Churchill's wartime rhetoric, frozen into historical error-Hitler   
the raging tiger sprang first on Poland, then insensately turned and tore France to death, then   
reached his blood-dripping claws toward England and recoiled snarling from a terrible blow   
between the eyes from the R.A.F. Maddened, blinded, balked at the water's edge, he turned   
from west to east and hurled himself against Russia to his doom. 
 
In fact, from start to finish Hitler soberly and coolly-though with selfdefeating amateurish   
mistakes in combat situations-followed out the political goals laid down in Mein Kampf, step   
by step.    He yearned to come to terms with England.    No victorious conqueror ever tried harder   
to make peace. The failure to achieve this peace through the Eagle attack was of course a   
disappointment. 
 
It meant that our rear remained open to nuisance attack from England while we launched the   
main war in the east.    It meant we had to divert precious limited resources to U-boats.    Above   
all it meant the increasing intervention of America under Roosevelt. 
 
The Final Tragedy 
 
These nagging results of British obduracy festered in Adolf Hitler's spirit. 
 
He had in any case an unreasonable attitude toward the Jewish people. But the regrettable   
excesses which he at last permitted trace directly to this frustration in the west.    A Germany   
allied with England even with a benevolently neutral England-would never have drifted into   
those excesses. But our notion was beleaguered, cut off from civilization, and we became   
locked in a mortal combat with a primitive, giant Bolshevist country.    Humane considerations   
 350 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
went by the board.    Behind the line, in conquered Poland and Russia, the neurotic extremists of   
the Nazi Party were free to give rein to their criminal tendencies. 
 
Hitler, enraged by the Churchillion opposition, was in no mood to stop them, as he could have   
with one word.    When crossed, he was a formidable personality. 
 
This was the most important result of the "Battle of Britain." 
 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTE: Roon's discussion of the Bottle of Britain is unacceptable.    It is not a   
Teutonic trait to admit defeat gracefully. 
 
I have read most of the important German military books on the war, and few of them manage   
to digest this bitter pill.    But Roon's far-fetched thesis that Winston Churchill's stubbornness   
caused the murder of the European Jews may be the low point in all this literature of self- 
extenuation. 
 
His figures on the airplanes involved in the battle are unreliable. To be sure, few statistics of   
the war are harder to pin down. Depending on the date one takes as the start, the original   
balance of forces differs. Thereafter the figures change week by week due to combat losses and   
replacements.    The fog of war at the lime wos dense, and both commands riddled ,with, tangled   
records. 
 
Still, no official source I have read calls it an equal match, as Roon calmly does. 
 
His assertion that the attack was a "peacemaking gesture" is as ridiculous as his claim that the   
outcome was a draw. If there is ever another major war, I devoutly hope the United States   
armed forces will not fight such a "draw." 
 
"Popular history" has it right.    Goering tried to get daylight mastery of the air, the two fighter   
commands slugged it out, and he failed; then he tried to bomb the civilian population into   
quitting, First by day and then by night, and failed. 
 
The British fighter pilots turned the much larger Luftwaffe back, and saved the world from the   
Germans.    The sea invasion never come off because Hitler's admirals and generals convinced   
him that the British would drown too many Germans on the way across, and in Churchill's   
words, "knock on the head the rest who crawled ashore." A navy remains a handy thing to   
have around when the going gets rough.    I hope my countrymen will remember this. 
 
There was no clear-cut moment of victory for the British.    They really won when Sea Lion was   
called off, but this Hitler backdown was a secret. The Luftwore kept up heavy night raids on   
the cities, and this with the U-boat sinkings made the outlook for England darker and darker   
until Hitler attacked the Soviet Union.    But the Luftwaffe never recovered from the Battle of   
Britain.    This was one reason why the Germans failed to take Moscow in 1941.    The blitzkrieg   
ran out of blitz in Russia because it had dropped too much of it on the He/ds of Kent and   
Surrey, and in the streets of London.-V.H. 
 
ILVERY fat barrage baloons, shining in the cloudless sky ahead of the S plane before land   
 351 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
came in view, gave the approach to the British Isles a carnival touch.    The land looked very   
peaceful in the fine August weather. 
 
Automobiles and lorries crawled on narrow roads, through rolling yellowand-green patchwork   
fields marked off by dark hedgerows.    Tiny sheep were grazing; farmers like little animated   
dolls were reaping corn.    The plane passed over towns and cities clustered around gray spired   
cathedrals, and again over streams, woods, moors, and intensely green hedge-bounded fields,   
the pleasant England of the picture books, the paintings, and the poems. 
 
This was the end of a tedious week-long journey for Pug via Zurich, Madrid, Lisbon, and   
Dublin.    It had begun with the arrival in Berlin of a wax-sealed envelope in the pouch from   
Washington, hand-addressed in red ink: Top Secret-Captain Victor Henry only. 
 
Inside he had found a sealed letter from the White House. 
 
Dear Pug: Vice C.N.O says you are a longtime booster of "radar." 
 
The British are secretly reporting to us a big success in their air battle with something called   
"RDF."    How about going there now for a look, as we discussed? 
 
You'll get dispatch orders, and our friends will be expecting you. 
 
London should be interesting now, if a bit warm.    Let me know if you think it's too warm for us   
to give them fifty destroyers. FDR Pug had had mixed feelings about these chattily phrased   
instructions.    Any excuse to leave Berlin was welcome.    The red-ink blare and boasts in the   
meager newspapers were becoming intolerable; so were the happy triumphant Germans    in   
government offices, chortling about the pleasant postwar life that would start in a month or so;   
so were the women strolling the tree-lined boulevards, looking slyly complacent in French siM   
and cosmetics. Pug even felt guilty eating the plunder in the improved restaurant menus:   
Polish hams, Danish butter, and French veal 
 
AL 
 
and wine. The gleeful voices    of the radio announcers, claiming staggering destruction of   
British airplanes    and almost no Luftwaffe losses, rasped his nerves as he sat alone in the   
evenings in the Grunewald mansion looted from a vanished Jew. An order to leave all this   
behind was a boon. 
 
But the letter dismayed him, too.    He had not walked the deck of a ship now in the line of duty   
for more than four years, and this shore-bound status appeared to be hardening. 
 
Walking home that afternoon he passed the rusting olive-painted Flakturm, and like nothing   
else it made him realize how glad he would be to get out of Berlin.    People no longer gawked   
at the high tower bristling at the top with guns, as they had when the girder frame and the thick   
armor plates had been going up, Guesses and rumors about it had run fast and wild for weeks.   
Now the story was out.    It was an A.A. platform for shooting at low-flying bombers.    No high   
building could get in the lines of fire, for it rose far above the tallest rooftops jn Berlin, a crude   
 352 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
eyesore.    So far the few English raiders    had hugged maximum    altitude,    but the Germans   
seemed to think of everything. This gigantic drab iron growth, towering over the playing   
children and elderly strollers in the pretty Tiergarten, seemed to Victor Henry to epitomize the   
Nazi regime. 
 
The lonely cavernous house got on his nerves that evening, as his quiet-stepping Gestapo butler   
served him pork chops from Denmark at one end of the long bare dining table.    Pug decided   
that if he had to come back he would'take a room at the Adlon.    He packed suits and uniforms,   
the great weariness of an attache's existence: morning coa dress blues, dress whites, evening   
uniforn-4 khakis, civilian street clothes, civilian dinner jacket. He wrote letters    to Rhoda,   
Warren, and Byron, and went to sleep thinking of his wife, and thinking, too, that in London he   
would probably see Pamela Tudsbury. 
 
Next day Pug's assistant attache, a handsome co mander who spoke perfect German, said he   
would be glad to take over his duties and appointments. He happened to be a relative of   
Wendel! Willkie.    Since the Republican convention, he had become popular with the Germans.   
"I guess I'll have to hang around this weekend, eh?"    he said.    "TOO bad. 
 
I was going out to Abendruh with the Wolf Stellers- They've been awfully kind to me lately.   
They said Goering might be there." 
 
"Go by all means," said Pug.    "You might pick up some dope about how the Luftwaffe's really   
doing.    Tell your wife to take along a pair of heavy bloomers-l' He enjoyed leaving the attache   
staring at him, mystified and vaguely offended. 
 
And so he had departed from Berlin. 
 
How the devil do you keep looking so fit?"    he said to Blinker Vance, the naval attache who   
met him at the London airport.    After a quarter of a century, Vance still batted his eyes as he   
talked, just as he had at Annapolis, putting the plebe Victor Henry on report for a smudged   
white shoe.    Vance wore a fawn-colored sports jacket of London cut, and gray trousers.    His   
face was dried and lined, but he still had the flat waist of a second classman. 
 
"Well, Pug, it's pretty good tennis weather.    I've been getting in a couple of hours every day." 
 
"Really?    Great war you've got here." 
 
"Oh, the war.    It's going on up there somewhere, mostly to the south." 
 
Vance vaguely A,aved a hand up at the pellucid heavens.    "We do get some air raid warnings,   
but so far the Germans haven't dropped anything on London. You see contrails once in a   
while, then you know the fighters are numng it up close by.    Otherwise you just listen to the   
BBC for the knockdown reports.    Damn strange war, a sort of airplane numbers game." 
 
Having just toured bombed areas in France and the Low Countries, Henry was struck by the   
serene, wholly undamaged look of London, the density of the auto traffic, and the cheery   
briskness of Itbe well-dressed sidewalk crowds. The endless shop windows crammed with   
 353 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
good things surprised him.    Berlin, even with its infusion of loot, was by comparison a bleak   
military compound. 
 
Vance drove Victor Henry to a London apartment off Grosvenor Square, kept by the Navy for   
visiting senior officers: a dark Hat on an areaway,    with a kitchen full of empty beer and   
whiskey bottles, a dining room, a small sitting room, and three bedrooms along a hall.    "I guess   
you'll be a bit crowded here," Vance said, glancing around at the luggage and scattered clothes   
of two other occupants in the apartment. 
 
"Be glad of the company." 
 
Blinker grimaced, winked his eyes, and said tentatively, "Pug, I didn't know you'd become one   
of these boffins." 
 
"Boffins?" 
 
"Scientific red-hots.    That's what they call 'em here.    The word is you came for a look-see at   
their newest stuff, with a green light from way high UP." 
 
Victor Henry said, unstrapping his bags, "Really?" 
 
The attache grinned at his taciturnity.    "You'll hear from the Limeys next.    This is the end of   
the line for me-until I can be of service to you, one way or another." 
 
The loud coarse ring of a London telephone, quite different in rhythm and sound from the   
Berlin double buzz, startled Pug out of a nap.    A slit of sunlight gleamed through drawn brovrn   
curtains. 
 
"Captain Henry?    Major-General Tillet here, office of military History." The voice was high,   
crisp, and very British.    "I'm just driving down to Portsmouth tomorrow.    Possibly drop in on a   
Chain Home station. 
 
You wouldn't care to come along?" 
 
Pug had never heard the expression C-n Honw.    "That'll be fine, General. Thank you." 
 
"Oh, really? jolly good!" Tillet sounded delighted, as though he had suggested something   
boring and Pug had been unexpectedly gracious. 
 
"Suppose I pick you up at five, and we avoid the morning traffic? 
 
You might take along a shaving kit and a shirt." 
 
Pug heard whiskeyish laughter in the next bedroom, the boom of a man and the tinkling of a   
young woman.    It was six o'clock.    He turned on the radio and dressed.    A mild Schubert trio   
ended, one he had often heard on the Berlin station, and news came on. In a calm, almost   
desultory voice, the broadcaster told of a massive air battle that had been raging all afternoon.   
The PAF had shot down more than a hundred German planes, and had lost twenty-five.    Half   
the British pilots had safely parachuted.    The fight was continuing, the announcer said.    If there   
 354 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
were any truth in this almost ludicrously understated bulletin, Pug thought, an astonishing   
victory was shaping up, high and invisible in the sky, while the Londoners went about their   
business. 
 
He found Pamela Tudsbury's number in the telephone book and called her. A different girl   
answered, with a charming voice that became more charming when Victor Henry identified   
himself.    Pamela was a W.A.A.F now, she told him, working at a headquarters outside London.  
 
She gave him another number to call.    He tried it, and there Pamela was. 
 
"Captain Henry!    You're here!    Oh, wonderful!    Well, you picked the right day to arrive, didn't   
you?" 
 
"Is it really going well, Pam?" 
 
"Haven't you heard the evening news?" 
 
'I'm not used to believing the radio." She gave an exhilarated laugh. "Oh, to be sure. The   
Berlin Radio. 
 
MY God, it's nice to talk to YOU.    Well, it's all quite true. 
 
We've mauled them today.    But they're still coming.    I have to go back on duty in an hour. 
 
I'm just snatching a bite to eat.    I heard one officer say it was the turning POirlt of the war.    By   
the way, if inspection tours are in order for you, you might bear in mind that I'm working at   
Group Operations, Number Eleven Fighter Group." 
 
"Will do.    How's your fiance?" 
 
"Oh, Ted?    Fit as a flea.    He's on the ground at the moment.    He's had a busy day!    Poor fellow,   
old man of the squadron, just turned twenty-nine.    Loo here, any chance that we can sec you?   
Ted's squadron gets its spell off ops next'week. We'll undoubtedly come down to London   
together.    How long will you be here?" 
 
"Well, next week I should still be around." 
 
"Oh, lovely.    Let me have your number then, and I'll call you. 
 
I'm so glad you're here." 
 
He went out for a walk. London wore a golden light that evening, the light of a low sun   
shining through clear air.    He zigzagged at random down crooked streets, along elegant rows of   
town houses, and through a green park where swans glided    on calm water. He came    to   
Trafalgar Square, and walked on through the Whitehall government buildings and along the   
Thames to Westminster Bridge.    Out to the middle of the bridge he strolled, and stood there,   
looking at the untouched famous old City stretching on both sides of the river. 
 
London's top-heavy red buses and scuttling black little taxis streamed across the bridge amid   
 355 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
an abundant flow of private cars. 
 
Berlin's sparse traffic had been mostly government or army machines. 
 
London was a no Flakturmcivilian city still, he thought, for all the uniforms.    It had The British   
seemed to have produced their navy and their R.A.F from the mere table scraps of the   
prosperity still visibly spread here.    Now these table-scrap forces had to hold the line.    His job   
was to make a guess whether they would; also, to see whether their new electronic stuff was   
really advanced.    Looking at this pacific and rich scene, he doubted it. 
 
He dined alone in a small restaurant, on good red roast beef such as one could only dream of in   
Berlin.    The apartment was dark and silent when he returned.    He went to bed after listening to   
the news. 
 
The claimed box score for the day was now a hundred thirty German planes down, forty-nine   
British.    Could it be true? 
 
The small bald moustached general, in perfectly tailored khakis, smoked a stubby pipe as he   
drove, a severe look on his foxy much-wrinkled face. It had occurred to Victor Henry, after the   
phone conversation, that he might well be E. J. Tillet, the military author, whose books be   
greatly admired.    And so he was; Tillet more or less resembled his book-jacket pictures, though   
in those the man had looked twenty years younger.      Pug was not inclined to start a   
conversation with this forbidding pundit. Tillet said almost nothing as he spun his little   
Vauxhall along highways    and down back roads. By the sun, Pug saw they were moving   
straight south. 
 
The further south they went, the more warlike the country looked. 
 
Signposts were gone, place names painted out, and some towns seemed deserted.    Great loops   
of barbed steel rods overarched the unmarked roads. 
 
Tillet said, pointing, "To stop glider landings," and shut up again. Victor Henry finally tired of   
the sin e and the beautiful rolling scenery.    He said, "I guess the Germans too Ikea chad beating   
yesterday." 
 
Tillet puffed until his pipe glowed and crackled. Victor Henry thought he wasn't going to   
reply.    Then he burst out, "I told Hitler the range of the Messerschmitt log was far too short.   
He agreed with me, and said he'd take it up with Goering. But the thing got lost in the   
Luftwaffe bureaucracy.    It's a great mistake to think dictators are all-powerful! 
 
They're hobbled by their paper shutters, like all politicians. 
 
More so, in a way.    Everybody lies to them, out of fear or sycophancy. 
 
Adolf Hitler walks in a web of flattery and phony figures.      He does an amazing job,   
considering.    He's got a nose for facts.    That's his mark of genius.    You've met him, of course?" 
 
"Once or twice."    great admirer of mine, or so 
 356 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"I had several sessions with him. He's a he says. His grasp is quick and deep. The gifted   
amateur is often like that.    I said Goering was making the same mistake with his fighter planes   
designing them for ground support-that the French were making with their tanks.    You don't   
have to give a ground support machine much range, because the fuel trucks are always close at   
hand to fill them up.      Those French tanks were superb fighting machines, and they had   
thousands of them.    But the wretched things could only run fifty, sixty miles at a crack. 
 
Guderian drove two hundred miles a day.    Some difference!    The French never could get it into   
their heads that tanks should mass and operate independently.    God knows Fuller, de Gaulle,   
and I tried hard enough to explain it to them." 
 
The car was bumping along 4 muddy detour past concrete dragons' teeth and a stone wall,   
ringed in barbed wire, that blocked the higbwa-". 
 
Masked workmen were raising clouds of gray dust with pneumatic hammers and drills.   
"There's foolishness for you."    Tillet pointed at the tank trap with his Pipe.    "Intended to halt   
invaders.    What this rubbish actually would do is reduce the maneuverability of our reserve to   
zero. Happily Brooke's taken charge now.    He's cleaning all this out." 
 
Pug said, "General Alan Brooke, is that?" 
 
"Yes, our best man, a genius in the field. He managed the Dunkirk retreat. I was with his   
headquarters.    I saw him demoralized only once. 
 
Headquarters was shifting from Armentires to Lille."      Tillet knocked out his pipe in a   
dashboard tray and shifted his cold gray eyes to Pug. "The roads were crammed with refugees.   
Our command cars could hardly move. 
 
The Armentieres lunatic asylum had been bombed.    All the boobies had got out.    There must   
have been two thousand of them all over the road, in loose brown corduroy pajamas, moping,   
drooling, and giggling. 
 
They swarmed around our car and looked into the windows, dripping saliva, making silly   
faces, waggling their hands.    Alan turned to me. 
 
it's a rout,. 
 
Ted," he said.    'We're lost, you know, the whole BEF's lost. 
 
We've lost the damned war."    That's when I said, 'Never mind, Alan. 
 
There are a lot more lunatics on the German side of the hill, including the boss."    Well, that   
made him laugh, for the first time in days. 
 
After that he became himself again.    A word in season, the Good Book says." 
 
"Do you think Hitler's crazy?"    Henry said. 
 
Tillet chewed at his pipe, eyes on the road. "He's a split personality. Half the time he's a   
 357 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
reasonable, astute politician.    When he's beyond his depth he gets mystical, pompous, and silly.   
He informed me that the English Channel was just another river obstacle, and if he wa nted to   
cross, why, the Luftwaffe would simply operate as artillery, and the navy as engineers.   
Childish. All in all, I rather like the fellow. There's an odd pathos about him. He seems   
sincere, and lonely. Of course"there's nothing for it now but to finish him off.-Hullo, we   
almost missed that Turn.    Let's have a look at the airfield." 
 
This was Pug's first look at a scene in England that resembled beaten Poland and France.    Bent   
blackened girders hung crazily over wrecked aircraft in the hangars.    Burned-out planes stood   
in sooty skeletal rows on the field, where bulldozers were grinding around rubble heaps and   
cratered runways.    "Jerry did quite a job here," said Tillet cheerfully. 
 
"Caught us napping." The ruined airfield lay amid grassy fields dotted with wild flowers,   
where herds of brown cattle grazed and lowed. 
 
Away from the burned buildings, the air smelled like a garden. 
 
Tillet said as they drove off, 'Goering's just starting to make sense, going for the airfields and   
plane factories.    He's wasted a whole bloody month bombing harbors and pottering about after   
convoys. 
 
He's only got till the equinox, the damned fool-the Channel's impassable after about September   
the fifteenth. 
 
His mission is mastery of the air, not blockade.    Define your mission!" he snapped at Victor   
Henry like a schoolmaster.    "Define your mission! And stick to it!" 
 
Tillet cited Waterloo, lost for want of a few handfuls of nails and a dozen hammers, because a   
general forgot his mission. Marshal They's    premature cavalry charge against Wellington's   
center, he said, surprised and overran the British batteries, gaining a golden chance to spike the   
guns. 
 
But nobody had thought of bringing along hammers and nails.    "Had the), spiked those guns,"   
said Tillet    through his teeth-puffing angrily at his clenched pipe, chopping a hand on the   
steering wheel, and getting very worked up and red-faced-"had Marshal They remembered   
what the hell his charge was all about, had one Frenchman among those five thousand thought   
about his mission, we'd be living in a different world. With our artillery silenced, the next   
cavalry charge would have broken Wellin ton's center. We'd have had a French-dominated   
Europe for the next hundred and fifty years, instead of a vacuum into which the German came   
boiling up.    We fought the Kaiser in 1914 and we're fighting Adolf right now because that ass   
They forgot his mission at Waterloo-if he ever kne", it." 
 
"For want of a nail the kingdom was lost," said Pug. 
 
"Damned right!" 
 
"I don't know much about Waterloo, but I never heard that version. 
 358 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
I just remember Blucher and his Prussians showing up at sunset and saving the day." 
 
"Wouldn't have been worth a tinker's dam if They had fetched along his hammers and nails.   
By sunset Wellington would have been in full flight. Napoleon had routed Blucher three days   
earlier.    He'd have done it again with ease." 
 
The car went over the crest of a hill. Ahead, beyond green empty pastureland, lay the blue   
Channel, shining in the sun, and a hairline of French coast all ajong the horizon.    They got out   
and stood amid high grass and red poppies blowing in a cool sea breeze.    After an impressive   
silence, broken only by birdsong, Tillet said, Well, there we are. You're looking at Hitler's   
France." 
 
Turn by Turn they scanned the coast through a telescope Tillet brought out of the car's trunk.   
Small images of houses and ships shimmered on the far shore. 
 
"That's as close as Jerry's ever come," Tillet said.    "Close enough, too." 
 
"The    Germans    took all    the    neutral    attaches    on a    tour of France not    lo ng ago," Pug said.   
"Brought us clear to the coast.    The Poppies are growing over there, too.    We saw your chalk   
cliffs, and the Maginot Line guns they were pointing at you.    Now I'm looking down the wrong   
end of those guns." 
 
Tillet said, "They're no problem. They lob a few shells over for terror, but they fall in the   
fields.    Nobody's terrorized." 
 
Running westward along the coast, they passed through siicnt 
 
boarded-up villages, thickly tangled with barbed wire. 
 
Camouflaged pillboxes stood thick along the hills and in the towns. 
 
Pug saw a children's merry-go-round with the snouts of cannon peeking from under the   
platform of painted horses.      Along the Hat stony beaches, jagged iron rods spiked up,   
festooned with wire.    As waves rose and fell, queerly shaped tangles of pipe poked above the   
water. 
 
Pug said, "Well, you're not exactly unprepared." 
 
"Yes. Adolf was decent enough to give us a breather, and we've used it. Those pipes out   
beyond the waterline are just the old Greek fire idea. 
 
We set the sea ablaze with petroleum, and fry the Germans we don't drown." 
 
Barrage balloons came in sight over the hills to the west.    'Ah. 
 
Here we are."    Tillet pulled up under a spreading old tree. 
 
'Tortsmouth has two possible restaurants, but the city's taken a pasting.    They may be short of   
crockery.    I have some sandwiches and coffee in the boot." 
 359 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'Perfect."    Pug trotted up and down the road, restoring circulation to his numb heavy legs, then   
sat beside Tillet under the tree. They ate the lunch wordlessly. Tillet appeared to have no   
small talk whatever. Pug did not mind, being more or less like that himself. 
 
"Look there," Tillet said, gesturing with the last of his sandwich. In the blue sky a patch of   
orange was flowering over the city, a barrage balloon on fire.    "they're back today, after all. 
 
More coffee?" 
 
"No thanks." 
 
"Now, what's the damned fool doing hitting poor Portsmouth again? 
 
Yesterday he was going inland, where he should be."    Tillet deftly packed the lunch things and   
got his binoculars. The air vibrated with the distant thump of A.A. firing and the hum of   
planes.    "Shall we get along down there?    I imagine it's a feint.    It doesn't look like much of a   
show." 
 
"Right." 
 
Climbing in the car, Pug paused, and scanned the sky high to the east. "Look there, General."   
Tillet squinted skyward, saw nothing, and used his binoculars. His eyes    widened. "Yes.   
That's more like it." 
 
He passed the binoculars to Victor Henry.    The binoculars resolved the gray moving dot into   
swarms of airplanes moving north in tight V's across the cloudless blue. 
 
"Heinkels, a lot of log's, and some no's," Pug said.    "More than a hundred of them." 
 
"No Stukas?    They're sitting birds.    Our pilots say it's hardly sporting to go after them." 
 
"I don't see any crooked wings up there.    But they're pretty far off." 
 
"Care to join our observer corps, Captain Henry?" Tillet's Voice to him was slightly more   
cordial. 
 
More barrage balloons over Portsmouth burst into flame and went writhing lazily down in   
black smoke.    Fires were burning on the docks; white smoke trails crisscrossed the blue sky.   
The car passed a black plane nose down, burning in a grassy field, its markings hidden by   
flames, By the time they reached Portsmouth, fire fighters were streaming water on the blazes,   
and people were out in the streets gawking.    Though buildings were smashed and burning and   
rubble heaps blocked many streets, the town did not look anything like Rotterdam, or even   
some of the badly hit French towns. 
 
"Care to inspect the damage?    You're welcome to, but it's a dreary sight.    I'm thinking we might   
go straight on to the Chain Home station. 
 
Since Jerry does seem to be coming over today, you might find it interesting." 
 360 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Sure thing." 
 
They had the ferry to themselves.    The old wooden boat rolled nauseatingly on the little stretch   
of open water to the Isle of Wight. 
 
"People forget how choppy this Channel is," Said Tillet, clinging to a stanchion and raising his   
voice above the mind and the engine thump. 
 
"If the Germans do cross, they may arrive too seasick to fight. 
 
It's a factor." 
 
An olive-painted military car awaited them at the landing they drove across the bucolic island,   
passing one mansion after another shuttered and dead amid rolling wide lawns and shrubbery   
sprouting and flowering rankly.    they saw no other car on their way to a cluster of iron and   
wooden huts around steel towers thrusting toward the sky, a grim blotch on the green holiday   
island. 
 
A tubby man with a scarlet face, the group captain in charge of the station, offered them tea in   
his little office, chatting about the raid On Portsmouth.    He also mentioned with some pride a   
large sea bass which he had hauled from the surf at dawn.    "Well, shall we have a look at how   
things are going?    There's rather a large attack been laid on today, I believe." 
 
Victor Henry's first glimpse of British radar scopes at Ventnor, in a small stuffy room lit by   
one red light and foul with smoke, was a deep hock.    He listened intently to the talk of the pale,   
slender man    in gray    tweed    caned    Dr,    Cantwell,    a    civilian    scientist,    as    they   
inspected the   
scopes'. 
 
But the sharp green pips were news enough. The British were miles ahead of the United   
States.    They had mastered techniques that American ex. 
 
Plerts had told him were twenty years off. 
 
The R.A.F could measure the range and bearing of a ship down to a hundred yards or less, and   
read the result off a scope at sight.    They could do the same to a single incoming airplane, or   
count a horde of airplanes, and give the altitude too.      These instruments were marvels   
compared to the stuff that he had seen tested on the New York last year and that the Navy had   
ordered in large quantities. Pug Henry had two immediate thoughts: that the United States   
Navy had to get hold of this equipment; and that the British were far better prepared for war   
than the world knew. He admired the quiet sense of drama with which General Tillet had   
bowled    him    over. That was well    done. But    it    all hung on    the    fact    that    they    had these   
remarkable radars.      Here was a moment of confrontation between America and England   
masked in a casual visit, in an offhand atmosphere, in a smoky, dim little room smelling of   
electric machinery, on a playground island deserted by the rich, facing the displaced Maginot   
Line guns. 
 
'We have nothing like this," he said. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Then?"    said Dr.    CantweB, lighting a cigarette.    "Are you sure? 
 
They're pretty far along at MIT, we understand, with this sort of thing." 
 
'I know what we've got."    Pug saw on General Tillet's face, in the red fight, the shadowy gleam   
that comes of drawing a good hand of cards: a deepening of lines, a brightening of eyes,   
nothing more.    "How the devil do you obtain such a sharp beam?    I pressed our boys on this. 
 
The answer was that it was a question of stepping down to shorter and shorter wavelengths.   
Beyond a certain point you can't do that, they say, and still get the power to shoot out the   
pulses to any distance." 
 
The scientist nodded, his eyes almost shut, his face as blank as possible. But he too, Pug   
thought, was a happy man. 
 
Then, yes, that's the problem, isn't it?"    he mumbled.    "But they'll certainly get around to the   
answer.    It's a question of tube design, circuitry, and so forth.    Our cavity magnetron does a   
pretty good job, at that.    We're not entirely displeased with it."    "Cavity magnetron?" 
 
"Yes.    Cavity magnetron.    One gets rid of the grid in a vacuum tube, you see, and one controls   
current flow with an external magnetic field. 
 
That allows for the more powerful pulses. It takes a bit of designing, but your people will   
certainly work it up in due course." 
 
"No doubt.    Got any cavity magnetrons for sale?"    Both Tillet and Dr. 
 
Cantwell burst out laughing, and even the enlisted men at their scopes turned around and   
smiled. 
 
The scarlet-faced group captain peered at a scope where a boyish operator was chattering into a   
headphone.    "Hullo, looks like we have another circus heading this way.    Fanning up over Le   
Havre again.    A couple of dozen would you say, Stebbins?" 
 
"Thirty-seven, sir." 
 
Excitement thickened in the dark room as reports came in from several scopes.    A young duty   
officer wearing headphones strolled from scope to scope, making ngtes on a clipboard, talking   
to the operators. 
 
To PLig Henry's eye this was smooth expert work, like the controlled tumult in a submarine   
conning tower during an attack run. 
 
General Tillet said, "I take it you think rather well of our cavity magnetron." 
 
"It's a ma or breakthrough, general." 
 
"Hell.    Yeas.    Strange, isn't it, that warfare has come down to fencing with complicated toys   
that only a few seedy scholars can make or understand." 
 362 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Pretty useful toys," said Pug, watching the duty officer write down the ranges and bearings   
that the radar operators were barking. 
 
"Exact intelligence of the enemy's location and movements, without disclosing your own." 
 
"Well, of course.    We're damned grateful for our boffins.    A few Englishmen did stay awake   
while our PO]iticians kicked away air parity and all the rest of our military posture.    Well, now   
that you've had a look, would you just as soon pop back to Londonr I thought we might have to   
stay here a day or two to see action, but Jerry's been obliging.    We can break our trip overnight   
at some decent hotel, then whip up to London.    A couple of people there would like a word   
with you." 
 
Outside 10 Downing Street a single helmeted bobby paced in the morning sun, watched by a   
few sightseers on the opposite sidewalk. 
 
Remembering the grim arrays of SS men in front of Hitler's marble chancellery, Victor Henry   
smiled at this one unarmed Englishman guarding the Prime Minister's old row house.    Tillet   
brought him in, introduced him to a male secretary in a morning coat, and left.    The secretary   
led him up a wide stairway lined with portraits-Pug recognized Disraeli, Gladstone, and   
Rariisay MacDonald-and left him waiting in a broad room full of beautiful old furniture and   
splendid paintings.    Perched on a petit-point sofa, all alone, Pug had plenty of time to grow   
nervous before the secretary returned to fetch him. 
 
In a small hot cluttered room that smelled of old books and dead cigars, the corpulent old   
Prime Minister stood near the window, one hand on his hip, looking down at a spread of   
photographs on his desk. 
 
He was very short and very stooped, with graceful little hands and feet; he bulged in the   
middle, and tapered upward and downward like Tweedledum.    As he turned and went to meet   
Victor Henry, his walk was slow and heavy. With a word of welcome he shook hands and   
motioned Pug to a seat.    The secretary left.    Churchill sat in his armchair, put a hand on one   
arm, leaned back, and contemplated the American naval captain with filmy eyes. The big   
ruddy face, flecked and spotted with age, looked severe an d suspicious. He puffed at the   
stump of his cigar, and slowly rumbled, "We're going to win, you know." 
 
"I'm becoming convinced of that, Mr.    Prime Minister," Victor Henry said, trying to control his   
constricted throat and bring out normal tones. 
 
Churchill put on half-moon glasses, took up a paper and glanced at it, then peered over the rims   
at Henry.    "Your post is naval attache in Berlin.    Your President has sent you here to have a   
look at our RDF, a subject in which you have special knowledge.    He reposes much confidence   
in your judgment."    Churchill said this with a faint sarcastic note suggesting that he knew Pug   
was one more pair of eyes sent by Roosevelt to see how the British were taking the German air   
onslaught; also, that he did not mind the-, scrutiny a bit. 
 
"Yes, sir.    We call it radar." 
 363 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"What do you think of my stuff, now that you've seen it?" 
 
'The United States could use it."    Churchill uttered a pleased grunt. "Really?    I haven't had an   
opinion quite like that from an American before. Yet some of your best people here have   
visited Chain Home stations." 
 
"Maybe they don't know what we've got.    I do." 
 
"Well, then, I suggest you report to your President that we simple British have somehow got   
hold of something he can use." 
 
"I've done so."    "Good!    Now have a look at these." 
 
From under the outspread pile of photographs, the Prime Minister drew several charts and   
passed them to the American.    He dropped his gnawed stub into a shiny brass jar of sand, and   
lit a fresh cigar, which trembled in his mouth. 
 
The colored curves and columns of the charts showed destroyer and merchant ship losses, the   
rate of new construction, the increase of Nazi-held European coastline, and the rising graph of   
U-boat sinkings. 
 
It was an alarming picture.    Puffing clouds of blue and gray smoke, Churchill said that the fifty   
old destroyers were the only warships that he would ever ask of the President.    His own new   
construction would fill the gap by March.    It was a question of holding open the convoy lines   
and beating off invasion during these next eight months. 
 
Every day danger mounted, he said, but the deal was bogging down. 
 
Roosevelt wanted to announce the lease of Caribbean naval bases on British islands as a trade   
for the destroyers. But Parliament would be touchy about bartering British soil for ships.   
Moreover, the PrestihdeenBtriwtiashntefldeeat written guarantee that if the Nazis invaded and   
won, would not yield to the Germans or scuttle itself, but would steam to American ports.    "It   
is ability that I won't discuss, let alone publicly record," Churchill growled.    -The German fleet   
has had considerable practice in scuttling and surrendering.    We have had none." 
 
Churchill added-with a crafty grin that reminded Pug a bit of Franklin Roosevelt-that giving   
fifty warships to one side in a war perhaps was not a wholly friendly act toward the other side.   
Some of the President's advisers feared Hitler might declare war on the United States.    That   
was another difficulty. 
 
"There's not much danger of that," Victor Henry said. 
 
"No, not much hope of that," Churchill said, "I quite agree." His eyes under twisted brows   
looked impish as a comedian's. Victor Henry felt that the Prime Minister had paid him the   
compliment of stating his entire war policy in one wily joke. "Here's that bad man's invasion   
fleet.    Landing craft department," Churchill went on, scooping up and handing him a sheaf of   
photographs showing various oddly shaped boats, some 
 364 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
air viewed in clusters from the 
 
, some photographed close on.    "A raggle-taggle he's still scraping together.    Mostly the prahms   
they use in inland waterways. 
 
Such cockleshells will ease the task of drowning Germans, as we devoutly hope to do to the lot   
of them.    I should like you to tell your President that now is the time to get to work on landing   
craft.    We shall have to go back to France, and we shall need a lot of these.    We have got some   
fairly advanced types, based on designs I made back in 1917- Look at them, while you're here. 
 
We shall want a real Henry Ford effort." 
 
Victor Henry couldn't help staring in wonder at this slumping, smokey"reathed puddle of an   
old man, fiddling with the thick gold chain across his big black-clad belly, who with three or   
four combat divisions, with almost no guns or tanks left after Dunkirk, with his back to the   
wall before a threatened onslaught of Hitler's hundred and twenty divisions, was talking of   
invading Europe. 
 
Churchill stared back, his broad lower lip thrust out.    "Oh, I assure You we shall do it.    Bomber   
Command is growing by leaps and bounds. 
 
We shall one day bomb them till the rubble jumps, and invasion will administer the coup de   
grace.    But we shall need those landing craft." He paused, threw his head back, and glared at   
Henry. "In fact, we are prepared now to raid Berlin in force, if he dares to bomb London.   
Should that occur while you're still here, and if you don't consider it foolhardy nonsense, you   
might go along to see how it's done."    The pugnacious look faded, the wrinkled eyes blinked   
comically over the spectacles, and he spoke in slow jocular lisping rhythms. 
 
"Mind you, I don't suggest you return to your duty post by parachute. 
 
It would save time, but might be considered irregular by the Germans, who are sticklers for   
form."    Pug thought it was extremely foolhardy nonsense, but he said at once, "I'd be honored,   
of course." 
 
"Well, well.    Probably out of the question.    But it would be fun! 
 
wouldn't it?"    Churchill painfully pushed himself out of his chair, and Pug jumped up.    "I trust   
General Tillet is taking good care of you? 
 
You are to see everything here that you've a mind to, good or bad." 
 
'He's been perfect, sir." 'Tillet    is very good. His views on Gallipoli I regard as slightly   
unsound, since he makes me out at once a Cyrano, a jackass, and a poltroon."    He held out his   
hand. "I suppose you've seen a bit of Hitler. What do you    think of him?" "Very able,   
unfortunately." 
 
"He is a most wicked man.    The German badly wants tradition and authority, or this black face   
out of the forest appears.    Had we restored the Hohenzollems in igig, Hitler might still be a   
 365 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
ragged tramp, muttering to himself in a squalid Vienna doss house.    Now, alas, we must be at   
considerable trouble to destroy him.    And we shall." 
 
Churchill shook    hands at the desk.    "You were in    War Plans and you may be again.      I   
recommend that you obtain all our latest stuff on landing craft.    Ask Tillet." 
 
"Yes, sir."    "We shall require great swarms of the things.    Great. 
 
.. swarms!" 
 
Churchill swept his arms wide, and Victor Henry saw in his mind's eye thousands of landing   
craft crawling toward a beach in a gray dawn. 
 
"Thank you, Mr.    Prime Minister." 
 
General Tillet was waiting in his car.    They went to a room in the Admiralty where huge wall   
charts showed the disposition of the fleet. 
 
In the blue spaces of the Mediterranean, the Persian Gulf, and the Indian Ocean, the little   
colored pins looked sparse and lonesome, but the sowing around the home islands bristled   
thick.    Pins in a thin line marked the great-circle convoy path across the Atlantic; Tillet traced   
this line with his pipe.    "There's the problem.    We breathe through that tube.    If Jerry can cut it,   
we've bought it.    Obviously we can use some old destroyers you've got lying around from the   
last war, not doing much of anything." 
 
"Yes, so the Prime Minister said.    But there's a political problem, General.    Either Hitler's a   
menace to the United States, in which case we need everything we've got and a lot more-or he   
isn't, and in that case why should we let you have part of our Navy to fight him? 
 
I'm just giving you the isolationist argument." 
 
"Men, Yaas- Of course we hope you'll think of common traditions and all that, and the   
advantage of keeping us alive, and the possibility that the Germans and Japanese, dominating   
Europe and Asia and the oceans, might prove more disagreeable over the years than we've   
been. 
 
Now I'm still to show you those landing craft we've got up in Bristol, and Fighter Command in   
Stanmore-" 
 
"If I can, I'd also like to visit Group operations, Number Eleven Fighter Group." 
 
Tillet blinked at him.    "Number Eleven?    jolly good idea.    Take a bit of arranging, but I believe   
we can lay it on." 
 
Victor Henry sat in the lobby of the Savoy, waiting for Pamela and her fighter pilot.    Uniforms   
thronged past, with only a sprinkling of dinner jackets on white-headed or bald men. The   
young women, in colorful thin summer finery, looked like a stream of excited amorous angels.   
On the brink of being invaded by Hitler's hordes, England was the gayest place he had ever   
seen. 
 366 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
This was nothing like the glum hedonism of the French in May, going down with knives and   
forks in their hands.    Whenever the American had visited in a hard-driving week-and by now   
this included shipyards, navy and air bases, factories, government offices, and army   
maneulvershe had noted the resolute, cheerful spirit, borne out by the rise in production   
figures.    The British were beginning to turn out tanks, planes, guns, and ships as never before.   
They now claimed to be making airplanes faster than the Germans were knocking them down.   
The problem was getting to be fighter pilots. If the figures given him were true, they had   
started with somewhat more than a thousand seasoned men. 
 
Combat attrition was taking a steep toll, and to send green replacements into the sides was   
fruitless.    They could kill no Germans and the Germans could kill them.    England had to sweat   
Out 1940 with the fighter pilots on hand. 
 
But how fast was the Luftwaffe losing its own trained pilots? 
 
That was the key, Tillet said; and the hope was that Goering was already throwing everything   
in.    If so, and if the British could hold on, there would come a crack in Luftwaffe performance.   
The signal, said Tillet, might be a shift to terror bombing of the cities. 
 
"Here we    are, late as hell," chirruped Pamela, floating up    to him in a mauve silk dress.   
Pamela's flier was short, swarthy, broad-nosed, and rather stout, and his thick wavy black hair   
badly needed cutting. 
 
Except for the creased blue uniform, Flight Lieutenant Gallard looked like a young lawyer or   
businessman rather than an actor, though his brilliant blue eyes, sunken with fatigue, had a   
dramatic sparkle. 
 
Diamonds glittered in Pamela's ears.    Her hair was done up in a makeshift way.    Pug thought   
she had probably emerged from bed rather than a beauty parlor; and fair enough, in the time   
and place!    The notion gave him a pang of desire to be young and in combat.    Their table was   
waiting in the crowded grillroom.    They ordered drinks. 
 
"Orange squash," said Might lieutenant Callard. 
 
" Two dry martinis.    One orange squash.    Very good, sir," purred the silver-haired waiter, with   
a low bow. 
 
Gallard gave Victor Henry a fetching grin, showing perfect teeth; it made him seem more of an   
actor.    The fingers of his left hand were beating a brisk tattoo on the starched cloth.    "That's the   
devil of an order, isn't it, in the Savoy?" 
 
Pamela said to Pug, "I'm told he used to drink like a proper sponge, but he went on orange   
squash the day we declared war." 
 
Pug said, "My son's a Navy flier.    I wish he'd go on orange squash." 
 
"It's not a bad idea.      This business up there"-Gallard raised a thumb toward the   
ceiling-"happens fast. You've got to look sharp so as to see the other fellow before he sees   
 367 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
you. You have to react fast when you do see him, and then you have to make one quick   
decision after another. Things get mixed up and keep changing every second.    You have to fly   
that plane for dear life. Now, some of the lads thrive on drink, they say it blows off their   
steam.    I need all my steam for that work." 
 
"There's a lot I'd like to ask you," said Victor Henry.    "But probably this is your night to forget   
about the air war." 
 
"Oh?" Gallard gave Pug a long inquiring look, then glanced at Pamela. "Not a bit'. Fire   
away," 
 
"How good are they?" 
 
"The jerries are fine pilots and ruddy good shots.    Our newspaper talk about how easy they are   
makes us a little sick." 
 
"And their planes?" 
 
"The jos a fine machine, but the Spitfire's a good match for it. 
 
The Hurricane's quite a bit slower; fortunately it's much more maneuverable. 
 
Their twin-engine i io is an inferior machine, seems to handle very stiffly. 
 
The bombers of course are sitting birds, if you can get at them." 
 
"How's R.A.F morale?" 
 
Gallard Hipped a cigarette in his mouth and lit it with swift gestures of one hand, "I'd say it's   
very high. But not the way the papers tell it. Not that dashing patriotic business. I can   
remember the first time I fought Over England, when those dots appeared in the sky just where   
Fighter Control said they were, I had a bit of that feeling, I thought, rMy, damn their eyes,   
they're really trying it, and what the hell are they doing flying over my country?    Let's shoot the   
bloody bastards down!" But right away I became damn busy trying not to get shot down   
myself.    That's how it's been ever since."    He smoked in silence, his eyes de and far away, his   
fingers dancing and dancing. 
 
He shifted in the chair, as though it were too hard.    'It's a job, and we're trying to do our best. 
 
It's a lot more fighting than we had over France.    You can tell your son, Captain, that fear's a   
big factor, especially as the thing goes on and on.    The main thing is learning to live with it.   
Some chaps simply can't.    We call it LMF, lack of moral fibre.    The brute fact is that as range   
decreases, accuracy increases.    You've got to close the range. 
 
There's nothing to do about that old truth of warfare.    But there's always the chap who opens up   
and blazes away from afar, you know, and runs out of bullets and heads for home.    And there's   
the one who somehow always loses the bird he's after in the clouds, or who never finds the foe   
and aborts the mission.    One soon knows who they are. 
 368 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nobody blames them.    After a while they're posted out."    He fell silent again, looking down at   
the smoking cigarette in his damped hands, obviously absorbed in memory.    He shifted in the   
chair again, and glanced up from Victor Henry to Pamela, who was watching his face tensely.   
"Well -the long and the short of it is, it's us against the jerries, Captain Henry, and that's   
exciting.    We're flying these machines that can cross all of England in half an hour.    Excellent   
gun platforms.    Best in the world. 
 
We're doing what very few men can do or ever have done.    Or perhaps will ever do again."    He   
looked around at the elegant, grillroom full of well-dressed women and uniformed men, and   
said with an uncivilized grin, the whites showing around His eyeballs, "If excelling interests   
you, there it is'-he made the thumb gesture-"up there." "Your orange squash, sir," said the   
waiter, bowing. 
 
"And just in time," said Gallard. "I'm talking too much." Pug raised his glass to Gallard.   
"Thanks.    Good luck and good hunting." 
 
Gallard grinned, drank, and moved restlessly in the chair.    "I was an actor of sorts, you know.   
Give me a cue and I rant away.    What does your son fly?"    "SBD, the Douglas Dauntless," said   
Pug.    "He's a carrier pilot."    Gallard slowly nodded, increasing the speed of his finger tattoo.  
 
"Dive bomber." 
 
"Yes." 
 
"We still argue a lot about that.    The jerries copied it from your navy. 
 
Our command will have no part of it.    The pilot's in trouble, we say, in that straight predictable   
path.    Our chaps have got a lot of victories against the Stukas.    But then again, providing they   
get all the way down, they do lay those bombs in just where they're supposed to go. Anyhow,   
my hat's off to those carrier fellows, landing on a tiny wobbly patch at sea.    I come home to   
broad immovable mother earth, for whom I'm developing quite an affection." 
 
"Ah, I have a rival," said Pamela.    "I'm glad she's so old and so Hat." 
 
Gallard smiled at her, raising his eyebrows. "Yes, you've rather got her there, haven't you,   
Pam?" 
 
During the meal, he described in detail to Victor Henry the way fighter tactics were evolving   
on both sides.    Gallard got very caught u'p in this, swooping both palms to show maneuvers,   
pouring otrt a rapid fire of technical language.    For the first time he seemed to relax, sitting   
easily    in his chair,    grinning    with    enthusiastic    excitement.      What    he    was saving was   
vital   
intelligence and Pug wanted to remember as much as possible; he drank very little of the   
Burgundy he had ordered with the roast beef. 
 
Pamela at last complained that she was drinking up the bottle by herself. 
 
"I need all my steam, too," Pug said.    "More than Ted does." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"I'm tired of abstemious heroes.    I shall find myself a cowardly sot." 
 
Gallard was baying his second helping of roast beef and Yorkshire pudding-he was eating   
enormously, saying that he had lost almost a stone in three weeks and proposed to make it up   
in three days-when the headwaiter came to him with a written note.    Gallard crumpled it up,   
wiped a napkin across his mouth, and excused himself.    He returned in a few minutes, smiled   
at them, and resumed eating, "Pam, there's been a change," he abruptly said when his plate was   
empty.    "Our s uadron's rest off ops is cancelled. We'll get it when the weather's a little   
cooler."    He smiled at Victor Henry and drummed ten fingers on the table.    "I don't mind.    One   
gets fidgety, knowing the thing's still going on full blast and one's out of it." 
 
In the silence at the little table, Victor Henry thought that the ominousness of this summons   
went much beyond the riskiness of recalling and sending up a fatigued, edgy pilot.    It signalled   
that the R.A.F was coming to the end of its rope. 
 
Pamela said, 'I"en do you have to go back?    Tomorrow?" 
 
"Oh, I'm supposed to be on my way now, but I was damned we]] going to enjoy this company,   
and my beef." 
 
"I shall drive you to Biggin Hill," 
 
"Well, actually, they're digging the chaps out of various pubs and places of lesser repute, Pam.  
 
We'll be going up together. Those of us they can find." He glanced at his watch. "I'll be   
cracking off soon, but the evening's young. No reason for you not to go on to that Noel   
Coward show.    I've heard it's very funny." 
 
Quickly Pug said, "I think now's the time for me to leave you Ioth." 
 
The R.A.F pilot looked him straight in the eye.    'Why?    Don't you    think you    could bear   
Pamela's drunken chatter for another little while? 
 
Don't go, Here she is all tarted up for the first time in weeks." 
 
"All right," Pug said.    "I think I can bear it." 
 
The pilot and the girl stood.    Pamela said, "So soon?    Well, we shall have a nice long stroll   
through the lobby." 
 
As Pug got up and offered his hand, Ted Gallard said, "Good luck to you, Captain Henry, and   
to that son of yours in the Dauntless clive bomber. Tell him I recommend orange squash.   
Come and see us at Biggin Hill aerodrome." 
 
Left alone at the table, Pug sat and wiped his right hand with a napkin. Gallard's palm had been   
very wet. 
 
He did visit Ted Gallard's squadron, one afternoon a few days later. 
 370 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Biggin Hill lay southeast of London, squarely in the path of incoming German bombers from   
the nearest airfields across the Channel. 
 
The Luftwaffe was persisting in a fierce effort to knock out Biggin Hill, and the aerodrome was   
a melancholy scene: wrecked aircraft, burned-out roofless hangars, smashed runways,   
everywhere the inevitable stinks of burned wood, broken drains, blown-up earth, and smashed   
plaster.    But bulldozers were snorting here and there, patching the runways, and a co uple of   
planes landed as Pug arrived. On stubby fighters dispursed all over the field, mechanics in   
coveralls were climbing and tinkering, with much loud cheerful profanity.    The aerodrome was   
very much in business. Gallard looked very worn, yet happier than he had been in the Savoy   
Grill.    In the dispersal hut he introduced Pug Henry to a dozen or so hollow-eyed, dishevelled   
lads in wrinkled uniforms, fleece-lined boots and yellow lifejackets, lounging about on chairs   
and iron cots, either bareheaded or with narrow blue caps tilted over one eye.    The arrival of an   
American Navy captain in mufti dried up the talk, and for a while the radio played jazz in the   
awkward silence.    Then one pink-cheeked fellow who looked as though he had never shaved,   
offered Pug a mug of bitter tea, with a friendly insult about the uselessness of navies.    He had   
been    shot    down    by a    British    destroyer    in    the    Channel, he said,    and    so might be 
slightly   
prejudiced.    Pug said that speaking for the honor of navies, he regretted the idiocy; but as a   
friend of England, he approved the marksmanship. That brought a laugh, and they began   
talking about flying again, self-consciously for a while, but then forgetting the visitor. Some of   
the slang baffled him, but the picture was clear enough: everlasting alert, almost no sleep, too   
many airplanes lost in accidents as well as combat, far too many German fighters, and   
desperate, proud, nervous high 
 
Mk 
 
spirits in the much reduced squadron.    Pug gathered that almost half the pilots that had started   
the war were dead. 
 
When the six o'clock news came on, the talk stopped and all huddled around the radio.    It had   
been a day of minor combat, but again the Luftwaffe had come off second best in planes shot   
down, at a rate of about three to two. The fliers made thumbs-up gestures to each other,   
boyishly grinning. 
 
"They're fine lads," Gallard said, walking Victor Henry back to his car. "Of course, for your   
benefit they cut the talk about girls. 
 
I'm the middle-aged man of the squadron, and I get left out of it too, pretty much. 
 
When they're not flying, these chaps have the most amazing experiences." 
 
He gave Pug a knowing grin.    "One wonders how they manage to climb into their cockpits, but   
they do, they do." 
 
"It's a good time to be alive and young," Pug said. 
 
"Yes.    You asked me about morale.    Now you've seen it."    At the car, as they shook hands,   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gallard said diffidently, "I owe you thanks." 
 
"You do?    Whatever for?" 
 
"Pamela's coming back to England.      She told me that when they met you by chance in   
Washington, she was trying to make up her mind.    She decided to ask you about it, and was   
much impressed by what you said." 
 
"Well, I'm flattered.    I believe I was right.    I'm sure her father's surviving nicely without her." 
 
"Talky?    He'll survive us all." 
 
It's not going well," general Tillet said, maneuvering his car through a beetle-cluster of wet   
black taxicabs at Marble Arch. The weather had lapsed into rain and fog; pearl-gray murk   
veiled a warm, sticky, unwarlike London.    Umbrella humps crowded the sidew.    The tall red   
omnibuses glistened wetly; so did the rubber ponchos of the bobbies. The miraculous summer   
weather had given the air battle an exalting radiance, but today London wore a dreary   
peacetime morning face. 
 
'The spirit at Biggin Hill is damned good," Pug said. 
 
"Oh, were you there?    Yes, no question about spirit!    It's the arithmetic that's bad.    Maybe the   
Fat Boy's getting low on fighter pilots, too.    We are, that's Hat.    Perilously low.    One doesn't   
know the situation on the other side of the hill.    One hangs on and hopes." 
 
The rain trailed off as they drove.    After a while the sun hazily sbonc Out on wet endless rows   
of identical grimy red houses, and sunlight shafted into the car.      Tillet said, "Well, our   
meteorology blokes are on top of their job.    They said the bad weather wouldn't hold, and that   
Jerry would probably be flying today.    Strange, the only decent English summer in a century,   
and it comes along in the year the Hun attacks from the sky." 
 
"Is that a good or bad break?" 
 
"It's to his advantage for locating his target and dropping his bombs. 
 
But our interceptors have a better chance of finding him and shooting him down.    Given the   
choice, our chaps would have asked for clear skies." 
 
He talked of Napoleon's luck with weather, and cited battles of Charles XII and Wallenstein   
that had turned on freak storms. Pug enjoyed Tillet's erudition. He was in no position to   
challenge any of it, and wondered who was.    Tillet appeared to have total kno%vledge of every   
battle ever fought, and he could get as annoyed with Xerxes or Caesar for tactical stupidity, as   
he was with Hermann Goering.    About an hour later they came to a town, drove along a canal   
of very dirty water, and turned off to a compound of sooty buildings surrounded by a high wire   
fence. 
 
A soldier at the gate saluted and let them pass.    Pug said, "Where are we?" 
 
"Uxbridge.    I believe you wanted to have a look at Group Operations, Number Eleven Fighter   
 372 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Group," said Tillet. 
 
"Oh, yes."    In three weeks, Tillet had never once mentioned the request and Victor Henry had   
never repeated it. 
 
A flight lieutenant with a pleasant chubby round face met them. 
 
He was a lord, but Tillet clicked the long name out too crisply for Pug to catch it.    His lordship   
conducted them out of the bright sunshine, down and down a long turning stairway into the   
ground.    "One rather expects to encounter a white rabbit, doesn't one, Captain?"    he fluted in   
Oxonian tones. "Hurrying by consulting its pocket watch, and all that. Nothing here that   
interesting, I'm afraid." 
 
They entered a shallow balcony in a small strange theatre.    In place of the stage and curtain   
stood a black wall full of columns of electric bulbs, white except for a single line of red lamps   
near the top.    At the side of the wall was a column of R.A.F terms for stages of readiness. On   
the floor below, twenty or so girls in uniform, some wearing headphones on long lines, worked   
around a large-scale table map of southern England.    On either wall, in glassed boxes like radio   
control booths, men with headphones scrawled at desks.    The place had an underground, earth- 
andcement smell, and it was quiet and cool. 
 
"Burne-Wilke, here's your American visitor," said Tillet. 
 
The blond officer sitting in the middle of the balcony turned, smiling. "Hullo there!    Frightfully   
glad to hear you were coming. 
 
Here, sit by me, won't you?"    He shook hands with them.    "Nothing much doing yet, but there   
will be soon. The bad weather's drifting clear of the Channel, and Jerry's getting airborne."   
Burne-Wilke rubbed his bony pink chin with one hand, giving Pug a quizzical glance. 
 
"I say, those aeroplanes you rounded up have proven ever so useful." 
 
"They can't play in this league," Pug said. 
 
"They're excellent on patrol. They've done some smart punishing of invasion barges. The   
pilots are keen on them." Burne-Wilke looked him in the eye. "See here, could you have   
produced those planes in two days?" 
 
Pug only grinned. 
 
Burne-Wilke shook his head and caressed his wavy hair.    "I was sorely tempted to take you up.   
But you struck me as a chap who might just bring it off, and then we'd have looked proper   
fools.    Hullo, there's a mutual friend.    Didn't I first meet you with the Tudsburys, in a sweaty   
Washington receiving line?" 
 
Pamela was walking in to take the place of another girl.    She looked UP, threw Victor Henry a   
smile, then got to work, and did not glance his way again. 
 
"This is all fairly clear, isn't it?"    said Burne-Wilke, gesturing toward the map and the wall.   
 373 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Fighter Command at Stanmore is responsible for air defense, but it lets each group run its own   
show. 
 
Our beat is southeast England.    It's the hot spot, closest to the Germans, and London's here." 
 
He swept one lean arm toward the wall, straight up and down. 
 
"Those six columns of, lamps stand for our group's six fighter control stations. 
 
Each vertical row of lights stands for one fighter squadron.    All in all, twenty-two squadrons.   
In theory, we dispose of more than five hundred fighter pilots."    Burne-Wilke wrinkled his lips.   
"In theory. 
 
just now we're borrowing pilots from other groups.    Even so, we're way under.    However..."   
He gestured toward the bottom part of the black wall, where white lights burned in a ragged   
pattern.    "Going up the wall, you step up in readiness, dU you get to AMORNE, ENEMY iN   
siGiErr, and of course IENGA.    That's the red row of lamps.    Our six substations talk to us and   
to the pilots.    Here we put together the whole picture. If things warm up enough, the air vice- 
marshal may come in and run the show.-Oh, yes. 
 
Those poor devils under glass on the left collect reports from our ground observer corps, on the   
right from our anti-aircraft.    So all the information about German planes in our air will show up   
here fairly fast." 
 
Pug was not quite as surprised as he had been at Ventnor.    He knew of the system's existence;   
but this close view awed him. "Sir, aren't you talking about a couple of hundred thousand   
miles of telephone cable? 
 
Thousands of lines, a forest of equipment?    When did all this spring into being?" 
 
"Oh, we had the plan two years ago.    The politicians were aghast at the money, and balked.   
Right after Munich we got our budget.    It's an ill wind, eh?    Hullo, here we go.    I believe Jerry's   
on his way." 
 
On the black wall, white lights were starting to jump upward.    The young lord at Burne-Wilkes   
elbow gave him a telephone.    Burne-Wilke talked brisk R.A.F abracadabra, his eyes moving   
from the wall to the map table. Then he handed back the telephone.    "Yes. Chain Home at   
Ventnor now reports several attacks forming up or orbiting.    Two of them are forty-plus, one   
sixty-plus." 
 
Tillet said, "Goering's been an abysmal donkey, hasn't he, not to knock out our Chain Home   
stations?    It will prove his historic mistake." 
 
"Oh, he has tried," Burne-Wilke said.    "It isn't so easy.    Unless one hits a steel tower dead on   
and blows it to bits, it just whips about like a palm tree in a storm, then steadies down." 
 
"Well, he should have gone on trying." 
 
White lights kept moving up the board. An air of business was settling over the operations   
 374 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
room, but nobody moved in an excited way, and the hum of voices was low. The air vice- 
marshal appeared, a spare stern sparse-moustached man, with a sort of family resemblancp to   
General Tillet.    He ignored the visitors for a while as be paced, then said hello to Tillet with a   
surprising warm smile that made him look kind and harmless. 
 
The first lights that leaped to red were in the column of the Biggin Hill control station.    Victor   
Henry saw Pamela glance up at these lights. 
 
On the table, where she busily continued to lay arrows and numbered discs with the other girls,   
a clear picture was forming of four flights of attackers, moving over southern England on   
different    courses. The reports    of the telephone    talkers    on the floor merged    into a steady   
subdued buzz.    There was not much chatting in the balcony. 
 
Henry sat overwhelmed with spectator-sport fascination, as one by one the red lamps began to   
come on.    Within twenty minutes or so, half the squadrons on the board were blinking red. 
 
"That's about it," Burne-Wilke said off handedly, breaking away from giving rapid orders.   
"We've got almost two hundred planes engaged. The others stand by to cover, when these land   
to refuel and rearm." 
 
"Have you ever had red lights across the board?" 
 
Burne-Wilke wrinkled his mouth.    "Now and then.    It's not the situation of choice.    We have to   
call on other fighter groups then to cover for us, and just now there's not much left in reserve." 
 
Far away and high in the blue sky, thought Pug, forcing himself to picture it, planes were now   
darting and twisting in and out of clouds in a machine joust to the death of German kids and   
British kids, youngsters like Warren and Byron.    Pamela's pudgy actor, cold sober on orange   
squash, was up there in his yellow life jacket, flying at several hundred miles an hour, watching   
his rearview mirror for a square white nose, or squirting his guns at an onrushing airplane with   
a black cross on it. 
 
Two of the Biggin Hill fights moved up to white: RETURNINg, 13ASE. 
 
"These things seldom last longer than an hour or so from the time Jerry starts," said Burne- 
Wilke. "He runs dry rather fast and has to head back. They keep falling in the sea like   
exhausted bats. 
 
Prisoners say that the Luftwaffe has given the Channel an impolite name-roughly equivalent to   
your American 'shit creek."' Within a few minutes, the red lights blinked off one by one.    The   
air vice-marshal left.    Below, the girls began clearing markers off the table. 
 
Lord Burne-Wilke spoke on the telephone, collecting reports.    He put slender, hairy hands over   
his face and rubbed hard, then turned to Pug, his eyes reddened. "Wouldn't you like to say   
hello to Pamela Tudsbury?" 
 
"Very much.    How did it go?" 
 375 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Widi a weary shrug, Burne-Wilke said, "One can't stop every bomber. 
 
I'm afraid quite a number got through and did their work.    Often once the fires are out, things   
don't look so bad.    We lost a number of planes.    So did they.    The count takes a day or so to   
firm up.    I think we did all right." 
 
As Pug went out with the young lord, leaving Tillet conversing with the slumped senior officer,   
he glanced back at the theatre.    On the wall, all lights were burning at or near the bottom again.   
The room was very quiet, the earth smell strong.    The staircase to the surface seemed very long   
and steep. Pug felt drained of energy, though he had done nothing but sit and watch. He   
puffed and panted and was glad to see the daylight.    Pamela stood in the sun outside in a blue   
uniform. 
 
" Well, you made it, but not on the best day.    Ted's down."    Her voice was calm, even chatty,   
but she gave his hand a nervous squeeze in two ice-cold hands. 
 
"Are you sure?" 
 
"Yes.    He may have parachuted, but his plane dove into the sea. 
 
Two of his squadron mates reported it.    He's down."    She clung to his hand, looking into his   
face with glistening eyes. 
 
"Pam, as you've said, they often climb out of the water, and go right back to work." 
 
"Oh, certainly.    Leave that to Ted.    I've asked for a special pass. I think I shall come to London   
this evening.    Would you buy me a dinner?" 
 
A week passed, and another, and Gallard did not return.      Pamela came several times to   
London.    Once Victor Henry remarked that she appeared to be fighting the war only when it   
suited her. "I am behaving shockingly," she said, " using every trick I know, presuming on   
everybody's sympathy and good nature, and pushing them all much too far. I shall soon be   
confined to camp until further notice.    By then you'll be gone. 
 
Meantime you're here." 
 
It became a settled thing among the Americans that Pug Henry had found himself a young   
W.A.A.F. To cheer her up, he took her often to Fred Fearing's apartment on Belgrave Square,   
the center for the partying American-British crowd.    Shortly after the Christmas night row with   
Rhoda, the Germans had expelled Fearing for telling the truth about some bomb damage in   
Hamburg.    Fearing was having such a good time with the London girls that, as he put it, he   
often arrived at the broadcasting studio on his hands and knees. His thrilling and touching   
word pictures of England at war were stirring up so much sympathy in the United States that   
isolationists were claiming he was obviously in the pay of the British. 
 
The second time Victor Henry brought Pamela to the apartment, Fearing remarked, catching   
Pug alone for a moment in the hallway, "Aren't you the sly one, Reverend Henry?    She's small,   
but saucy." 
 376 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"She's the daughter of a guy I know." 
 
"Of course.    Talky Tudsbury.    Old pal of mine, too." 
 
"Yes.    That's who she is.    Her fiance's an R.A.F pilot missing in action." 
 
Fearing's big knobby face lit in an innocent smile.    "Just so. 
 
She might enjoy a little consolation." 
 
Pug looked up at him. The correspondent was over six feet tall, and heavily built. "How   
would you enjoy getting knocked on your ass?" 
 
Fearing's smile went away.    "You mean it, Pug?" 
 
"I mean it." 
 
"Just asking.    What do you hear from Rhoda?" 
 
"She misses me, New York stinks, she's bored, and the weather is unbearably hot." 
 
"Situation normal.    Good old Rhoda." 
 
The other men who drifted in and out of the apartment, usually with a woman, usually more or   
less drunk-observers from the Army and the Air Corps, correspondents, film actors,   
businessmen-danced or bantered with Pamela, but otherwise let her alone, assuming she was   
Victor Henry's deary. 
 
Once, early in September, when they were having a drink in her apartment and joking about   
this, Pug said, "'Lechery, lechery-still wars and lechery-nothing else holds fashion."' She   
widened her eyes at him. "Why, bless me.    He's a Shakespeare scholar, too." 
 
"Aside from Western stories, Pamela, practically the only things I read for recreation are the   
Bible and Shakespeare," Pug said, rather solemnly.    "It's always time well spent.    You can get   
through a lot of Shakespeare in a Navy career." 
 
"if "Well, there's precious little lechery around here," said Pamela. 
 
people only knew." 
 
"Are you complaining, my girl?" 
 
"Certainly not, you leathery old gentleman.    I can't imagine how your wife endures you." 
 
"Well, I'm good, patient, uncomplaining company." 
 
"God love you, you are that." 
 
At this point the air raid sirens started their eerie moaning and wailing-a heart-stopping noise   
no matter how often Pug heard it. 
 377 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"My God!"      said Pamela.      "There they come!      This is it.      Where on earth is Fighter   
Command?"    She stood with Victor Henry on the little balcony outside her living room, still   
holding her highball glass, staring at arrays    of bombers in wide ragged V's as they sailed   
through a bright blue sky, starkly visible in yellowing late sunlight. 
 
Anti-aircraft bursts all around and through the formations looked like white and black powder   
puffs, and seemed to be having no more effect. 
 
"Tangling with the fighter escort further south, I'd guess." 
 
Victor Henry's voice shook.    The number of bombers staggered him. 
 
The mass of machines was poming on like the invaders in a futuristic movie, filling the air with   
a throbbing angry hum as of a billion bees. 
 
The pop and thump of scattered anti-aircraft guns made a pitiful counterpoint.    One V-wave   
passed; in the azure distance several more appeared, swelling to unbelievable width and   
numbers as they drew over the city.    The bombers were not very high, and the A.A. seemed to   
be exploding dead inside the V's, but on they thrummed.    The muffled thunder of bomb hits   
boomed over the city, and pale flame and smoke began billowing up in the sunshine. 
 
Pug said, "Looks like they're starting on the docks." 
 
"Shall I get you another drink? I must, I must have one." She took his glass and hurried   
inside. 
 
More bombers kept appearing from the southeast.    Pug wondered whether General Tillet could   
be right; was this a sign of weakening, a play of Goering's last card?    Some show of weakness!   
Yet a heavy toll of an fighter escorts must be paying for the incredibly serene overflight of   
these bomber waves.    The British fighters could knock these big slow machines down like tin   
ducks. They had proved that long ago, yet On the bombers came, sailing unscathed across   
London's sky from horizon to horizon, an awesome pageant of flying machinery. 
 
She brought the drinks and peered at the sky.    "Why, God help us, there's more of them!" 
 
She leaned against the rail, touching shoulders. He put his arm around her and she nestled   
against him.    So they stood together, watching the Luftwaffe start its effort to bomb London to   
its knees. 
 
It was the seventh of September. 
 
Along the river more and bigger fires shot skyward in great billows of dirty smoke.    Elsewhere   
in the city random small blazes were flaring up from badly aimed bombs.    After the first shock,   
there was not much terror in the sight.    The noise was far off, the patches of fire meager and   
dispersed in the red and gray expanse of untouched buildings. London was a very, very large   
city.    The Fat Boy's big try was not making much of a dent after all.    Only along the burning   
Thames embankment was there a look of damage.    So it seemed, in the view from Pamela's   
balcony of the first allout Valhalla attack. 
 378 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
So it seemed too in Soho, where they went to dine after the all clear. 
 
The Londoners thronging the sidewalk looked excited, undisruayed, even elated. Strangers   
talked to each other, laughed, and pointed thumbs up. 
 
The traffic flowed thick as ever.    There was no trace of damage on the street.    Distant clangs of   
fire engines and a heavy smokiness overhead remained the only traces, in this part of town, of   
Goering's tremendous attempt.    Queues even stood as usual outside the movie houses, and the   
stage box offices were briskly selling tickets too. 
 
When they walked in twilight down toward the Thames, after an excellent Italian dinner, the   
picture began to change.    The smell of smoke grew stronger; flickering red and yellow light   
gave the low clouds, thickened by ever-billowing smoke, a look of inferno.    The crowds in the   
street grew denser.    It became an effort to push through. 
 
The people here were more silent and grave. Henry and Pamela came to roped-off streets   
where amid noise and steam, shouting firemen dragged hoses toward blackened buildings and   
streamed water at tongues of fire licking out of the windows. 
 
Pamela skirted through alleys and side streets till they emerged on the riverbank into a mob of   
onlookers. 
 
Here an oppressive stench of burning fouled the air, and the river breeze brought gusts of fiery   
heat in the warm summer night. A low moon shone dirty red through the rolling smoke.   
Reflections of the fires on the other bank flickered in the black water.    The bridge was slowly   
disgorging a swarm of refugees, some with carts, baby carriages, and wheelchairs, a poor   
shabby lot for the most part, many workmen in caps, and a horde of ill-dressed children who   
alone kept their gaiety, running here and there as they came. 
 
the smoke, Victor Henry looked up at the sky.    Above rifts in the stars shimmered. 
 
"It's a very clear night, you know," he said. "These fires are a beacon they can see for a   
hundred miles.    They may come back."    e. I'm Pamela said coldly and abruptly, "I must return   
to Uxbridg beginning to feel rotten."    She looked down at her flimsy gray dress.    "But I seem to   
be slightly out of uniform." The sirens began their hideous screaming just as Pug and Pamela   
found a taxicab, many blocks from the river. "Come along," said the wizened little driver,   
touching his cap.    "Business as usual, wot?    And to jell 
 
with 'Itler!" 
 
tched the start of the night raid from the balcony victor Henry waned b while she changed.    His   
senses were sharpe v the destruction, the excitement, the peculiar beauty of the fire panorama   
and the swaying blue-white searchlight beams, the thick thrumming of a number of motors,   
and the thump-thump of the anti-aircraft, going out on the gloomy moonlit balcony in her   
Pamela Tudsbury, in her W.A.A.F uniform," appeared to him the most desirable young female   
on God's    earth.    She looked -honer because of the low-heeled    shoes, but the severe garb   
made,her small figure all the sweeter.    So he thought. 
 379 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"they're here?"    she said. 
 
"Arriving."    to his.    Again he held her with one 
 
Again she leaned her shoulder 
 
encircling arm.    "Damn, the bastards just can't nliss," he said, "with those fires to guide them." 
 
"Berlin can catch fire, too."    Pamela suddenly looked about as ugly as she could: a grim, nasty   
face with hate scored on it in the red paint of her mouth. 
 
New fires sprang up along the river, and spread and ran into the big fire.    More blazes flared   
out of the darkness far from the Thames. Still, most of the vast city remained black and still.    A   
tiny bomber came toppling down through the smoky sky, burning like a cancllewick, transfixed   
by 
 
two crossing searchlights.    t more of them.    Please." 
 
"Oh God, they got him. They got one. Ge And in short order two more bombers fell-one   
plunging straight down in a blaze like a meteor, the other circling and spiralling black smoke   
until it exploded in midair like a distant firecracker.    In a moment they heard the sharp pop. 
 
"Ah, lovely.    Lovely!" 
 
The telephone rang. 
 
"Well!" she laughed harshly. "Uxbridge, no doubt, screaming for their little fugitive from   
duty. Possibly inviting me to a court-martial." She returned after a moment with a puzzled   
face.    "It seems to be for YOU." 
 
"Who?"    "Wouldn't say.    Sounded important and impatient." 
 
General Tillet said, "Ah, Henry.    jolly good.    Your friend Fearing suggested I try you here.    Ah,   
you do recall, don't you, when you paid a little morning call a couple of weeks ago on a portly   
old gentleman, he mentioned that you might want to go along on a little expedition that was in   
the works?    A trip to familiar foreign scenes?" 
 
A tingle ran down Victor Henry's spine.    'I remember." 
 
"Well, the trip seems to be on.    I'm to meet you tonight when this nuisance stops, to give you   
the details, if you're interested.-I say, are you there, Henry?" 
 
'Yes, General.    Will you be going on the trip?" 
 
"Me?    Good God, dear chap, no.    I'm a timid old fellow, quitL4 
 
unsuited for the rigors of travel.    Besides, I haven't been asked." 
 
"When is the trip?"    "I gather they'll be leaving tomorrow, some time." 
 380 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'Can I call you back?" 
 
'I'm supposed to pass your answer along within the hour."    'I'll call you back very soon."    'Jolly   
good."    "Tell me this.    Do you think I should go?" 
 
'Why, since you ask, I think you'd be insane.    Damned hot where they're going.    Worst time of   
year.    You have to be very fond of that kind of scenery.    Can't say I an-L" 
 
"Are you at the same number?" 
 
'No."    Tillet gave him another number.    "I'm sitting here and waiting. 
 
As he came out on the balcony, she turned to well, her face alight. 
 
"They've got two more.    Our night fighters must be up.    At least we're getting some of our own   
back."    Pug peered out at the fantastic show-the fires, the searchlight beams, the skybing pillars   
of red and yellow smoke over the lampless city. 
 
"I gave you some good advice in Washington. Or you thought it was good advice." "Yes,   
indeed."    Her eyes searched his.    "Mo telephoned you?" 
 
"Come inside.    I'll take that drink now." 
 
They sat in two armchairs near the open french windows to the balcony. He leaned forward,   
elbows on his knees, holding the glass in his cupped hands. "Pamela, the R.A.F will be   
bombing Berlin tomorrow night, and it seems I'm invited along as an observer." 
 
The girl's face in the shadowy light went taut.    She took her lower lip in her teeth, and looked   
at him so.    It was not an attractive expression. 
 
Her eyes were round as an owl's.    "I see.    Shall you go?" 
 
"That's what I'm wondering.    I think it's a goddamned idiotic notion, and General Tillet agrees,   
but meantime he's reported the invitation. I've got to accept it or duck it." 
 
"Strange they'd ask you.    You're not Air Force." 
 
"Your Prime Minister mentioned it in passing when I saw him. He apparently has a good   
memory." 
 
"Do you want my opinion?" 
 
"That's what I'm asking for." 
 
"Decline.    Quickly, firmly, and finally." 
 
"All right, why?" 
 
"It's not your business.    It's especially not the business of America's naval attache in Berlin." 
 
"True." 
 381 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Your chances of returning are something like three out of five. 
 
It's miserably unfair to your wife." 
 
"That N,a' my'first thought."    Pug paused, looking out of the balcony doors, In the night the   
A.A. snapped and thumped, and searchlights swayed blue fingers across the blackness.    "Still,   
your Prime Minister thinks there'd be some purpose in my going." 
 
Pamela Tudsbury Hipped her hand in a quick irritated gesture. 
 
"Oh, rot.    Winnie is a perpetual undergraduate about combat.    He probably wishes he could go   
himself, and imagines everyone's like him. 
 
He got himself unnecessarily captured in South Africa long ago. 
 
Why, in May and June he flew over to France time after time, got in the hair of the generals,   
and skittered around the front making a frightful nuisance of himself. 
 
He's a great man, but that's one of his many weaknesses." 
 
Victor Henry lit a cigarette and took deep puffs, turning the match packet round and round in   
his fingers.    "Well, I'm supposed to call General Tillet pretty damn quick.    I'd better do that."   
He reached for the telephone. 
 
She said quickly, "Wait a minute.    What are you going to say?" 
 
"I'm going to accept." 
 
Pamela drew a sharp noisy breath, and said, "Why did you ask my opinion, then?" 
 
"I thought you might voice a good objection that hadn't occurred to "You gave the best   
objection yourself.    It's idiotic." 
 
"I'm not positive.    My job is intelligence.    This is an extraordinary opportunity.    There's also a   
taunt in it, Pamela.    The U.S. Navy's out of the war, and I'm here to see how you're taking it.  
 
Question, how will I take it?    It's hard to duck that one." 
 
"You're reading too much into it.    What would your President say to this?    Did he send you   
here to risk getting killed?" 
 
"After the fact he'd congratulate me."    'If you returned to be congratulated." 
 
As he reached for the telephone again, Pamela Tudsbury said, 'I shall wind up with Fred   
Fearing. Or his equivalent" That. stopped the motion of Pug's arm. She said, 'I'm in dead   
earnest.    I miss Ted horribly. 
 
I shall not be able to endure missing you.    I'm much more attached to you than you are.    And   
I'm not at all moral, you know.    You have very wrong ideas about me."    The seams in his face   
were sharp and deep as he peered at the angry girl.    The thumping of his heart made speech   
 382 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
difficult.    "It isn't very moral to hit below the belt, I'll say that." 
 
"You don't understand me.    Not in the least.    On the Bremen you took me for a schoolgirl, and   
you've never    really changed.    Your wife    has    somehow kept    you    remarkably    innocent    for   
twenty-five years." 
 
Victor Henry said, 'Pam, I bonesdy don't think I was born to be shot down over Berlin in a   
British bomber.    I'll see you when I get back." 
 
He telephoned Tillet, while the girl stared at him with wide angry eyes. "Ass!" she said.   
"Ass?" YOUNGSTER in greasy coveralls poked his head through the open door. 
 
A "Sir, the briefing's begun in B flight crew room." 
 
"Coming," said Pug, struggling with unfamiliar tubes, clasps, and straps.    The flying suit was   
too big.    It had not been laundered or otherwise cleaned in a long time, and smelled of stale   
sweat, grease, and tobacco. 
 
Quickly Pug pulled on three pairs of socks and thrust his feet into fleccelined boots, also too   
big. 
 
"What do I do with these?" Pug gestured at the raincoat and tweed suit he had folded on a   
chair. 
 
"They'll be right there when you get back, sir." 
 
Their eyes met.    In that glance was complete mutual recognition that, for no very good reason,   
Pug was going out to risk death.    The young man looked sorry for him, and also wryly amused   
at the Yank officer's predicament.    Pug said, "What's your name?" 
 
"Aircraftsman Horton, sir." 
 
"Well, Aircraftsman Horton, we seem to be about the same size.    If I forget to pick up that suit   
or something, it's all yours." 
 
"Why, thank you, sir." The young man's grin became broad and sincere. "That's very fine   
tweed." 
 
Several dozen men in flying clothes slouched in the darkened room, their pallid faces attentive   
to the wing commander, who motioned the alking about the primary and secondary targets in   
Berlin, using a long pointer at a gray, grainy aerial picture of the German capital blown up on a   
large screen.    Victor Henry had driven or walked past both targets often.    One was a power   
plant, the other the main gasworks of Berlin. 
 
It made him feel decidedly odd to discern, in the Grunewald area, the lake beside which the   
Rosenthal house stood. 
 
"All right, let's have the opposition map." 
 383 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Another slide of Berlin flashed on the screen, marked with red and orange symbols, and the   
officer discussed anti-aircraft positions and search light belts. The tiers listened to the dull   
droning voice raptly. 
 
"Lights." 
 
Bare lamps in the ceiling blazed up. The bomber crews blinked and shifted in their chairs.   
Rolled up, the screen uncovered a green-and-brown map of Europe, and over it a sign in large   
red block letters: BETTER TO KEEP YOUR MOUTH SHUT AND LET PEOPLE THINK   
YOU'RE A FOOL, THAN TO OPEN IT    AND REMOVE ALL DOUBT. 
 
"All right, that's about it.    Berlin will be on the alert after all the stuff they've been dumping on   
London, so look alive."    The wing commander leaned his pointer against the wall, put hands on   
hips, and changed to an offhand tone: "Remember to be careful of the moon.    Don't fly directly   
into it, you'll look like a cat on a Christmas card. When you've done your stuff, get your   
photographs, shove the nose down, and pedal home downMI as fast as you can.    Keep Very   
pistols loaded and have those photoflash bombs handy.    Work fast, the flak will be heavy. 
 
Incidentally, our American observer will be flying in F for Freddie. 
 
He's Admiral Victor Henry, one of the least prudent officers in the United States Navy." 
 
Faces turned to Pug, who cleared his throat.    'Sir, maybe I'll be entitled to the field promotion   
when I get back, but I'm only Captain Henry." 
 
"The promotion stands for this mission," said the wing commander with a laugh.    "You deserve   
it!" 
 
He went out.    After a silence a boy's voice behind Pug piped, "Anybody who'd go on a ruddy   
mission like this when he ruddy well doesn't have to, should be in a ruddy loony bin." 
 
A short skinny flier with heavy, crinkling black hair and bloodshot little eyes approached him,   
holding out a paper box crudely tied with red ribbon.    "Admiral, a little token of welcome from   
the squadron." 
 
Pug opened the box and took out a roll of toilet paper. He glanced around at the expectant   
white amused faces. 
 
"I'm touched.    But I don't think I'll be needing this, inasmuch as I'm already scared shitless." 
 
He got a good laugh.    The little flier offered his hand.    "Come along with me, Admiral.    I'm   
Peters, the sergeant navigator of F for Freddie." 
 
He took him to a row of lockers and gave the American his parachute, showing him how to clip   
it to his chest.    He also handed him a paper sack with his ration. 
 
'Now you don't wear your chute.    That's a good chute.    You just stow it where it'll be handy in a   
hurry.    It's hard enough moving around inside the Wimpy, you'll find, without that thing on.   
Now you'll want    to meet the    pilots.      They're    Flight    lieutenant    Kirlian    and    Sergeant   
Pilot   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Johnson. 
 
Tiny, we call the sergeant."    He conducted Victor Henry to a small room where the two pilots   
were studying and marking up maps of Berlin. 
 
The    lieutenant,    who had the furrowed brow    and neat    little    mustache    of an assistant    bank   
manager, was using a magnifying glass.    Sergeant Tiny Johnson, booted feet on the desk, was   
holding the map up and glaring at it.    "HuJ]o! 
 
Brassed off, I ain, Adii-ural," he said, ",ben Peters introduced Victor Henry. 
 
"Ruddy well brassed off."    He was a large fellow with a ham face and thik lips. 
 
"Pack it up, Tiny," said the first pilot. "Brassed off, I say.    A nine-hour sweat just for us.    While   
those twerps 
 
i the Channel coast to hit 
 
in all the other sqlladrons go for a quick one on the invasion barges, and then home for tea,   
mother.    I've been over Berlin. 
 
I don't like it." 
 
"You've Then,er stopped boasting about being over Berlin," said the skipper, drawing lines on   
the map. 
 
"Rottenest moment of my life," said the sergeant, with a rolling side glance at Victor Henry.   
"Ruddiest thickest flak you ever saw. 
 
Masses of searchlights turning the night into day."    He got up yawning. 
 
"Brassed off, that's what I am, mates.    Brassed off.    You're a brave man, Admiral." 
 
He went out. 
 
"Tiny's a good pilot," said the first pilot in upper-class tones, tucking the map into a canvas   
pouch.    "He does talk a lot." 
 
The six men of the F for Freddie crew gathered under a naked light in a hallway for a last word   
from Flight Lieutenant Killian, reading notes on a clipboard Aside from the theatrical-looking   
flying suits and life vests, they seemed like any half-dozen young men off any London street.   
The wireless operator was thin and somewhat ratty; the rear gunner was a fresh-faced boy- 
almost a child, Pug thought-on his first operational flight; the pimply front gunner vulgarly   
worked chewing gum in long jaws.    Only their nervy, apprehensive, adventurous, and cheerful   
look was unusual. 
 
The warm night was studded with summer stars: Vega, Deneb, Altair, Arcturus-the old   
navigation aids reliably twinklidg away. The senior pilot went aboard the plane. The crew   
lounged on the grai;s nearby. 
 385 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"F for Freddie," said the sergeant pilot, giving the fuselage a loud affectionate slap. "Been   
through many a long sweat, Admiral." 
 
This was how Pug found out that a Wellington bomber had a skin of fabric.    The slapped cloth   
sounded just like what it was.    He was used to his Navy's metal aircraft.    It had never occurred   
to him that the British could use fabric planes as attack bombers, and this piece of intelligence   
had not come his way, for he was not an aviator.    Victor Henry could still have walked away   
from the flight, but he felt as compelled to enter this cloth plane and fly over Berlin as a   
murderer is to climb a gallows to be hanged. In the sweet-smelling quiet night, plaintive   
birdsongs rose here and there, richly warbling and rolling. 
 
"Ever heard nightingales before?"    said Tiny Johnson. 
 
"No, I never have."    "Well, Admiral, you're hearing nightingales." 
 
Far down the field, one plane after another coughed and began to roar, shooing out flames in   
the darkness.    A truck rolled up to F for Freddie. A mechanic plugged a cable into its fuselage.   
The motors caught and turned over, spitting smoke and fire, as other planes trundled to a dimly   
lit runway and thundered up and away into gauzy blue moonlight. 
 
Soon only F for Freddie was left, its crew still lying on the grass, its spinning motors cherry   
red.    A.U at once the engines shut off. 
 
Pug heard nightingales again. 
 
"Eh? What now?" said Tiny. "Don't tell me we've been scrubbed, due to some splendid,   
lovely engine trouble?" 
 
Mechanics came trotting out and worked rapidly on one engine, with many a vile cheerful   
curse, their tools clanking musically in the open air. 
 
Twenty minutes after the other planes left, F for Freddie tpok off and flew out over the North   
Sea. 
 
After what seemed a half hour of bumping through cold air in a dark shaking machine, Pug   
glanced at his watch.    Only seven minutes had gone by.    The crew did not talk.    The intercom   
crackled and buzzed-the helmet, unlike the rest of his clothing, was too tight and hurt his ears- 
but once the plane left the coast on course, the pilots and navigator shut up.    Victor Henry's   
perspiration from the heavy suit cooled and dried, chilling him. 
 
His watch crawled through twenty more minutes as he sat there. 
 
The lieutenant gestured to him to look through the plexiglass blister where the navigator had   
been    taking    star sights, and then    to stretch    out prone    in the nose bubble,    the    bombardier   
position.    Pug did these things, but there was nothing to see but black water, bright moon, and   
jewelled stars. 
 
"Keep that light down, navigator," the lieutenant croaked. 
 386 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The sergeant who had given Pug the toilet paper was marking a chart on a tiny fold-down   
wooden slat, and trying to squelch the dim beam of an amber flashlight with his fingers.   
Crouching beside him, watching him struggle with star tables, star sight forms, dividers, ruler,   
and flashlight, Pug wondered what kind of navigational fix he could possibly come up with.   
The youngster gave him a harried grin. 
 
Pug took the flashlight from his hands and shielded the beam to strike just the chart.    Peters   
gestured his gratitude and Pug squatted there, cramped in the space behind the two pilots, until   
the navigator had finished his work.    The American had imagined that the long-range British   
bomber would be as big as an airliner, with a control cabin offering ample elbow room.    In fact   
five men sat crowded within inches of each other-the two pilots, the front gunner, the   
navigator, and the wireless operator.    Pug could just see the gunner in the forward bubble, in   
faint moonlight.    The others were faces floating in the glow of dials. 
 
Stumbling, crouching, grasping at guy wires, Pug dragged his parachute down the black   
fuselage to the bubble where the rear gunner sat. 
 
The hatless boy, his bushy hair falling in his face, gave him a thumbs-up and a pathetic smile.   
This was a hell of a lonely, shaky, frigid place to be riding, Pug thought.    The bomber's tail was   
whipping and bouncing badly. 
 
He tried to yell over the wind noise and motor roars, then made a hopeless gesture.    The boy   
nodded, and proudly operated his power turret for him. 
 
Pug groped to a clear space in the fuselage, and squatted on his parachute, hugging his knees.   
There was nothing to do.    It was getting colder and colder.    He took something from his ration   
bag-when he put it in his mouth he tasted chocolate-and sucked it.    He dozed. 
 
Garbled voices in his ear woke him.    His nose was numb, his cheeks felt frostbitten, and he was   
shivering.    A hand in the dark tugged him forward.    He stumbled after the vague figure toward   
the cockpit glow. 
 
Suddenly it was bright as day in the plane.    The plane slanted and dived, and Pug Henry fell,   
bruising his forehead on a metal box. 
 
Rearing up on his hands and knees, he saw the bright light go out, come on and go out again as   
though snapped off.    The plane made sickening turns one way and another while he crawled   
forward. 
 
Tiny Johnson, gripping the controls, turned around, and Pug saw his lips move against the   
microphone.    "Okay, Admiral?" The voice gargled in the intercom.    "Just passing the coast   
searchlight belt." 
 
'Okay," Henry said. 
 
The helmeted lieutenant threw a tight grim glance over his shoulder at Henry, then stared   
ahead into the night, Tiny waved a gloved hand ai a fixture labelled OXYGIEN.    "Plug in, and   
 387 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
come and have a look." 
 
Sucking on rubber-tasting enriched air, Pug crawled into the bombardier position. 
 
Instead of sparkling sea he saw land grayed over by moonlight. 
 
The searchlight beams waved behind them.    Straight below, tiny yellow lights winked.    Red   
and orange bags came floating slowly and gently up from these lights, speeding and getting   
bigger as they rose. 
 
A few burst and showered red streaks and sparks.    Several balls passed ahead of the plane and   
on either side of it, flashing upward in blurry streaks of color. 
 
The voice of Tiny said, "Coast flak was heavier last time." 
 
just as he said this something purple-white and painfully brilliant exploded in Victor Henry's   
face.    Blackness ensued, then a dance of green circles.    Pug Henry lay with his face pressed to   
cold plexiglass, sucking on the oxygen tube, stunned and blind. 
 
A hand grasped his. The voice of Peters, the    navigator, rattled    in his    ear. "That was a   
magnesium flash shell.    Ruddy close, Admiral. 
 
Are you all right?" 
 
"I can't see." 
 
"It'll take a while.    Sit up, sir."    The plane ground ahead, the blindness persisted and persisted,   
then the green circles jerked in a brightening red mist. A picture gradually faded in like a   
movie scene: faces lit by dials and the glimmering moonlight.    Until his vision returned, Victor   
Henry spent nasty minutes wondering whether it would. 
 
Ahead he saw clouds, the first of this trip, billowing up under the moon. 
 
The navigator spoke.    "Should be seeing beams and flak now." 
 
"Nothing," said Lieutenant Killian.    "Black night." 
 
"I've got Berlin bearing dead ahead at thirty miles, sir." 
 
"Something's wrong.    Probably your wind drift again." 
 
"D.F. bearings check out, sir." 
 
"Well, damn it, Peters, that doesn't put Berlin up ahead."    The skipper sounded annoyed but   
unworried. "It looks like solid forest down there, clear across the horizon. Featureless and   
black." 
 
Tiny Johnson observed bitterly that on his last raid almost half of the planes had failed   
altogether to find Berlin, and that none of Bomber Command's official navigational procedures   
were worth a shit. 
 388 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
He added that he was brassed off. 
 
The piping voice of the rear gunner broke in to report searchlights far astern, off to the right.   
At almost the same moment, the pilots saw, and pointed out to Victor Henry, a large fire on the   
horizon ahead: a yellow blotch flickering on the moonlit plain.    After some crisp talk on the   
intercom, Lieutenant Killian swung the plane around and headed for the searchlights; as for the   
fire,    his guess was    that    another bomber had    overshot the    mark and then    gone    ahead    and   
bombed the wrong target. "That's Berlin," he soon said, pointing a mittened hand at the lights,   
"All kinds of fireworks shooting off. 
 
Well done Reynolds.    How goes it back there? 
 
The high strained voice of the rear gunner replied, "Oh, I'm fine, sir. This operational stuff's the   
real thing, isn't it?" 
 
As they neared Berlin, the nose gunner was silhouetted black by exploding balls and streaks of   
color, and fanning rays of blue light. 
 
Tiny's voice in the intercom rasped, "Those poor bastards who got there first are catching the   
heat blisters." 
 
The lieutenant's voice came, easy and slow: "It looks worse than it is, Admiral. The stuff   
spreads apart once you're in it.    The sky's a roomy place, actually." 
 
F for Freddie went sailing into the beautiful, terrible display, and as the captain had said, it   
thinned out.    The searchlight beams scattered and ran down to the l,it and right.    The streaks   
and balls of flak left great holes of darkness through which the plane bored smoothly ahead.   
The captain and the navigator talked rapidly in fliers' jargon. 
 
it See that fire off there, Admiral? Some other chaps have pretty well obbered the primary   
target," said Killian. 
 
"Or at least dropped a lot of bombs in the vicinity," Tiny said. 
 
"I can't make out a damned thing for the smoke." 
 
The view below was half moonlit clouds, half black city flickering with anti-aircraft flashes.   
Pug Henry saw a peculiar high column of flickers -the Flakturm, that must be-and, in another   
direction, an irregular blob of fire and smoke enveloping buildings and smokestacks, near the   
river curling silver through Berlin.    The black puffs and fiery streaks of the flak slid past F for   
Freddie, but the plane plowed ahead as though protected by a chartn.    The captain said, "Well,   
I'm going for secondary. 
 
Course, navigator." 
 
Shortly thereafter the motor noise ceased. The nose of the plane dipped way down. The   
sudden quiet was a big surprise. 
 
"Gliding approach, Admiral," the captain's voice gargled.    "They control their lights and flak   
 389 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
with listening devices.    Navigator's got to take your place now." 
 
The plane whiffled earthward.    Pug made his way to the rear gunner, who was looking down   
with saucer eyes in a pallid baby face at the moonlit German capital, and at the anti-aircraft   
winking like fireflies.    A rush Of icy air and a roar followed the captain's order, "Open bomb   
bay."    Into the plane    a strong acrid smell    poured, and Pug had a mental    flash of gunnery   
exercises on a sunny blue sea near green islands.    Off Manila or over Berlin, cordite smelled   
the same.    The navigator kept talking in a drilled cheerful tone: "Left, left. 
 
too much... right... dead on -no, left, left... smack on. Smack on.    Smack on.    There!" 
 
The plane jumped. Pug saw the bombs raggedly f2ll away behind them, a string of black   
tumbling sticks.    The airplane slanted up, the motors came bellowing on, and they climbed. 
 
Below, a string of small red explosions appeared alongside the buildings and the huge fat gas- 
storage tower.    Pug thought the bonbs had missed. Then, in the blink of an eye, yellow-white   
flame with a green core came blasting and billowing up from the ground, almost to the height   
of the climbing plane, but well behind.    In the gigantic flare, the city of Berlin was suddenly   
starkly visible, spread out below like a picture postcard printed with too much yellow ink-the   
Kurfiirstendamm, Unter den Linden, the Brandenburg Gate, the Tiergarten, the river, the   
bridges, the Flakturm, the chancellery, the Opera-clear, sharp, close, undamaged, peculiarly   
yellow. 
 
The cheers in the intercom hurt his ears.    He seized his microphone and gave a rebel yell. 
 
As he did so, F for Freddie was transfixed by half a dozen searchlights that swung and stopped.   
In the gunner's bubble all was blue radiance. 
 
The boy looked horror-stricken at Pug and suddenly started to scream in fright, his eyes tight   
shut, his mouth wide open. There was so much noise that Pug could hardly hear him. It   
looked like a painted scream, and in the blue light the boy's tongue and gums were black. 
 
The plane seemed to have landed on a shining blue pyramid.    The motors howled, the machine   
lurched, dived, sideslipped, but the pyramid stayed locked under it. 
 
Pug seized the gun mount with both arms to steady himself.The gunner fell against the mount,   
knocking the microphone away from his open mouth.    His clamor ceased in the intercom, and   
Pug heard Lieutenant Kirlian and Tiny talking in brisk controlled voices.    A mass of orange   
and red balls lazily left the ground and floated up directly at F for Freddie. 
 
They came faster.    They burst all around, a shower of fire, a barrage of explosions.    Pug  felt a   
hard thump, heard the motor change sound, heard a fearful whistling.    ky air blasted at him.   
Fragments rattled all over the plane, and F for Freddie heeled over in a curving dive. Victor   
Henry believed that he was going to die.    The plane shrieked and horribly shuddered, diving   
steeply.    Both pilots    were shouting now, not in panic but to make themselves    heard, and   
through the frail plexiglass bubble Henry stared at the fabric wings, waiting for them to break   
off, Butter away, and signal the end of his life. 
 390 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
All at once the screeching, whistling blue pyramid turned black. 
 
The dizzying swoops and slips stopped, the plane flew straight. 
 
Pug caught a whiff of vomit. The gunner had fainted, and the puke was dribbling from his   
mouth in the moonlight and rolling down his chest: chocolate, coffee, bits of orange.    The boy   
had eaten his whole ration. 
 
Out of the left leg of his flying suit black blood welled. 
 
Pug tried the intercom, but the crackling in his ears had stopped. 
 
The system was dead.    The stricken plane lurched on in a tumult of wind roars and bowls.    He   
went forward, clutching the guy ropes, and ran headon into a figure who shouted that he was   
Peters. Pug screamed in his car that Reynolds was wounded, and moved on to the cockpit,   
passing a ragged flapping hole in the starboard fuselage through which he could see the stars.   
Mechanically he noted the form of the Dipper. They were heading 
 
west, back to England.    their controls.    Tiny 
 
In the cockpit the pilots sat as before, busy at shouted, "Ah, Admiral. We're going home to tea.   
To hell with ruddy pictures. 
 
You'll tell them you saw that gas plant go up, won't you?" 
 
"Damn right I will.    How's the airplane?" 
 
"The port engine was hit, but it's still pulling. Heading back over land, in case we have to   
come down.    Looks like we can make it, unless that engine completely packs up." 
 
"Your rear gunner's got a leg wound.    Navigator's back there with him." 
 
The swinging searchlights of the outer belt loomed ahead, probing the clouds, but F for Freddie   
climbed into the overcast undetected. 
 
Tiny bellowed at Victor Henry, his big blue eyes rolling, both hands on the wheel, "Ruddy   
asinine way to make a living, isn't it, Admiral? 
 
Brassed off, I am.    Should have joined the ruddy navy!" 
 
Pulling off his helmet, Lieutenant Kirlian turned over control to Tiny, and wiped his face with   
a big white handkerchief no whiter than his skin. He gave the American a tired smile, his   
forehead a mass of wrinkled lines. 
 
"It may    close at that, Admiral.    We're having a bit of trouble holding altitude.    How's your   
French?"    AMELAhad remained in London. 
 
She knew it was a night bombing mission and she knew the distances. It was not hard to   
calculate when Victor Henry would be getting back. At ten in the morning she went to his Hat- 
it had no other occupant for the moment-and persuaded the charwoman to let her in.    She sat in   
 391 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
the untidy living room, trying to read a newspaper, but actually only counting the minutes and   
praying that he was still alive. 
 
Pug Henry had entered her life at a dark time.    Her parents had been divorced before she was   
fourteen.    Her mother had remarried, made a new life, and shut her out.    Alistair Tudsbury had   
deposited her in schools vhile he travelled.    She had grown up well-mannered, attractive, but   
almost wild, and had had several love affairs before she was out of her teens. In her early   
twenties she had met Philip Rule, a tall golden-haired newspaper correspondent, who had for a   
while shared Leslie Slote's flat in Paris.    An ice-cold man with beguiling ways, a rich How of   
clever talk, and corrupt tastes, Rule had bit by bit destroyed her ambition, her selfconfidence,   
and almost her will to live.    She had fought off suicidal depression by breaking off with him at   
last and going to work as her father's slave; and as such, she had encountered Victor and Rhoda   
Henry on the Bremen. 
 
She had never met a man quite like Commander Henry: remote, taciturn, apparently an old- 
fashioned narrow professional, yet incisive and engaging.    She had found him attractive from   
the start, and had come to like him more and more.    Aboard ship, such attractions take on an   
unreal intensity, but usually fade fast on dry land. For Pamela the feeling had only grown   
stronger on seeing him again in Berlin.    There she had sensed that Pug was beginning to like   
her, too.    But the start of the war had broken their contact, except for the momentary encounter   
in Washington. 
 
When Victor Henry arrived in London, Pamela had been quite ready to marry the fighter pilot;   
and    this    visit    of the older    man    who had be-en    something    like    a shipboard    crush had 
not   
changed that.    But since then Gallard had vanished, and she had had two weeks with Pug.    In   
wartime, as on board ship, relationships deepen fast.    Nothing had yet happened between them.   
He had awkwardly put an arm around her while watching the German bombers come in; that   
was all.    But Pamela now thought that, whatever the views and scruples of this very married   
man, she could go to bed with him if she pleased, and when she pleased. 
 
Still,    Pam    had no intention    of enticing    Captain    Henry into    what    he termed    a    "shack-
up."   
Blinker Vance, in Henry's disapproving view, was snacked up with Lady Maude Northwood,   
though the shack was one of the most elegant flats in Mayfair and Lady Maude, if somewhat   
horsefaced, was a clever and charming woman. Pamela didn't in the least believe in Victor   
Henry's morality.    She thought it was a crust of cramping nonsense that stopped her from   
giving the lonely man and herself pleasure.    But that was how he was.    She was detern-dned   
above all things not to upset or repel him; rather, to let matters take their course. 
 
Almost exactly at noon the key turned in the lock. 
 
As Pug let himself in, he could hear the noonday news broadcast echoing in the flat.    He called,   
'Hello, who's here?" 
 
Steps clicked in the living room.    The girl struck him like a blue projectile.    "Oh, my God, you   
came back." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"What the devil?"    Victor Henry managed to say between kisses. 
 
"What are you doing here?"    'I'm absent without leave.    I shall be court-martialled and shot.    I   
should have sat here for a week. Your charwoman    let me in. Ahhh!" With growls Of   
Pleasure, she kissed him again and again. Disorganized enough before this    surprise, Pug   
dazedly kissed her back, not quite believing what was happening.    Pam said, "Good heavens,   
Captain Henry, you do reek of rum." 
 
"That's the debriefing.    They give you a big breakfast and lots of rum and you talk."    He had   
difficulty getting this out, because Pamela kept kissing him.    Dead on his feet as he was, he   
nevertheless began    on instinct    to    respond to    this eager    aroused    girl    clinging to    him.    He   
realized foggily, as he pulled her close and returned her kisses, that at this rate he was soon   
going to take her to bed.    He was caught by surprise and had no impulse to stop, strange and   
drea-like as it all was. He was hours away from a brush with death, and still numb and   
stunned.    "Well, how about this?" 
 
he said hoarsely.    "The conquering hero's reward, hey?" 
 
She was covering his face with soft slow kisses.    She leaned back in his arms, looking into his   
eyes.    "Just so.    Exactly." 
 
"Well, I didn't do a goddamned thing except take up space, burn up gasoline, and get in   
everybody's way.    However, thank you, Pam.    You're beautiful and sweet, and this welcome   
makes me feel great." 
 
His evident exhaustion, his clumsy moves, his comical indecisiveness about what to do next   
with this unfamiliar female body in his arms, caused a wave of deep tenderness to go through   
her.    "You look absolutely drained," she said, stepping free.    "Totally wrung out. 
 
Was it very bad?" 
 
"It was long."    "Want a drink?    Some food?" 
 
"A drink, I guess.    I feel okay, but I'd better get some sleep." 
 
"So I figured."    She led him to the darkened bedroom.    The bed was turned down, his pajamas   
laid out.    She took her time about mixing the drink, and when she came back to the bedroom he   
was asleep. On the floor, uncharacteristically dumped, lay the tweed suit that Aircraftsman   
Horton had missed out on. 
 
The hand on his shoulder was gently persistent.    "Captain Henry! 
 
It's five o'clock.    You've had a call from the embassy." 
 
He opened his eyes.    "What?    What embassy?" 
 
It took him a few seconds to recollect where he was, and why Pamela Tudsbury was standing   
over him in uniform, with a smile so intimate and bright.    In his dream he had been back in F   
for Freddie, fumbling and fumbling for a cloth to wipe the vomit off the poor rear gunner; the   
 393 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
hallucinatory stench was still in his nostrils.    He sat up and sniffed. A delicious odor of broiling   
meat floated through the open door, erasing the dream smell.    "What's that?" 
 
"I thought you'd be hungry by now." 
 
"But where'd you get food?    There's nothing in that icebox but beer and club soda." 
 
'Went out and bought it." 
 
He tried to shock himself awake with a cold shower, but still had a feeling, as he shaved and   
dressed, of stumbling through dreams within dreams.    He could not get used to the wonder of   
being alive in normal circumstances.    A dim recollection of Pamela's ardent welcome added to   
that wonder. 
 
"What the Sam Hill!"    he said.    "Where and how did you get all this?" 
 
The salads, the bowl of fruit, the long bread, and the bottle of red wine made an attractive   
clutter on the small table.    She was humming in the kitchen.    She said, entering with steak s on   
two plates, "Oh, I'm a London alley cat, I know where to forage.    Sit down and get at this. The   
oven's really not very good, but I've done my best." He cut into the meat and took a hot   
mouthful.    The bread broke soft 
 
AL 
 
and crusty; the heavy wine was delicious.    Pug Henry fell to with the gusto of a boy borne from   
tobogganing. Pamela cut herself a piece of steak and ate it, not taking her eyes off Victor   
Henry as he wolfed the food.    "Well," she said.    "Rather hungry at that, weren't you?" 
 
'A"Y, this is Marvelous.    It's the best meat, the best wine, the best bread I've ever eaten." 
 
"You exaggerate, but I'm glad you're enjoying it.    I'm trying to make up for the stupid way I   
acted before you left." 
 
'Tam, I'm glad I went.    That was the right decision." 
 
"Oh, now that you're back, there's no argument.    My apologies." 
 
Victor Henry put down his knife and fork.    All his senses were newedged. To his eyes, Pamela   
TudsbuWs face radiated remarkable beauty and sweetness.    He experienced a pleasant quake in   
all his nerves, remembering vividly their stunning kisses at the door. 
 
"You're forgiven." 
 
"Good."    She drank wine, looking at him over the edge of the glass. 
 
"Do you know that I fell for you on the Bremen?    Did you have any inIding of it?    In Berlin I   
was hard put to it not to try my luck with you. 
 
But I knew it was impossible.    You're so devoted to your wife." 
 394 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Yes indeed," Pug said.    "Rock of Gibraltar.    I guess I'm dumb, but I hadn't the slightest notion   
of that, Pamela." 
 
"Well, it's true.    I'd been in rotten shape for a couple of years. 
 
It did me good to be,able to like a man so much. I proceeded to go mad over Ted shortly   
thereafter."    A shadow of sadness flickered across her face. 
 
'When you    opened the door a few hours ago, I came    close to believing in God. There's   
strawberry tart for dessert." 
 
"You're kidding." 
 
"I'm not kidding.    I passed a pastrycook's and the tarts looked good." 
 
He reached out and took her slim wrist.    Her skin felt as sweet to his blunt fingers as her lips   
had felt on his mouth.    "Pam, I've developed a high regard for a London alley cat, myself." 
 
"I'm glad. I should be sorry to think that my great passion was totally unrequited, If you'll   
unhand me, I'll serve your strawberry tart and coffee- It's getting on for six.    Captain Vance   
was most insistent that you be at the embassy by six-thirty." 
 
"What will you do?    Go back to Uxbridge?" 
 
'What will you do?    That's what matters." 
 
"First I have to find out what Blinker wants." 
 
"Shall I wait for your call at my flat?" 
 
"Yes, Pam.    Please do that." 
 
They parted on the sidewalk.    He kept glancing back over his shoulder at the dwindling figure   
in blue, marching among the pedestrians NAtb that odd swing he had first noticed on the   
Bremen-just another perky little W.A.A.F among the thousands in London. 
 
He felt reborn.    He smiled at people he passed on the street, and they smiled back.    The young   
girls appeared seductive as starlets; the older women were full of grace. The men were all   
great good fellows, the slopeshouldered pale clerks with briefcases and bowler hats- no less   
than the passing soldiers, the withered gray men, and the purple-faced fat men in tweed.    They   
all had the stuff that he had seen at the Biggin Hill dispersal hut and in F for Freddie.    They   
were Englishmen, the happy breed.    The sunlight dappling the leaves in Grosvenor Square was   
golden, the leaves were fresh green, and the sky was the blue of a W.A.A.F uniform.    What a   
world! What    an idiocy in    these Europeans    to dump    tiro-    and explosives    on each other's   
habitations, built with such hard work!    All things were washed clean, or at least he was seeing   
them with a child's clear inquisitive eye-a shiny automobile, a shop-window dummy, a box of   
red geraniums on a windowsill.    He noticed that the sidewalk gave off tiny sparkles in the late   
sunlight. 
 395 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The American flag fluttering from the second story of the embassy struck Pug with a pang of   
pride.    Its red, white, and blue seemed so rich, its slow waving so    of majesty, that a sixty-piece   
orchestra might have been playing "The star-spangled Banner'; but there was no orchestra in   
the square, only discordant loud traffic noise.    He sat on a bench for a moment looking at the   
flag, suffused with zest for life and a burning wish to live a long time yet in this radiant world   
through which he had been walking blind as a bat.    This grim stocky obscure American Navy   
captain sat bemused on a London park bench, undergoing an exaltation for which he finally   
found the name. At first he had thought his exhilarated mood was the snapback from the   
bombing mission, the plain joy of being alive after brushing death in a diving plane, in a whirl   
of blue cones and exploding colored balls.    But it was something more. Nothing like this had   
happened to him in twenty-five years, and he had not expected it ever to happen again, so   
recognizing it had taken him this long. 
 
Nothing could be simpler.    He had fallen in love. 
 
A black Cadillac pulled up at the embassy door and discharged an admiral whom Pug   
recognized, two Army generals, and Blinker Vance.    Pug hastened across the street. 
 
"Hey, Pug!"    Admiral Benton offered a fat hand.    This holy terror, his old boss at War Plans,   
was a short rotund man with a shiny round face and a bald round head.    Pug liked him, despite   
his short temper, because he was a smart    and driving worker, wasted no words, admitted   
ignorance, too, and took blame when the blame was his.    He was a gunnery expert the Navy's   
best. His weakness was opinionated political theorizing; he thought the New Deal was a   
Communist plot. 
 
Blinker    Vance brought the    four men    to a quiet second-floor conference    room panelled    in   
cherry wood. He left. They sat themselves at one end of a long polished table lined with   
twenty chairs upholstered in blue leather.    Admiral Benton took the head, with the two generals   
on either side of him and Pug below the younger-looking one. "Now goddamn    it, Pug,"   
Benton began, "the ambassador says if he'd known about this observer flight of yours, he'd   
have stopped you. He's dead right. We don't want to give the Army and its Air Corps"-he   
gestured at the other men-"the idea that the Navy trains goofy daredevils."    Benton sounded   
very pleased with Pug.    "These gentlemen and I have been waiting for you to get back from   
that blamed fool excursion.    This is General Anderson, and General Fitzgerald here is Army   
Air Corps."    Benton glanced at the others.    "Well, shall we get at it?" 
 
General Fitzgerald, who sat beside Pug, danced long lean fingers together.    He had wavy blo nd   
hair and a handsome thin face; he might have been an artist or an actor, except for the stone- 
hard look in his pale blue eyes. "Admiral, I'd like to hear about the captain's bomber ride   
myself." 
 
"So would I," said Anderson.    Victor Henry now recognized him as Train Anderson, a West   
Point football star of around igio. Anderson was heavy and jowly,    and his thin hair was   
smoothed tight on a pink scalp. 
 
Victor Henry narrated his bomber adventure in a matter-of-fact way. 
 396 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Great!"    Benton burst out when Pug came to the explosion of the gasworks. 
 
The three senior officers listened tensely to the account of his return trip in a damaged aircraft;   
the jettisoning of all removable weight to maintain altitude; the final thirty miles flown at a few   
hundred feet. When Pug finished, Train Anderson lit a cigar and leaned back on a thick elbow.  
 
"Quite a yarn, Captain. It amounted to a token bombing though, didn't it? Berlin sounds   
untouched, compared to this place.    You've been to the docks I presume?" 
 
'Yes, sir." 
 
'We toured them today.    The Germans are making mincemeat of the are a. At this rate, in a   
week London will cease to be a port.    Then NA,hat appens?    Famine?    Plague?" 
 
"That's a big dock area," Pug said. "Their repair and fire-fighting crews are good, General.   
Things look worse than they are." 
 
The Air Corps    general    laced his    fingers daintily together.    "Have you    been in the public   
shelters, Henry?    We visited one during a raid. 
 
Nothing but a shallow cement hole.    A hit would have killed everybody. 
 
All stinking of unwashed bodies and urine, all jammed with nervous, jittery old folks and   
crying kids.    Big crayon scrawl on the ceiling, This is a Jew War.    We visited the underground,   
too, last night.      A mob of people sleeping on the tracks and the platforms, a sanitation   
nightmare, a setup for an outbreak of typhus."    'Sickness and casualties are running far under   
their estimates, sir," Pug said. 
 
'There are thousands of empty hospital beds." 
 
"So this man Vance told us," put in Anderson.    "Well, they'll fill 'em. 
 
Now, Captain Henry, you've been an observer here, and you've been sending optimistic reports   
to the President recommending all-out assistance." 
 
"Not wholly optimistic, sir, but recommending full assistance, yes." 
 
"Possibly you're a bit out of touch with what's happening on the other side of the water.    So let   
me read you something.    It's from the Saint Louis Post-Dispatch, a red-hot New Deal paper."   
He tookout his wallet, unfolded a neatly cut newspaper capping, and intoned through his nose:   
"Mr. Roosevelt today committed an act of war, turning over to a -warring power a goodly   
portion of the United States Navy. We get in exchange Imes an British possessions. What   
good will these es be if Hitler should acquire title to these islands by right of conquest? 
 
Of all sucker real estate deals in history, this is the worst.    If Mr. 
 
Roosevelt gets away with this, we may as well say good-bye to our liberties and make up our   
minds that kenceforth we live under a dictatorship. 
 397 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'That's a Roosevelt supporter talking," observed Anderson, puteng violently on the cigar.   
'Now, we're proceeding from here to a dinner at the Army and Navy Club, in half an hour or   
so, with some British generals and admirals.    We already have the list of the war materials they   
want.    It would strip our armed forces clean.    We have to make cabled recommendations to the   
President within five days. He's already let them have-in addition to these fifty warships- 
virtually all our seventy-fivemillimeter field guns, several squadrons of naval aircraft, half a   
million nfles, millions of rounds of ammunition-" 'He hasn't given 'em away, General," Benton   
observed.    "The Limeys have paid cash on the barrelhead." 
 
"Yes, luckily the Neutrality Act compels that, but still it was a god-damned lie to call the stuff   
surplus.    Surplus!    We don't have any surplus! 
 
You know that.    Fifty destroyers!    All this without any authorization from Congress.    All things   
we're short of. And now Congress is passing a draft law. Our boys will be drilling with   
broomsticks!    There's going to be ati accounting one day, you know.    If the British fold and this   
stuff winds up in German hands-a possibility to be reckoned with-the accounting Will not be   
far off - All who have taken part in these transactions, or even advocated them"-here General   
Anderson    turned    a belligerent face at    Victor Henry-"I    warn    you, stand    a    good    chance   
of   
hanging from lamp posts on Constitution Avenue." 
 
After a silence, Admiral Benton said Mildly, folding his hands over his stomach, "Well, Pug,   
I've told these gentlemen that I know you, and that any dope you put out is reliable.    We've got   
a big responsibility. We've been handed one hell of a hot potato. So get down to the short   
hairs. What makes you think the British will keep fighting, after the way the French folded?   
No horseshit now." 
 
"All right, Admiral." 
 
To begin with, Victor Henry said, the British had made better use than the French of the time   
between the wars.    He debed their scientific advances, the strength and disposition of the bathe   
fleet, the fighter control system he had seen at Uxbridge, the figures of German and British   
plane losses, the morale of the fliers, the preparations along the invasion beaches, the Chain   
Home stations, the production of aircraft. Fitzgerald listened with his eyes closed, his head   
flung back, his fingers dancing. 
 
Benton stared gravely at Pug,    pulling at an    ear as he had    done in a hundred    War Plans   
meetings.    Train Anderson, wreathing himself in smoke, also looked hard at Pug, though the   
glare was fading to a frigid calculating expression. 
 
Pug gave as sober and clear an account as he could, but it was an effort. As he plodded   
through his military facts, Pamela Tudsbury shimmered in his mind's eye, shifting with   
afterimages of the flight over Berlin. 
 
He felt in an undisciplined mood and was hard put to it to keep a respectful tone. 
 
"Now wait, Pug, this RDF you're so hot on," Benton interposed, that's nothing but radar, isn't   
it?    We've got radar.    You were with me aboard the New York for the tests." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"We haven't got this kind of radar, sir."    Victor Henry described in detail the cavity magnetron.   
The senior officers began glancing at each other.      He added, "And they've even started   
installing the stuff in their night fighters." 
 
General Fitzgerald sat straight up.    "Airborne radar?    What about the weight problem?" 
 
"They've licked it." 
 
"Then they've developed somethine new." 
 
"They have, General." 
 
Fitzgerald turned a serious gaze on Train Anderson, who stubbed out his cigar, observing to the   
admiral, "Well, I'll say this, your man makes out a case, at least.    We've got to come across   
anyhow, since that's what Mr.    Big wants.    What we can do is exercise tight control item by   
item, and that by God we will do.    And get trade-offs like that cavity thing, wherever possible."   
He regarded Henry through half-shut eyes. "Very well.    Suppose they do hold out?    Suppose   
Hitler doesn't invade? What's their future?    What's their plan?    What can they do against a man   
who controls all Europe?" 
 
"Well, I can give you the official line," Victor Henry said. 
 
"I've heard it often enough. Hold him back in 1940. Pass him in air power in 1941, with   
British and American production. Shoot the Luftwaffe out of the skies in 1942 and 1943-   
Bomb their cities and factories to bits if they don't surrender.    Invade and conquer in 1944-'   
'With what?    Ten or fifteen divisions against two hundred?" 
 
"Actually, General, I think the idea is simpler.    Hang on till we get in." 
 
"Now you're talking.    But then what?" 
 
General Fitzgerald said very quietly, "Why, then we pound Germany from the air, Train, with   
the bomber fleet we're building.    A few months of that, and we land to accept the surrender, if   
anyone's alive to crawl out of the rubble." 
 
Raising an eyebrow at Victor Henry, Admiral Benton said, "How's that sound, Pug?" 
 
Victor Henry hesitated to answer. 
 
"You're dubious?"    General Fitzgerald observed amiably. 
 
"General, I've just been out pounding Germany from the air. 
 
Twenty-four bombers went on the mission.    Fifteen returned.    Of those, four didn't bomb the   
right target.    Navigation was off, they had operational troubles, there were German decoy fires,   
and so forth.    Two didn't bomb any target. 
 
They got lost, wandered around in the dark, then dropped their bombs in the ocean and homed   
back on the BBC.    In one mission they lost a third of the attacking force." 
 399 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"This business is in its infancy," smiled Fitzgerald. 
 
"Twenty-four bombers.    Suppose there'd been a thousand, with much heavier payloads? 
 
And at that, they did get the gasworks."    "Yes, sir.    They got the gasworks."    "How do you   
think it's going to go?"    General Anderson said brusquely to Henry. 
 
"Sir, I think sooner or later a couple of million men will have to land in France and fight the   
German army." 
 
With an unpleasant grunt, Train Anderson touched his left shoulder. 
 
"Land in France, hey?    I landed in France in 1918.    I got a German bullet through my shoulder   
in the Argonne.    I don't know what that accomplished.    Do you?" 
 
Victor Henry did not answer. 
 
"Okay."    Train Anderson rose.    "Let's be on our way, gentlemen. 
 
Our British cousins await us."    "I'll be right along," Benton said. 
 
When the army men were gone he slapped Victor Henry's shoulder. 
 
"Well done.    These Limeys are holding the fort for us.    We've got to help 'em.    But Jesus God,   
they're not bashful in their requestsi The big crunch comes when they run out of dollars.  
 
They can't even pay for this list of stuff, without selling their last holdings in America.    What   
comes next?    It beats me.    The boss man will have to figure a way to give 'em stuff.    He's a   
slippery customer and I guess he will. 
 
Say, that reminds me-" He reached into a breast pocket and brought out a letter.    Victor Henry,   
in his wife's small handwriting, was the only address on the envelope, which was much thicker   
than usual. 
 
"Thank you, Admiral." 
 
The admiral was fumbling in his pockets.    'No, there's something else. Damn, I couldn't have- 
no, here we are.    Whew!    That's a relief." 
 
It was a White House envelope.    Pug slipped both letters into his pocket. 
 
"Say, Pug, for a gunnery officer you've painted yourself into a peculiar corner.    That screwball   
socialist in the White House thinks a lot of you, which may or may not be a good thing.    I'd   
better mosey along. Rhoda sounded fine when I talked to her, only a little sad." 
 
Benton sighed and stood.    "They have to put up with a lot, the gals. 
 
Good thing she didn't know about that bomber ride.    Now that you're back I sort of envy you. 
 
But me, I'm absurdly fond of my ass, Pug.    I'm not getting it shot off except in the line of duty.   
 400 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
I commend that thought to you hereafter." 
 
Blinker Vance took off big black-rimmed glasses and stepped out from behind his desk to   
throw an arm around Pug.    "Say, I want to hear all about that joyride one of these days, i How   
did it go with the big brass?" 
 
"All right." 
 
"Good.    There's a dispatch here for you from Bupers."    He peeled a tissue off a clipboard hung   
on the wall, and handed it to Pug. 
 
VICTOR HENRY DETACHED TEMPOPARY DUTY LONDON X RETURN BERLIN   
UNIIL RELIEVED ON OR ABOUT I NOVEMBER X THEREUPON DETACHED TO   
PROCEED WASMNGTON HIGHEST AIR pRioRrry X REPORT BUPERS FOR FURTHER   
REASSIGNMENT X Vance said, "Glad you'll be getting out of Berlin?" 
 
"Overjoyed." 
 
"Mought you'd be. Transportation tells me they've got a priority to Lisbon available on the   
fourteenth." 
 
"Grab it."    "Right."    With a knowing little smile, Vance added, "Say, maybe you and that nice   
little Tudsbury girl can have a farewell dinner with me and Lady Maude tomorrow night."   
Several times Blinker had asked Victor Henry to join them for dinner. 
 
Pug knew and liked Blinker's wife and their six children. 
 
Avoiding a censorious tone, he had declined the invitations. 
 
Victor    Henry knew    how    commonplace    these    things    were-"Wars    and    lechery,    nothing 
else   
holds fashion'-but he had not felt like endorsing Blinker's shack-up.    Vance now was renewing   
the bid, and his smile was reminding Pug that on telephoning the flat, he had found Pamela   
there. 
 
"I'll let you know, Blinker.    I'll call you later." 
 
"Fine!"    Vance's grin broadened at not being turned down.    "Lady Maude will be channed, and   
my God, Pug, she has a fabulous wine cellar." 
 
Victor Henry returned to the bench in Grosvenor Square. The sun still shone, the flag still   
waved.    But it was just a sticky London evening like any other.    The strange brightness was out   
of the air. 
 
The President's hasty pencilled scrawl was on a yellow legal sheet this time. 
 
PugYour bracing reports have been a grand tonic that I needed. 
 
The war news has been so bad, and now the Republicans have gone and put up a fine candidate   
in Wendel! Willkie!    Come November, you just might be working for a new boss.    Then you   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can slip the chain and get out to sea! 
 
Ha hal Thank you especially for alerting us on their advanced radar. The British are sending   
over a scientific mission in September, with all dieit "wizard war' stuff, as Churchill calls it.   
Well be very sure to follow that up!    There's something heartwarming about Churchill's interest   
in landing craft, isn't there?    Actually he's right, and I've asked for a report from C.N.O. Get as   
much of their material as you can. 
 
FDR Pug stuffed the vigorous scrawl in his pocket like any other note, and opened his wife's   
letter.    It was a strange one. 
 
She had just turned on the radio, she wrote, heard an old record of "Three O'Clock in the   
Morning," and burst out crying.      She reminisced about their honeymoon, when they had   
danced so often to that song; about his long absence in 1918; about their good times in Manila   
and in Panama.    With Palmer Kirby, who now kept a small office in New York, she had just   
driven up to New London to visit Byron-a glorious two-day trip through the early autumn   
foliage of Connecticut.    Red Tully had told her that Byron was lazy in his written work, but   
very good in the simulator and in submarine drills.    She had asked Byron about the Jewish girl. 
 
The way he changed the subject, I think maybe all that is over. 
 
He got a peculiar look on his face, but said nary a word. 
 
Wouldn't that be a relief 1 
 
YOU know that Janice is pregnant, don't you?    You must have heard from them.    Those kids   
didn't waste much time, hey?    Like father like son, is all I can say!    But the thought of being a   
GRANDMOTHERIII In a way I'm happy, but in another way it seems like the end of the   
world! 
 
It would have helped a lot if you'd been here when I first got the news. It sure threw me into a   
spin.    I'm not sure I've pulled out of it yet, but I'm trying. 
 
Let me give you a piece of advice.    The sooner you can come home, the better.    I'm all right,   
but at the moment I could really use a HUSIBAND around. 
 
He walked to his flat and telephoned Pamela. 
 
"Oh, my dear," she said, "I'm so glad you called.    In another quarter of an hour I'd have been   
gone.    I talked to Uxbridge.    They're being very broad-minded, If I come back tonight, all is   
forgiven. 
 
They're shorthanded and they expect heavy raids.    I must, I really must go back right away."   
"Of course you must.    You're lucky you're not getting shot for desertion," Pug said, as lightly   
as he could. "I'm not the first offender at Uxbridge," she laughed.    "A W.A.A.F has a certain   
emotional rope to use up, you know.    But this time I've really done 
 
He said, 'I'm ever so grateful to you." 
 402 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"You're grateful?"    she said.    " 
 
"Oh, God, don't you know that you've Pulled me through a very bad time? I shall get another   
special pass in a week, at most.    Can we see each other then?"    "Pam, I'm leaving day after   
tomorrow. Going back to Berlin for about a month or six weeks, and then home.... Hello?   
Pamela?" 
 
"I'm still here.    You're going day after tomorrow?" 
 
"My orders were waiting at the embassy." 
 
After a long pause, in which he heard her breathing, she said, "You wouldn't want me to desert   
for two more days and take what comes. 
 
Would you?    I'll do it." 
 
"It's no way to win a war, Pam." 
 
"No, it isn't, Captain.    Well.    This is an unexpected good-bye, then. 
 
But good-bye it is."    'Our paths will cross again." 
 
'Oh, no doubt.    But I firmly believe that Ted's alive and is coming back.    I may well be a wife   
next time we meet.    And that will be far more proper and easy all around.    All the same, today   
was one of the happiest of my life, and that's unchangeable now." 
 
Victor Henry was finding it difficult to go on talking.    The sad, kind tones of this young voice   
he loved were choking his throat; and there were no words available to his rusty tongue to tell   
Pamela what he felt. "I'll never forget, Pamela," he said awkwardly, clearing his throat. "I'll   
never forget one minute of it."    'Won't you?    Good. 
 
Neither will I. Some hours weigh against a whole lifetime, don't they? 
 
I think they do.    Well!    Good-bye, Captain Henry, and safe journeyings. 
 
I hope you find all well at home." 
 
"Good-bye, Pam.    I hope Ted makes it."    Her voice broke a little. 
 
'Somebody's coming for me.    Good-bye." 
 
Fatigued but    tensely    awake,    Victor    Henry changed to civilian clothes    and    drifted    to    Fred   
Fearing's noisy airless hot apartment.    A bomb bursting close by earlier in the week had blown   
in all the windows, which were blocked now with brown plywood.      Fearins broadcast,   
describing his feelings under a shower of glass, had been a great success. 
 
"Where's la Tudsbury?"    said Fearing, handing Victor Henry a cupful of punch made of gin and   
some purple canned juice. 
 
"Fighting Germans."    'Good show!"    The broadcaster did a vaudeville burlesque of the British   
 403 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
accent. 
 
Pug sat in a corner of a dusty plush sofa under a plywood panel, watching the drinking and   
dancing, and wondering why he had come here. 
 
He saw a tall young girl in a tailored red suit, with long black hair combed behind her ears,   
give him one glance, then another.    With an uncertain smile, at once bold and wistful, the girl   
approached. 
 
"HeHo there. 
 
Would you like more punch?      You look important and lonesome."      "I couldn't be less   
important.    I'd like company more than punch. 
 
Please join me." The girl promptly sat and crossed magnificent silk-shod legs. She was   
prettier than Pamela, and no more than twenty. 
 
'Let me guess. You're a general. Air Corps. They tend to be younger." "I'm just a Navy   
captain, a long, long way from home."    "I'm Lucy Somerville.    My mother would spank me for   
speaking first to a strange man.    But everything's different in the war, isn't it?" 
 
"I'm Captain Victor Henry." 
 
"Captain Victor Henry.    Sounds so American."    She looked at him with impudent eyes.    "I like   
Americans." 
 
"I guess you're meeting quite a few." 
 
"Oh, heaps.    One nicer than the other."    She laughed.    "The bombing's perfectly horrible, but it   
is exciting, isn't it?    Life's never been so exciting. 
 
One never knows whether one will be able to get home at night.    It makes things interesting.    I   
know girls who take their makeup and pajamas along when they go out in the evening.    And   
dear old Mums can't say a word!" 
 
The girl's roguish, inviting glance told him that here probably was a random Hare of passion   
for the taking.    Wartime London was the place, he thought; "nothing else holds fashion.    But   
this girl was Madeline's age, and meant nothing to him; and he had just said a stodgy, cold,   
miserable good-bye to Pamela Tudsbury- He avoided her dancing eyes, and said something   
dull about the evening news.    In a minute or so a strapping Army lieutenant approached and   
offered Lucy Somerville a drink, and she jumped up and was gone.    Soon after, Pug left. 
 
Alone in the flat, he listened to a Churchill speech and went to bed. 
 
The last thing he did before turning out the light was to reread Rhoda's nostalgic, sentimental,   
and troubled letter. Something shadowy and unpleasant was there between the lines. He   
guessed she might be having difficulties with Madeline, though the letter did not mention the   
daughter's name.    There was no point in dwelling on it, he thought. 
 404 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
He would be home in a couple of months.    He fell asleep. 
 
Rhoda had slept with Dr. Kirby on the trip to Connecticut.    That was    the shadowy and   
unpleasant thing Pug half discerned.    Proverbially the cuckold is the last to know his disgrace;   
no suspicion crossed his mind, though Rhoda's words were incautious and revealing. 
 
War not only forces intense new relationships; it puts old ones to the breaking stress.    On the   
very day this paragon of faithfulness-as his Navy friends regarded him-had received his wife's   
letter, he had not made love to Pamela Tudsbury, mainly because the girl had decided not to   
bring him to it.    Rhoda had fallen on the way back from New London.    It had been unplanned   
and unforeseen.    She would have recoiled from a cold blooded copulation.    The back windows   
of the little tourist house, where she and Kirby had stopped for tea, looked out on a charming   
pond where swans moved among pink lily pads in a gray drizzle. 
 
Except for the old lady who served them, they were alone in this quiet relaxing place.    The visit   
to Byron had gone well and the countryside was beautiful.    They intended to halt for an hour,   
then drive on to New York.    They talked of their first lunch outside Berlin, of the farewell at   
Tempelhof Airport, of their mutual delight at seeing each other in the Waldorf. The time   
flowed by, their tone grew more intimate.    Then Palmer Kirby said, "How wonderfully cosy   
this place isle Too bad we can't stay here." 
 
And Rhoda Henry murmured, hardly believing that she was releasing the words from her   
mouth, "Maybe we could."    Maybe we could!    Three words, and a life pattern and a character   
dissolved. The old lady gave them a bedroom, asking no questions. Everything followed:   
undressing with a stranger, casting aside with her underclothes her modesty and her much- 
treasured rectitude, yielding to a torrent of novel sensations. To be taken by this large   
demanding man left her throbbing with animal pleasure.    All her thoughts since then went back   
to that point in time, and there halted.    Like a declaration of war, it drew a line across the past   
and started another era.    The oddest aspect of this new life was that it was so much like the old   
one.    Rhoda felt she had not really changed.    She even still loved Pug.    She was trying to digest   
all this puzzlement when she wrote to her husband.    She did have twinges of silence, but she   
was surprised to find how bearable these were. 
 
In New York, Rhoda and Kirby heard in bright afternoon sunshine the Churchill broadcast   
which Pug had listened to late at night.    Rhoda had chosen well the apartment for Madeline and   
herself. It faced south, across low brownstones. Sunshine poured in all day through white- 
draped windows, into a broad living room furnished and decorated in white, peach, and apple   
green.    Photographs of Victor Henry and the boys stood in green frames on a white piano.    Few   
visitors failed to comment on the genteel cheerfulness of the place. 
 
"He has lighted a fire which will burn with a steady and consuming flame, until the    vestiges of   
Nazi tyranny have been burnt out of Europe.... OP Puffing at his pipe, Kirby slouched in an   
armchair and stared at the radio.    "Marvellous phrasemaker, that man." 
 
"Do you think they'll actually hold off the Germans, Palmer?" 
 405 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"What does Pug say?" 
 
'He wrote a pessimistic letter when be first arrived there.    He hasn't written again." 
 
'Odd.    He's been there a while." 
 
"Well, I tell myself if anything had happened to him I'd have heard. 
 
I do worry." 
 
"Naturally." 
 
The speech ended.    She saw him glance at the watch on his hairy wrist. "When does your plane   
go?" 
 
"Oh, not for a couple of hours."    He turned off the radio, strolled to the windows, and looked   
Out- "This is not a bad view. 
 
Radio City, the Empire State Building.    Pity that apartment house blocks out the river." 
 
"I know what you'd like right now," She said. 
 
"What?" 
 
"Some tea.    It's that time.- Answ,ring his sudden coarse grin with a half-coy, half-brazen smile,   
she hurriedly added, "I really mean tea, Mr. 
 
Palmer Kirby." 
 
"MY favorite drink, tea.    Lately, anyway." 
 
"Don't be horrible, you!    Well?    Shall I make some?" 
 
"Of course.    I'd love tea." 
 
"I suppose I should swear off it, since it was my downfall.    Of all things."    She walked toward   
the kitchen with a sexy sway.    "If only I could plead baying been drunk, but I was sober as a   
minister's wife." 
 
He came to the kitchen and watched her Prepare the tea. Palmer Kirby liked to watch her   
move around, and his eyes on her made Rhoda feel young and fetching as They sat at a low   
table in the sunshine and she decorously poured tea and passed him buttered bread. The   
picture could not have been more placid and respectable. 
 
"Almost as good as the tea at Mrs.    Murchison's guesthouse," Kirby said. "Almost." 
 
"Now never mind!    How long will you be in Denver?" 
 
"Only overnight Then I have to come to Washington.    Our board's going to meet with some   
British scientists. From the advance papers, they've got some remarkable stuff. "I'm sure   
they're surprising the Germans." 
 406 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"So!    You'll be in Washington next." 
 
"Yes.    Got a good reason to go to Washington?" 
 
"Oh, dear, Palmer, don't you realize I know everybody in that town, Absolutely everybody.   
And anybody I don't know, Pug knows.)' He said after a glum pause, "It's not very satisfactory,   
is it?    I don't see myself as a homewrecker.    Especially of a military man serving abroad." 
 
"Look, dear, I don't see myself as a scarlet woman.    I've been to church both Sundays since.    I   
don't feel guilty, but I do feel mighty curious, I'll tell you that." 
 
She poured more tea for him.    "It must be the war, Palmer. 
 
I don't know. With Hitler bestriding Europe and London burning to the ground, all the old   
ideas seem, I don't know, NUVIAL or something. 
 
I Mean conpared to what's real at the moment-the swans out in back at Mrs. Murchison's   
place-those sweet pink lily pads, the rain, the gray cat-the tea, those funny doughy cakes-and   
you and me.    That's as far as I've gotten." 
 
"I didn't tell you why I'm going to Denver." 
 
"No. "There's a buyer for my house.    Wants to pay a tremendous price. 
 
I've told you about the house." 
 
"Yes, it sounds heavenly.    Do you really want to let it go?" 
 
"I ratite around in it.    I've been thinking, and it comes to this. 
 
Most of my friends are in Denver.    The house is perfect to live in, to entertain in, to have my   
children and the grandchildren for visits. 
 
If I had a wife, I wouldn't sell it."    He stopped, looking at her now with serious, large brown   
eyes filled with worried shyness.    The look was itself a proposal of marriage.    "What do you   
think, Rhoda?" 
 
-Oh, Palmer!    Oh, heavenly days!"    Rhoda's eyes brimmed.    She was not totally astonished, but   
the relief was beyond description.    This resolved the puzzlement.    It had not been a crazy slip,   
after all, like that foolishness with Kip Tollever, but a grand passion. Grand passions were   
different. 
 
He said, 'That can't really be news to you.    We wouldn't have stayed at Mrs.    Murchison's if I   
hadn't felt this way." 
 
"Well!    Oh, my lord.    I'm proud and happy that you should think of me like that.    Of course I   
am.    But-Palmer!"    She swept her hand almost gaily at the photographs on the piano. 
 
"I have friends who've married again in their fifties, Rhoda. 
 407 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
After divorces, some of them, and some are blissfully happy." 
 
Rhoda sighed, dashed her fingers to her eyes, and smiled at him. 
 
"Is it that you want to make an honest woman of me?    That's terribly gallant, but unnecessary." 
 
Palmer Kirby leaned forward earnestly, tightening his large loose mouth. "Pug Henry is an   
admirable man.    It didn't happen because you're a bad woman. There was a rift in your   
marriage before we met. 
 
There had to be." 
 
In a very shaky voice, Rhoda said, "Before I ever knew him, Pug was a Navy fullback.    I saw   
him play in two Army-Navy games. I had a boyfriend who loved those games-let me talk,   
Palmer, maybe I'll collect myself. He was an aggressive, exciting player, this husky little   
fellow darting all over the field.    Then, my stars, he BURST on me in Washington.    The actual   
Pug Henry, whose picture had been in the papers and all that.    The war was on.    He looked   
dashing in blue and gold, I must say! Well, great heavens, he courted the way he played   
football. 
 
And he was very funny in those days.    Pug has a droll wit, you know, when he bothers to use it.  
 
Well, all the boys I went with were just from the old Washington crowd, all in to the same   
schools, all cut out by the same cookie cutter, you might say.    Pug was something different.   
He still is. For one thing, he's a very carious Christian, and you can bet that took a lot of   
getting used to!    I mean right from the start it was a complicated thing.    I mean it didn't seem to   
interfere at all with his ROMANCING, if I make myself clear, and yet-well, Pug is altogether   
unusual and wonderful.    I'll always say that.    I must bore Pug.    I know he loves me, but-the   
thing is he is so Navy!    Why, that man left me standing at my wedding reception, Palmer, for   
half an hour, while he drove his commanding officer to catch a train back to Norfolk!    That's   
Victor Henry for you.    But in twenty-five years-oh dear, now for the very first time I suddenly   
feel very, very wretched." 
 
Rhoda cried into her handkerchief, her shoulders shaking.    He came and sat beside her.    When   
she calmed down, she looked at him and said, "You go along to Denver, but ask yourself this.   
I've done this to Pug. 
 
Wouldn't you be thinking for ever and a day, if by some wild chance you got what you're   
asking for, that I'd do it to you?    Of course you would. Why not?" 
 
He stood.    "I'll keep that appointment in Denver, Rhoda.    But I don't think I'll sell the house." 
 
"Oh, sell it!    As far as I'm concerned, you go right ahead and sell that house, Palmer.    I only   
think you yourself might regret it one day." 
 
"Good-bye, Rhoda.    I'll telephone you from Washington.    Sorry I missed Madeline this time.   
Give her my best."    He said, glancing at the photographs'on the piano, "I think your kids would   
like me.    Even that strange Byron fellow." 
 408 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"How could they fail to?    That isn't the problem."    She walked with him to the door.    He kissed   
her like a husband going off on a trip. 
 
IEPTEMBERwas crisping the Berlin air and yellowing the leaves when s Pug got back.   
Compared to London under the blitz, the city looked at peace. Fewer uniforms were in sight,   
and almost no trucks or tanks. 
 
After beating France, Hitler had partially demobilized to free workers for the farms and   
factories.    His remaining soldiers were not loafing around Berlin.    Either they were poised for   
invasion on the coast, or they garrisoned France and Poland, or they guarded a thin prudent line   
facing the Soviet Union.    Only the air war showed its traces: round blue-gray snouts of flak   
guns poking above autumn leaves, flaxen-haired German children in a public square gawking   
at a downed Wellington.    The sight of the forlorn British bomber-a twin of F for Freddie-with   
its red, white, and blue bull's-eye, gave Pug a sad twinge. He tried and failed to see the   
wrecked gasworks. Scowling Luftwaffe guards and wooden street barriers cordoned off the   
disaster. 
 
Goering had long ago announced that if a single British bomb ever fell on Berlin, the German   
people could call him Meyer. 
 
The evidence of Meyer's shortcomings was off limits. 
 
But Pug wondered how many Germans would have gone there anyway to look. These were   
weird people.    In Lisbon, when he boarded the Lufthansa plane, Germany had then and there   
smitten him: the spotless interior, the heel-clicking steward, the fast service of food and drink,   
the harsh barking loudspeaker, and his seatmate, a fat be"pectacled blond doctor who clinked   
wineglasses with him and spoke warmly of the United States and of his sister in Milwaukee.   
The doctor expressed confidence that America and Germany would always be friends. 
 
Hitler and Roosevelt were equally great men and they both wanted peace. 
 
He deplored the ruthless murder of Berlin civilians by British bombers, as contrasted to the   
Luftwaffe's strict concentration on military targets. The R.A.F, he pointed out, painted the   
underside of their planes with a remarkable black varnish that rendered them invisible at night,   
and constantly changed altitude so that the A.A. 
 
batteries had trouble finding the range.    That was how they had sneaked by.    But these petty   
unfair tricks would avail them nothing. 
 
German science would find the answer in a week or two.    The war was really over and won.   
The Luftwaffe was invincible.      The British criminals responsible for dropping bombs on   
women and little children would soon have to face the bar of ustice. 
 
This man was exactly like a London music-hall burlesque German, complete to the squinting   
smile and the rolls of fat on his neck.    Pug got tired of him.    He said dryly that he had just come   
from London and that the Luftwaffe was getting beaten over England.    The man at once froze,   
turned his back on Pug, and ostentatiously flourished an Italian newspaper with lurid pictures   
 409 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
of London on fire. 
 
Then when Pug first returned to the Grunewald house, the art museum director who lived next   
door, a vastly learned little dark man named Dr. Baltzer, rushed over, dragging a game leg, to   
offer his neighbor a drink and to chat about the imminent British collapse. 
 
Besides being obliging neighbors, the Baltzers had invited the Henrys    to many interesting   
exhibitions and parties.    Mrs.    Baltzer had become Rhoda's closest German friend.    Tactfully,   
Pug tried to tell his neighbor that the war wasn't going quite the way Goebbels's newspapers   
and broadcasters pictured it.    At the first hint that the R.A.F was holding its own, the little art   
expert bristled and went limping out, forgetting his offer to give Pug a drink.    And this was a   
man who had hinted many times that the Nazis were vulgar ruffians and that Hitler was a   
calamity. 
 
This was what now made Berlin completely intolerable.    The Germans had balled themselves   
into one tight fist.    The little tramp had his one Reich, one people, one leader," that he had so   
long screeched for. 
 
Victor Henry, a man of discipline, understood and admired the stiff obedient efficiency of   
these people, but their mindless shutting out of facts disgusted him.    It was not only stupid, not   
only shameless; it was bad warmaking.    The "estimate of the situation"-a phrase borrowed by   
the Navy from Prussian military doctrine-had to start from the facts. 
 
When Ernst Grohke telephoned to invite him to lunch shortly after His return, he accepted   
gladly.    Grohke was one of the few German military men he knew who seemed to retain some   
common sense amid the Nazi delirium.    In a restauraiat crowded with uniformed Party officials   
and high military brass, the submariner griped openly about the war, especially the way Gijring   
had botched the Battle of Britain.    From time to time he narrowed his eyes and glanced over   
one shoulder and the other, an automatic gesture in Germany when talking war or politics. 
 
"We'll still win," he said.    "They'll try all the dumb alternatives and then they'll get around to   
it." 
 
"To what?"    Pug said. 
 
'Blockade, of course.    The old English weapon turned against them. 
 
They can't blockade us.    We've got the whole European coast open from the Baltic all the way   
around to Turkey.    Even Napoleon never had that. 
 
But England's got a negative balance of food and fuel that has to choke her to death. If   
Goering had just knocked out harbors this summer and sunk sbi, -adding that to the tremendous   
score our U-boats and magnetic mines have been piling up-England would already be making   
aproaches through the Swiss and the Swedes." He calmly lifted both hands upward. "No   
alternative!      We're sinking    them    all    across    the Atlantic.    They don't    have    the    strength   
to   
convoy.    If they did, our new tactics and torpedoes would still lick them.    Mind you, we started   
way under strength on U-boats, Victor. But finally denitz convinced Raeder, and Raeder   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
convinced the Fuhrer.    After Poland, when England turned down the peace offer, we started   
laying keels by the dozens. 
 
They begin coming off the ways next January.    An improved type, a beauty.    Then-four, five   
months, half a milliod tons sunk a month, and phfffi-Churchill kaput. 
 
You disagree?"    Grohke grinned at him.    The small U-boat man wore a well-tailored purplish   
tweed suit and a clashing yellow bow tie. His face glowed with sunburned, confident good   
health.    "Come on.    You don't have to sympathize.    We all know your President's sentiments,   
hen?    But you understand the sea and you know the situation." 
 
Pug regarded Grohke wryly.    He rather agreed with this estimate. 
 
"Well, if Goering really will switch to blockade, and if you do have a big new fleet of 'em   
coming along-but that's a couple of big if's." 
 
"You doubt my word?" 
 
"I wouldn't blame you for expanding a bit." 
 
"You're all right, Victor."    Grohke laughed.    "Goddamn.    But I don't have to expand.    You'll   
see, beginning in January." 
 
"Then it may get down to whether we come in." 
 
The U-boat man stopped laughing.    'Yes.    That's the question.    But now your President sneaks a   
few old airplanes and ships to England, and he can't even face your Congress with that.    Do   
you think your people will go for sending out American warships to be sunk by U-boats? 
 
Roosevelt is a tough guy, but he is afraid of your people." 
 
"Well!    Ernst Grohke and Victor Henry!    The two sea dogs, deciding the war." 
 
The banker Wolf Steller was bowing over them, thin sandy hair plastered down, cigarette   
holder sucking out of his smile.    "Victor, that is a beautiful new suit.    Savile Row?" 
 
"Yes, as a matter of fact." 
 
"Unmistakable.    Well, it will be a pleasure to start ordering clothes there again.    There are no   
tailors like the British.    I say, how far along are you gentlemen?    Come and join us.    just a few   
pleasant chaps at our table." 
 
"No thank you, Herr Steller," Pug said.    "I must get back to my office quickly." 
 
"Of course.    I say, Ernst, did you tell Captain Henry you're coming to Abendruh this weekend?   
Victor's an old Abendrub visitor, you know. 
 
By jove!    Why don't you come along this time, Victor?    Twice lately you've said no, but I'm   
not proud.    You and your old friend Ernst can tell each other big sea lies all weekend!    Do say   
yes.    There will be just two or three other spjendid fellows.    And some lovely ladies, not all of   
 411 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
them attached." 
 
Under Victor Henry's quick glance, Grohke smiled unnaturally and said, "Well, that's not a bad   
idea, is it?" 
 
"All right," said the American. It was quite clear to him now what was going on and why   
Grohke had called him.    "Thank you very much." 
 
"Grand.    Ripping.    See you on Friday," said the banker, clapping Victor Henry on the shoulder.  
 
After this, the talk of the two naval officers was lame and sparse. 
 
Ernst Grohke busied himself with his food, not looking much at Pug. 
 
That same afternoon, to Victor Henry's surprise, his yeoman rang him and said Natalie Jastrow   
was on the line from Siena. 
 
"Jehosephat!    Put her on." 
 
"Hello?    Hello?    What happened?    I was calling Captain Henry in Berlin." The girl's voice was   
muffled and burbling. 
 
"Here I am, Natalie." 
 
"Oh, hello!    Is Byron all right?" 
 
"He's fine."    -Oh, what a relief!"    The interference on the line stopped.    Natalie's voice came   
clear.    "I haven't had a single letter from him since I left.    I sent a cable and got no answer.    I   
know how impossible the mail is nowadays, but still I've begun to worry." 
 
'Natalie, he hasn't had any letters from you.    He wrote me that. 
 
And I'm sure he didn't get your cable.    But he's in good shape." 
 
"Why, I've been writing once a week. How aggravating that is! I miss him so. How's he   
doing in submarine school?"    Outside Victor Henry's window, the guard was changing at the   
chancellery, with rhythmic boot-thumpings and brisk German barks.    Natalie's telephone voice   
stirred an ache in him.    The New York accent was different from Pamela's, but it was a young   
low girlish voice like hers. 
 
'Scraping by, I gather." 
 
Her laugh, too, was much like Pamela's, husky and slightly mocking. 
 
'That sounds right." 
 
"Natalie, he expected you back long before this." 
 
"I know. There were problems, but they're straightening out. Be sure to tell him I'm fine.   
Siena's quite charming in wartime, and very peaceful. 
 412 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
It's sort of sinking back into the Middle Ages, Byron's got three months to go, hasn't he?" 
 
"He finishes in December, if they don't throw him out sooner." 
 
Again the laugh.    "They won't.    Briny is actually very sure "footed, you know.    I'll be back by   
December.    Please write and tell him that. Maybe a letter from you will get through."    "It will.   
I'll write today." 
 
It was a small gathering at Abendruh, with no staircase slide. 
 
Pug was sorry that Ernst Grohke didn't see the crude elaborate joke, so much to the Teutonic   
taste.    The submariner obviously was ill at ease, and could have used the icebreaker.    The other   
men were a Luftwaffe general and a high official in the foreign ministry, company far above   
Grohke.    The five pretty ladies were not wives.    Mrs. Stiller was absent. 
 
Victor Henry sized all this up as an orgy in the making, to get him hat to his surprise, they went   
to talk about the British.      After dinner, somew to a wood-panelled room where musical   
instruments were ready, and Steller, the Luftwaffe general, the man from the foreign ministry,   
and a the banker had redheaded lady played quartets.    In Pug's previous visits hown no musical   
skill, but Steller played first violin quite well.      The Luftwaffe general, a very tall dark   
cadaverous man with sickly hollow eyes, bowed and swayed over the cello, drawing forth   
luscious sounds. Pug had seen this man once before, at a distance at Karinhall in full uniform;   
he had looked far more formidable then than he did now in his dinner jacket and monocle. 
 
The musicians made mistakes, stopped a couple of times, joked stly, and took up the music   
once more.    The foreign ministry man    on the second violin, a roly-poly Bavarian    with a   
drooping yellow mustache, was a superb fiddler.    It was the best amateur music Pug had ever   
heard. Grohke sat with the submissiveness of most Germans in the presence of art, drinking a   
lot of brandy and stifling yawns.    After a couple of hours of this, the ladies abruptly said good- 
night and left. 
 
If there had been a signal, Pug missed it. 
 
"Perhaps we might have a nightcap outside," said the banker to Pug, putting his violin carefully   
in its case.    "The evening is warm. 
 
Do you like the tone of my Stradivarius?    I wish I were worthy to play it."    The broad stone   
terrace looked out on a formal garden, a darkly splashing fountain, and the river; beyond that,   
forest.    A smudged orange moon in its last quarter was rising over the trees.    In the light of   
reddishyellow flares on long iron poles, shadows danced on the house and the flagstone floor.   
The five men sat, and a butler passed drinks. Melodious birds sang in the quiet night,   
reminding Pug of the nightingales at the British bomber base. 
 
"Victor, if you care to talk about England," said Steller from the depths of an easy chair, his   
face in black shadow, "we would of course be interested."    Pug forced a jocular tone.    "You   
mean I have to admit I've been in England?" 
 413 
 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The banker heavily took up the note.    "Ha, ha.    Unless you want to get our intelligence people   
in bad trouble, you'd better."    After everybody else laughed, he said, "If you prefer, we'll drop   
the subject here and now for the weekend. Cur hospitality hasn't got-how do you say it in   
English?"-he switched from the German they were all speaking-"strings tied to it."    But you're   
in an unusual position, having travelled between the capitals." 
 
"Well, if you want me to say youpve shot the R.A.F out of the sky and the British Will quit   
next week, it might be better to drop it now." 
 
In a gloomy bass voice, the long shadowy form of the general spoke. 
 
'We know we haven't shot the R.A.F out of the sky. 
 
'Speak freely.    General jagow is my oldest friend," said Steller. 
 
" we were schoolboys together.    And Dr.    Meusse"-he waved an arm at the foreign ministry   
man, and a long skeletal shadow arm leaped on the wallgoes back almost that far." 
 
'We say in the Luftwaffe," put in the general, "the red flag is up. 
 
That means we all talk straight.    We say what we think about the Fuhrer, about Goering, about   
anything and anybody.    And we say the goddamnedest things, I tell you." 
 
'Okay, I like those ground rules," said Victor Henry.    "Fire away." 
 
'Would an invasion succeed?"    spoke up Dr.    Meusse. 
 
'What invasion?    Can your navy get you across?" 
 
"Why not?"    said General jagow in calm professional tones. 
 
"Through a corridor barricaded on both sides by mine belts, and cordoned off by U-boats,   
under an umbrella of Luftwaffe?    Is it so much to ask of the Grand Fleet?"    Pug glanced at   
Grohke, who sat glumly swirling brandy in a bell glass.    'You've got a U-boat man here.    Ask   
him about the cordons and the mine belts." 
 
With an impatient gesture that flicked brandy into the air, Grohke said, in thick tones, "Very   
difficult, possibly suicidal, and worst of all, entirely unnecessary." 
 
General jagow leaned toward Grohke, his monocle glittering in the flare light, his face stiff   
with anger. 
 
Pug exclaimed, "Red flag's up. 
 
"So it is," jagow said, with an unforgiving glare at the submariner, who slouched down in   
darkness. 
 
"I agree with him," Pug said.    "Part of a landing force might get through-not saying in what   
shape.    There's still the invasion beacheswhich I've seen close on.    Which I personally would   
hate to approach from seaward." 
 414 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Clearing beach obstacles is a technical task," jagow said, with a swift return to offhand tones.   
"We have special sappers well trained for that."    "General, our marine corps has been studying   
and rehearsing beach assaults intensively for years. It's the toughest attack problem in the   
book. 
 
I don't believe the Webrmacht ever thought about it until a few weeks ago."    "German military   
ingenuity is not negligible," said Dr. 
 
Meusse. 
 
"No argument," said Victor Henry. 
 
jagow said, "Of course we can't land without wastage. We would take big but endurable   
losses. Once we obtained a solid lodgment, you might see Churchill fall. The Luftwaffe   
would fight for the beachhead to the last plane. But I believe the R.A.F would run out of   
planes first." 
 
Victor Henry made no comment. 
 
"What is the bombing of London doing to British morale?"    Steller asked. 
 
"You're making Churchill's job easier.    They're fighting mad now. 
 
Knocking hell out of London won't win the war.    Not in my judgment. 
 
Not to mention that bombers can fly east as well as west." 
 
The general and the banker looked at each other.    The general's voice was sepulchral.    "Would   
it surprise you if some people here agreed with you?" 
 
"Churchill cleverly provoked the Fuhrer by bombing Berlin on the twenty-sixth," said Steller.   
'We had to hit back, for morale reasons. 
 
The trick worked, but the British people must now pay.    There's no political alternative but a   
big reprisal." 
 
'Let's be honest," said Dr.    Meusse.    "Field Marshal Goering wanted to go after London and try   
to end it." 
 
jagow shook his head.    "He knew it was too soon.    We all did.    It was those six days of bad   
weather that saved the R.A.F. We needed another week against those airfields.    But in the long   
run it will all be the same." 
 
Steller said, "They're a brave people.    I hate to see them prolong the agony." 
 
"They don't seem to mind," Victor Henry said. "By and large, they're having a good time.   
They think they're going to win." 
 
'There is the weakness," said Dr.    Meusse, pulling on his mustache. 
 415 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"National megalomania.    When a people loses touch with reality, it is finished."    ' Stiller lit a   
thick cigar.      "Absolutely.    The    course    of this    war    is    fixed    now    by    statistics-    That is   
my   
department.    Would you care to hear them?" 
 
"Gladly. Especially if you'll give away some secrets," said Victor Henry, evoking friendly   
laughter from all the Germans except Grohke. 
 
The submariner was sunk in gloom or sleep. 
 
"No secrets," said Steller.    'The financial stuff may be a little new to you.    But take my word   
for it, my figures are right." 
 
'I'm sure of that." 
 
"Good.    England lives at the end of-how would you put it-a revolving bucket chain of ships.   
She always has.    This time the buckets are being shot off the chain faster than she can replace   
them. 
 
She started the war with about twenty million tons of shipping. 
 
Her own, and what she could scrape up elsewhere.    That tonnage is disappearing fast.    The rate   
now is-what's the latest?"    He spoke condescendingly to Grohke. 
 
The submariner covered a yawn.    "That figure is secret.    Victor must have a damn good idea   
from what he heard in London." 
 
Pug said, 'I have." 
 
"All right.    Then you know the curve is upward.    Nothing else matters in this war.    England   
will soon run out of fuel and food, and that will be that. When her machines stop, and her   
planes are grounded, and her people are clamoring for food, Churchill will fall. 
 
There's no way out." 
 
'Isn't there?    My country has a lot of fuel and food-and steel and shipyards too-and we're open   
for business.)) The banker coldly smiled. 
 
-yes, but your Neutrality Act requires that England pay cash for everything.    Cash and carry.   
That is the one sensible thing your people learned from the last war, when England repudiated   
her war debts. Roosevelt, Willkie, it doesn't matter now.    There isn't a chance-you bear me out   
on this, Victor-that your Congress will ever make another war loan to England.    Will they?    " 
 
"No." 
 
cd All right. Then she is kaput. She started the war with about five billions    in foreign   
exchange.    Our intelligence is she's already spent more than four.    The planes and supplies and   
ships she needs right now to keeping will wipe out the last billion or SO like a snowball on a   
hot stove. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
By December the British Empire will be broke.    Bankrupt!    You see, dear fellow, they got into   
a war they couldn't fight and couldn't pay for. That is the simple fact.    And it was the political   
genius of the Fuhrer, Victorwhatever you think of him-to foresee this, through all the fog of the   
future.    just as he foresaw that the French wouldn't fight.    Staunch leadership brings victory."   
Steller leaned forward, with a disdainful hand-wave.      "Yes, Churchill's words are very   
eloquent, very touching, very spiritual.      But he was England's worst Chancellor of the   
Exchequer. He hasn't the slightest notion of logical or financial realities. Neither has had.    His   
pretty literary soap bubbles are all going to pop. Then there will be peace." 
 
Dr.    Meusse put in, "We are sinking ships now at a raic we never reached until the best months   
of 1917.    Do you know that?" 
 
"I know that," said Captain Henry.    "And as I said to Ernst the other day, that's when we came   
in."    The silence on the terrace lasted a long time.    Then Wolf Steller said, "And that is the   
world tragedy that must not occur now, Victor-Germany and America, the two great anti- 
Bolshevik powers, going to war.    The only victor will be Stalin." 
 
The voice of Grohke, coarse and fuddled, issued from the depths of his chair.    "It won't happen.   
It'll    all    be over too    fast. Wait    till    January,    when we get    ourselves    some    U-boats." The   
weekend proved cold, dull, rainy, and-for Pug-very heavy on music and culture. The five   
ladies, all in their thirties, all mechanically flirtatious, were available for talks for walks, for   
dancing; and when the rain briefly stopped, for tennis.    Pug assumed they were available for   
the night, too.    He had trouble telling them apart. 
 
Ernst Grohke slept a lot and left early on Sunday.    The other three men had been indifferent to   
the submariner, though markedly warm and agreeable to Victor Henry.    Obviously Grohke had   
served his purpose. Obviously his telephone call and the encounter with Steller in the   
restaurant had been arranged.    These big shots were incapable of carrying further a pretense of   
cordiality to a German four-striper. 
 
an Pug was asked, and he swered, many more questions about his trip to England.    Except for   
one probe by the gaunt Luftwaffe man about the radar stations-which Pug answered with a   
blank, stupid look-there was no effort to pump hard intelligence out of him. 
 
Rather, there seemed to be an effort to pump him full of German politics, philosophy, and   
poetry.    These three old comrades were mightily fond of intellectual talk, and kept pressing on   
Henry books from Steller's library that came up in conversation. He tried to read them at   
bedtime. 
 
After fifteen minutes, night after night, he fell into deep restful slumber. 
 
Germany's strange literature usually had that effect on Victor Henry. He had long since given   
up trying to understand the fantastic seriousness with which Germans took themselves, their   
"world-historical" position, and every twist and Turn of their murky history since   
Charlemagne.    From a military standpoint, all this river of ink about German destiny, German   
culture, German spirituality, Germanophilism, pan-Germanism, and the rest, kept underlining   
 417 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
one fact. 
 
Here was an industrial people of eighty million that had spent a century uniting itself, talking to   
itself,    rolling    up its    sleeves    to lick    the    world,    and convincing    itself    that    God would   
hold   
Germany's coat and cheer it on.    That was worth bearing in mind. 
 
The sun broke through late Sunday when they were having cocktails on the terrace. Steller   
offered to show Victor Henry his prize pigs, and walked him a long way down the river to the   
pens.    Here amid a great stink, the host told Henry the pedigrees of several remarkably large   
hairy porkers, lying in muck and hungrily grunting. As they strolled back, the banker said,   
"Have you been badly bored, Victor?" 
 
'y, not in the least," Pug lied. 
 
"I know it's been a different sort of weekend.    Meusse and jagow are very spiritual fellows.   
We have been pals forever.    jagow was my first real contact with Goering.    Before that I was   
very close to von Papen, who as you know was the Nazis' biggest opponent, until he himself in   
1933 
 
saw where destiny was pointing.    He actually made Hitler chancellor." 
 
Steller idly struck at purple flowering thistles with his heavy black stick, knocking off thier   
heads.    The broken flowers gave off a fresh rank smell. 
 
"Jagow thinks the world of you." 
 
"He plays a hell of a cello," said Pug, "for a fly-fly boy." 
 
"Yes.    He is brilliant.    But he is not well.    Victor, he especially appreciates your willingness to   
talk about England.    Most friendly of you." 
 
"I haven't revealed anything.    Not intentionally." 
 
Steller laughed.    'You're an honorable servant of your government. 
 
Still, your observations have been illuminating.    What strikes all of us is your sense of honor.   
Honor is everything to a German. 
 
Flattery made Pug Henry uncomfortable.    He met it with silence and a dulled look. 
 
"If there's anything that General jagow could do for you, I know it would give him pleasure." 
 
"That's very kind, but not that I know of."    "Installations you might care to visit?" 
 
"Well, our air attache would jump at such an invitation." 
 
"As you wish.    jagow would take a more personal interest in you. 
 
"There's one thing, a bit out of the ordinary. Am R.A.F pilot, a good friend of mine, went   
down in the Channel several weeks ago.    Your people might have picked him up." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
With a wave of the knobby stick, Steller said, "That should be simple to find out.    Give jagow   
this pilot's name, rank, and so forth. 
 
You'll have your answer shortly."    "I'll be much obliged." 
 
"If your friend is a prisoner, you might even be able to visit him." 
 
"That would be great." Wolf Steller called him early in October, when Victor Henry had   
almost forgotten the strange weekend.    "Your man is alive." 
 
"Who is?" 
 
Steller reeled off Gallard's name, rank, and serial number.    "He is in France, sdE in a hospital   
but in good condition. General jagow invites you, as his personal guest, to visit Luftwaffe   
Headquarters close by. You are invited as a friend, not as an American attache. 
 
This telephone call is the only communication there will be.    No reciprocity is necessary." 
 
After a moment Pug said, "Well, that's good news.    The general is mighty kind."    "As I told   
you, you made a hit with him."    "I'll have to call you back." 
 
"Of course." 
 
The charge d'affaires, when Pug told him about this, drooped his eyes almost shut, leaned back   
in his chair, and ran his thumb back and forth on his mustache.    "The Luftwaffe man wants   
something of you." 
 
"Naturally."    "Well, you have my approval.    Why not jump at it? 
 
You might learn something, and you'll see this flier.    Who is he?" 
 
"Well-he's engaged to the daughter of a friend of mine." The charge's eyes opened a little   
wider and he stroked his mustache.    Pug felt pressed to add something.    "Alistair Tudsbury's   
daughter, in fact." 
 
"Oh, he's Pam's fiance, is he? Lucky boy. Well, by all means go ahead and see how Pam   
Tudsbury's    fiance is," said the charge,    with a wisp of irony that did not escape,    and that   
irritated, Victor Henry. 
 
The weather was bad.    Pug went to Lille by train.    Rail travel was surprisingly back to normal   
in German-ruled Europe. The train left on time and roared through tranquil rainy autumn   
landscapes. Germany,    Belgium, and northern France looked all alike in October mist and   
drizzle, one large flat plain of farms, evergreens, and yellowing trees. The cities looked alike   
too, hodgepodges of ornate venerable buildings at the center, rimmed by severe modern   
structures; some were untouched by the war, some were scarred and blotched with rubble.    In   
the crowded restaurant car, amiably chatting Germans, Dutchmen, Frenchmen, Belgians, a few   
with wives, wined and dined amid rich good smells and a cheery clatter.      Uniformed   
Wehrmacht    officers, at a table    apart,    glanced    with contempt    at the civilians    and gave the   
scurrying waiters curt commands. Otherwise it was business as usual under the New Order,   
 419 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
except for the absence of Jews.    The Jews had been the busiest travellers in Europe, but on this   
train none were to be seen. 
 
In the Berlin-Lille express, the Third Reich looked a good bet to last a thousand years, by right   
of natural superiority and the ability to run things.    Trains headed the other way, jammed with   
cheerful young troops, gave Victor Henry his first solid hint that the invasion-if it had ever   
been on-might be off. 
 
An emissary of General jagow, a rigid thin lieutenant with extra gold braid on a shoulder, a   
splotch of ribbons, and a twitching eye muscle, met the American naval officer at the station,   
drove him to a grimy stone building with a facade of wet statues in the middle of Lille, and left   
him in a cheerless, windowless little office containing an ink-stained desk and two chairs.    The   
dusty yellow walls had clean squares and oblongs where pictures of French officials had been   
removed.    Behind the desk was a bright new    red, white, and black    swastika flag, and the   
popuJar picture of Hitler scowling in his soldier's coat, cowlick falling over one eye, a photo   
crudely touched up to make him look younger.    The room had the loudest-ticking pendulum   
wall clock Pug had ever heard; its face was green and faded with age, The door opened. A   
helmeted German soldier with a submachine gun tramped in, wheeled at the desk, and crashed   
his boots to stiff attention. Gallard followed him, his right arm in a sling, his face puffy,   
discolored, and bandaged, and behind him came the lieutenant with the twitching eye. The   
pilot wore his flying suit, in which large rips were crudely patched up. 
 
"Hello, Ted," said Victor Henry. 
 
Gallard said, with a look of extreme surprise, "Hello there!"    A dressing on his lower lip and   
chin muffled his speech. 
 
In quick precise German, the lieutenant told Captain Henry that, since British airmen were   
honor bound by their orders to seize every chance to escape, General jagow could not-to his   
regret-omit the precaution of an armed guard.    There was no time for that.    The soldier would   
not interfere.    He had no knowledge of English.    He was instructed to shoot at the first move to   
escape, so the lieutenant begged the gentlemen to avoid any gestures that might confuse him.   
As to the content of the interview, the general left it wholly to the honor of Captain Henry.    If   
there were no questions, he would now withdraw. 
 
"How do I let you know when we're through?"    Pug jerked a thumb at the blank-faced soldier.   
"If I get up and walk toward the door, for instance, that might confuse him." 
 
"Very true."    The lieutenant inclined his head and his eye twitched. 
 
"Then kindly raise the telephone for a few moments and replace it in the cradle.    I will then   
return.    Permit me to mention that the general hopes you will join him for lunch at advance   
headquarters, a drive of forty kilometers from here." 
 
As the door closed, Pug pulled out his cigarettes, and lit one for the Pilot. 
 
"Ah!    God bless you."    Gallard inhaled the smoke as a man emerging from under water gulps   
 420 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
air.    "Does Pam know?    Did anybody see me parachute?" 
 
"One of your mates claimed he had.    She's sure you're alive." 
 
'Good.    Now you can tell her." 
 
"That'll be a rare pleasure." 
 
The wall clock ticked very loudly.    Flicking the cigarette clumsily with his left hand, Gallard   
glanced at the guard, who stood like a post, machine gun slanted in his white-knuckled hands.   
The beetling line of the German helmet gave the farm-boy face a stern, statuesque look. 
 
"Puts a bit of a chill on the small talk, eh?" 
 
"He's rather a ripe one," Pug said. 
 
The guard, staring straight ahead, was giving off a co - upt unwashed smell in the close little   
room, though his smooth-shaven face was clean enough. 
 
"Rather.    I say, this is the surprise of my life.    I thought I was in for a rough grilling, or maybe   
for getting whisked off to Germany. 
 
They never told me a thing, except that I'd get shot if I misbehaved. 
 
You must have good friends in the Luftwaffe."    What do you want me to tell Pamela?" 
 
'Will you be seeing her?" 
 
"I don't think so.    I'm going back to Washington shortly.    I can wire or write her." 
 
"There's so much to tell.    First of all, I'm all right, more or less. Some burns around the face   
and neck."    He lifted the slung arm. 
 
"Luckily the bullet only broke the bone, didn't shatter it. I can't fault the medical attention.   
The food's been bloody awful-moldy black bread, vile margarine with a petroleum aftertaste,   
soup full of rotten potatoes.    The other day it mysteriously improved.    just in my ward. 
 
Last night we had a really passable stew, through it might have been Lille cats and dogs.   
Tasted good.    I suppose all that was apropos of your little visit.    I'm terribly grateful to you.   
Really, it's splendid that you've managed to do this, Captain Henry. 
 
How is Pam?    Tell me about her.    When did you last see her?    How did she look?" 
 
"I saw her several times after you disappeared.    She'd come down to London, and I'd take her   
to dinner and to cheerful places.    For a while she was peaky and wouldn't eat.    But she was   
coming around. 
 
Practically the last thing she told me was that she expected you back. 
 
That she was goidg to wait for you and marry you." The pilot's eyes grew moist, "She's a   
 421 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Marvelous girl, Pamela." He looked around at the guard. "Say, he does smell bad, doesn't   
he?"    Watching the soldier's dull unchanging face, he said in an offhand tone, "Will you look at   
that face?    Explains a lot, doesn't it?    Eighty million docile dangerous swine like this fellow.   
No wonder Hitler's their leader." 
 
There was not a flicker in the soldier's eyes.    "I really don't think he understands English." 
 
"Don't count on it," said Pug, dry and fast. 
 
"Well, tell her I admit she was right.    When I get back I'll take the headquarters job.    That's   
where I belong."    He shook his head. 
 
"Silly clot that I am.    These jerries were ahead of me and below, Me-ri o's, three sitters-a great   
chance.    But I missed my shot, didn't pull up in time, dove right down between them, and next   
thing I knew I felt a slam on the shoulder, just like a very hard punch.    My engine caught fire.   
I pulled back hard on my stick and by God it was loose as a broken neck.    I looked around and   
saw I had no tail section.    Shot clean off.    Well, I released the hood and the harness pin, and   
crawled out of there. I don't even remember getting burned, but the flames got to my face,   
mostly around the mouth.    I only felt it when the salt water stung."    Gallard sighed and glanced   
around the room, his dejected eyes coming to rest on the rigid malodorous soldier. 
 
"And here I am.    What's happening in the war?    The Hun doctors say it's practically over.    Of   
course that's a lie." 
 
Victor Henry made his account as cheerful as possible. The pilot nodded and brightened.   
"That's more like it." 
 
The clock ticked.    The soldier startled them by contorting his face and sneezing twice.    Tears   
ran down his face, but he stood rigid as before. 
 
"Ruddy idiotic," said Gallard, 'that you'll walk out of here to lunch with a Luftwaffe general,   
and I'll still be a prisoner at gunpoint.    I suppose You'd better be cracking off." 
 
"No hurry.    Take a few cigarettes.    I'd give you the pack, but Rosebud might think it was funny   
business and get confused." 
 
"Ha!    Rosebud is good.    Damned thoughtful of you, sir."    Gallard pulled out several cigarettes,   
and then impulsively extended the pack toward the soldier.    The German's eyes shifted down   
and up, and he briefly shook his head like a horse driving off Hies. 
 
Gallard chain-lit a cigarette. "Look here, I don't know how you've managed this, but thank   
you.    Thank you!    It's helped more than you can guess."    "Well, it was mainly luck, but I'm   
glad I tracked you down." 
 
With a distorted grin-the left side of Gallard's bandaged mouth seemed frozen-the pilot said,   
"Of course Pam thinks you can do anything." 
 
Pug glanced up at the old clock. The numbers were too faded to read, but the hands were   
 422 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
almost closed at noon.    "I guess I'd better not keep the general waiting."    "Certainly not, sir."   
The    pilot looked    at    the    guard    and    added,    "Anyway, while I'll never    forget    Rosebud,   
he's   
making me ill." 
 
The clock pock-pocked a dozen times while Victor Henry held the telephone receiver up off   
the hook.    He replaced it. 
 
"Tell Pam I'll be seeing her," said Gallard, in firm tones implying an intention to escape. 
 
'Be careful." 
 
"Trust me for that.    I've got a lot to live for, you know.    You're elected to be best man, if you're   
witmn a thousand miles."    "If I am, I'll come."    Driving through Lille, Pug marked again, as he   
had in the restaurant car, how German rule had serenely settled in.    In the drizzly gray streets   
and boulevards    of    this    large    industrial    town,    the    French    were    going about    their   
business,   
directed by French policemen, driving French cars with French license plates, amid French   
shops and billboards. Only here and there an official poster in heavy black German type, a   
sign on a street or over a building entrance-often containing the word oTEN-and the jarring   
sight of German soldiers cruising in army cars, reminded one that Hitler was the master of   
Lille. 
 
No doubt the city was being politely and methodically plundered. 
 
Pug had heard about the techniques: the worthless occupation currency with which the   
Germans bought up most things, and the meaningless custody receipts given by outright   
looters.    But the process was nowhere visible.    The busy pedestrians of Lille looked glum, but   
Victor Henry had never seen the French when they were not looking glum.    Here, as on the   
train, the New Order appeared good for a thousand years. 
 
In a tall LuftwafFe cap, shiny black boots, and a slick blue-gray milary raincoat to it his ankles,   
the cello player looked taller, leaner, and considerably fiercer.    The lieutenant's slavish bows   
and heel clicks, the scrambling obsequiousness of everybody at headquarters, amply showed   
that jagow was most high brass. He offered Victor Henry his choice of a decent lunch at a   
"rather comfortable" chateau nearby, commandeered by the Luftwaffe, or a mere bite here at   
the airfield. 
 
Nodding approval of Pug's preference, he doffed his raincoat, dropping it from his shoulders   
without looking around at the lieutenant who caught it. 
 
On a cloth-covered table in an inner office, the general and his guest ate soup, trout, veal,   
cheese, and fruit, all served up in gold-trimmed china by gliding, smiling French waiters, with   
three superb wines. General jagow picked at the food and hardly tasted the wine. Recognizing   
the cyanosed pallor of heart trouble, Victor Henry made no comment.    He was hungry and dug   
in heartily while the general smoked cigarettes and talked, in a clipped exact German which his   
lieutenant evidently had been imitating.    Often he interrupted himself to cover his mouth and   
cough carefully. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The United States Navy, jagow said, was the only military machine in the world professionally   
comparable to the German army. He had visited it as an observer in the thirties, and had   
brought back to Goering the dive-bombing idea.    So the Luftwaffe had developed the Stuka. 
 
'Whether you approve or not," he said with a tired smile, "the success of our blitzkrieg owes a   
sizable debt to your Navy." 
 
"Well, maybe we'll take that bow after the war, General." 
 
The American Army, jagow went on with a wry nod at Pug's irony, was in no way comparable.   
The doctrine and practice, like that of all modern armies, derived from German General Staff   
concepts. But he had noticed an amateurishness, a lack of.spirit in the maneuvers, and the   
numbers were pitiful.    Essentially, the United States was a great sea power, he said, linking the   
two world oceans.    The state of the armed forces reflected that geopolitical fact. 
 
That started him on Spengler, who he said had failed, like all too many Germans, to understand   
the United States.    That was the fallacy in 'The Decline of the West.    The United States was   
white Christian Europe again, given a second chance on a rich virgin continent.    America allied   
to a modernized orderly Europe could bring on a vast rebirth of the West, a new golden age.   
At least this was what Pug made out of the general's cloudy high-flown talk, so much like the   
evening conversations at Aberidruh. 
 
Over the coffee-terrible stuff tasting like burned walnut shellsjagow said, "Would you care to   
have a look at the aerodrome?    The weather is rather disagreeable." 
 
"I'd like that very much, if one of your aides can spare the time." 
 
The weary smile reappeared.    "I finished my work on this campaign long ago.    The rest is up to   
the field commanders.    I am at your disposal." 
 
They drove    around    the    aerodrome    in    a    small    closed    car,    full of the    sulphurous   
fumes    of   
German gasoline.    In wan sunlight, from holes of bright blue opening in the low overcast sky,   
stubby Messerschmitt log's stood half-concealed in dispersal bunkers, their painted crosses and   
swastikas    much    the worse for wear. It was just like    a British fighter    base: repair shops,   
hangars, dispersal huts, crisscrossing air strips, set among peaceful farms, and rolling pastures   
where herds of cows grazed.    Fading signs in French showed that this was an expanded base of   
the defeated French air force. Most of the buildings were raw new structures of wood or   
cement.    Cracked old landing strips stood beside broad fresh ones like autobahns. 
 
"You've done all this since June?"    said Pug.    "Pretty good." 
 
jagow for a moment looked like a flattered old man, showing his sparse teeth in a pleased soft   
grin.    "You have the professional eye. 
 
The Western newspaper smart alecks want to know why the Luftwaffe waited six precious   
weeks before commencing the attack.    What do they know about logistics?" 
 
While Hitler left the operation of the air force strictly to Goering, said the general, he had   
 
 
 
 
 
 
insisted on one point which showed his military genius.    After the conquest of    the Low   
Countries and northern France, advanced air bases had had to be set up on his orders. 
 
Only then would he allow the Luftwaffe to strike at England. Advanced bases would double or   
triple German air power.    The same plane could make two or three times as many attacks in the   
same number of hours, and-on these shortened runs kilograms of bombs could replace   
kilograms of gasoline. 
 
"The simplest strategic thinking," said jagow, "and the soundest." 
 
They visited a dispersal hut, where worn-looking German youngsters, strangely like the R.A.F   
fighter pilots, lounged in flying suits, ready to go. 
 
But when they saw jagow they sprang to attention as the British pilots never had.    The hut was   
more roughly built, and the plump simpering pinup girls on the wooden walls, next to   
mimeographed watch notices and regulations, offered doughy German sexiness rather than the   
bony Anglo-American variety.    Otherwise it was all the same, including the mildewy smell of   
bedding and flying clothes. 
 
As jagow's car drove along the field, an air raid siren went off. 
 
Pilots came scrambling out of their huts.    "Stop the car," he said to the driver, adding to Victor   
Henry, "A nuisance raid, high level. 
 
A sound tactic, we must respond and it throws our pilots off balance. 
 
But the British pay with a lot of bombers.    Flimsy planes, poorly armed. Shall we get out and   
watch?" 
 
Messerschmitt after Messerchmitt wheeled into position and roared off, a steady stream of   
steep-climbing fighters. 
 
"TO Me this is a depressing sight," said jagow, hugging his lean body in the shiny long coat   
with both arms, as though chilled. 
 
"Germans fighting Englishmen. Diamond cut diamond. It is civil war in the West, plain   
suicidal foolishness.      The English could have a decent honorable peace tomorrow.      That   
bulldog Churchill is counting on one thing and one thing only-American help." 
 
"General, he's counting on the courage of his people and the quality of his air force." 
 
"Captain Henry, if Roosevelt cut off all help and told Churchill he wanted to mediate a peace,   
how long would this war go on?" 
 
"But that's impossible. 
 
"Very true, because your President is surrounded by Morgenthals, Frankfurters, and Lehmans."   
General jagow held up a long skinny hand in a long gray glove as Pug started to protest.    "I am   
not a Nazi. I came into the Luftwaffe from the army. Don't ever think anti-Semitism is a   
 425 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
German problem.    Ah over EuroPe the attitude toward the Jews is exactly the same. 
 
The Fuhrer has been realistic in spelling it out, that's all. 
 
Some of his Party followers have committed silly excesses. But you can't indict a whole   
people for the crudeness of a few. Those American Jews around Roosevelt make the same   
mistake that our Nazi fanatics do.n "General jagow," Pug broke in earnestly, "You can't make a   
greater mistake than to believe that the Jews are behind our hostility to Hitler's regime."    He   
was hoping to penetrate this hardened German obsession just once. Jagow was unusually   
intelligent. 
 
"A lot of our people deeply admire the Germans.    I do.    But some things Hitler has done are   
unforgivable to any American." 
 
"Things Hitler has done!"    jagow sighed, his eyes heavy and sad. 
 
"I'll tell you    something    that may amaze    you,    Captain. When we took Poland, It was we   
Germans who stopped the Poles from murdering the jews- They took our arrival as a signal to   
let loose. It was like open season on Jews! The atrocities    were unbelievable. Yes, our   
Wehrrnacht had to step in and shield the Jews from the Poles."    The general coughed hard. "I   
am not pretending we love the Jews.    I don't claim they should love us.    1  
 
re tr gi all actually understand the Morgenthals.    But they' a c y wrong.    The United State s must   
not allow a war to the death between England and Germany.    We are all one civilization.    We   
are the West. 
 
If we fight it out among ourselves we'll go down before Asiatic Bolshevism. There will be   
barbaric darkness for a thousand years." 
 
jagow fell silent, his hollow, somewhat feverish eyes boring at Pug. 
 
Then he put out a long stiff finger. 
 
'If there were only a few strong advisers to give your President this viewpoint! But those   
advisers who aren't Jewish are of British descent. It's a damnable situation. We'll beat the   
British, Captain Henry.    We have the power.    We never intended to fight them.    The Fuhrer   
could have built a thousand submarines and strangled England in three months. He never   
emphasized U-boats.    You know that.    What do we gain by such a victory? 
 
We only crush our finest natural ally." "Well, General, you attacked Poland when she was   
England's ally. 
 
You made the deal with Stalin.    Those things are done." 
 
"They were forced on us."    Behind a gloved hand, jagow coughed long and genteelly.    'We are   
a strange people, Captain Henry, hard for others to understand.    We are very generous, very   
naive.    Always we are reaching for the stars.    To others we seem insensitive and arrogant. 
 
Our English cousins are every bit as arrogant, I assure you. Ah, but what a manner they   
 426 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
cultivated!      They despise their Jews.      They keep them out of the clubs where power is   
concentrated, and the banks, and all vital positions.    But they act politely to them.    We admitted   
the Jews to all our very highest circles, until they swarmed in and threatened to take over   
entirely. But we showed our feelings. That's the difference. The German is all feeling, all   
Faustian striving. 
 
Appeal to his honor, and he will march or fly or sail to his death with a happy song.    That is   
our naivete, yes, our primitivism. 
 
But it is a healthy thing.    America too has its own naivete, the primitive realism of the frontier,   
the cowboys. 
 
What does it all add up to?    We need friends in the United States to explain that there are two   
sides to this war, and that the only solution is peace in the West, unity in the West, an alliance   
in the West that can control the world.-Ah, look there.    The British markanship is rather hard   
on the French livestock, but that's about all." 
 
On a distant hill, huge inverted pyramids of dirt splashed high in the air amid flame and smoke,   
and cows galloped clumsily around.      The general glanced at his watch.      "I have a little   
conference at headquarters. 
 
If you can stay for dinner, there is a very pleasant restaurant in Lille-"- 'I have to return to   
Berlin, General.    I can't express my gratitude, but-" Up went the glove.    "Please.    To talk to an   
American, a professional military man, who shows some understanding of our situation, is   
literally good for my health." Messerschmitts were landing in the rain when jagow turned   
Victor Henry over to his lieutenant at the entrance to the headquarters building. 
 
"If we can be of further service in the matter of Flight Lieutenant Gallard, let us know," jagow   
said, stripping off a glove to offer a damp cold hand.    "Auf Wiedersehen, Captain Henry.    If I   
have been of any small service, all I ask is this.    Wherever duty takes you, remember there are   
two sides to the war, and that on both sides there are men of honor. 
 
The ornately molded and carved ceilings in Wolf Steller's bank seemed forty feet high.    It was   
after hours, A few clerks worked silently behind the grilles.    The footsteps of the two men on   
the red marble floor echoed and re-echoed under the high vault, like the tramp of a platoon.    "It   
is a little gloomy here now," said Steller, "but very private.    This way, Victor." 
 
They passed through a sizable conference room into a small richly furnished office, with a   
blaze of paintings crowding the walls; little though he knew, Henry recognized two Picassos   
and a Renoir. 
 
'So, you go so soon," Steller said, gesturing to a heavy maroon leather couch.    "Did you expect   
this?" 
 
"Well, I thought my relief would be along in a couple of weeks. 
 
But when I got back from Lille, here he was, waiting." 
 427 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Of course you are anxious to be reunited with your very beautiful wife." 
 
Victor Henry said, with a glance at the larger Picasso, a gruesomely distorted woman in flaring   
colors, "I thought modern art was frowned on in the Third Reich." 
 
Steller    smiled.    "It has not gone down in value. The field marshal    has    one of the great   
collections of the world.    He is a very civilized man. He knows these things will change." 
 
'They will?" 
 
"Most assuredly, once the war is over.    We are a nation under siege, Victor.    Nerves get frayed,   
a mood of extremism prevails.    That will die away.    Europe will be a wonderful place to live.   
Germany will be the pleasantest place of all.    What do you say to a glass of sherry?" 
 
"That'll be fine.    Thanks." 
 
Steller poured from a heavy crystal decanter.    "What do we drink to? 
 
I daresay you won't drink to the victory of Germany." 
 
With a tart grin Pug said, "We're neutral, you know" 
 
"Ah, yes. 
 
Ah, Victor, if only you were!    How gladly we would settle for that! 
 
Well, to an honorable peace?"    "Sure.    To an honorable peace." 
 
They drank. 
 
"Passable?" 
 
"Fine.    I'm no expert on wines." 
 
"It's supposed to be the best sherry in Europe." 
 
"It's certainly very good." 
 
The banker settled in an armchair and lit a of the floor lamp his scalp glistened pink through   
little trip to Lille was a success, hen?" 
 
"Yes, I'm obliged to you and the general." 
 
"Please.    By the ordinary rules, such a thing would be not only unusual but utterly impossible.   
Among men of honor, there are special rules." Steller heaved an audible sigh.    "Well, Victor, I   
didn't ask you to give me some time just to offer you sherry." 
 
"I didn't suppose so." 
 
"You're a military man.    There are special conversations that sometimes have to be forgotten,   
obliterated without    a    trace.      In German    we    have    a    special    phrase    for these    most   
delicate   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
matters.    'under four eyes." 
 
"I've heard the phrase." 
 
"What transpires next is under four eyes."    Victor Henry, intensely curious at this point, felt   
there was nothing to do but let the banker talk on.    What might be coming next, he could not   
imagine; his best guess was a wispy peace feeler at second hand from Goering, to convey to   
the President. 
 
'You had a conversation with Gregor jagow about the course of the war. About the tragic   
absurdity of this fratricidal conflict between Germany and England." 
 
Pug nodded. 
 
"Did his ideas make sense to you?" 
 
"Frankly, we don't study geopolitics in the Navy.    At least we don't call it that.    So I'm not up   
on Spengler and so forth."    'You're an American pragmatist," said Steller with a smile. 
 
"I'm a gunnery expert misplaced in diplomacy, and hoping the hell to get out of it."    "I believe   
you.    The man of honor wants to serve in the field."    "I'd like to do what I'm trained for." 
 
"You do agree that American help, and expectation of far greater help, is what is keeping   
England in the war?" 
 
'Partly.    They just don't feel like quitting.    They think they'll win. 
 
"With American help." 
 
"Well, they think they'll get it." 
 
"then what stands between the whole Western world and an honlong cigar. In the light his thin   
Hat hair.    "Your orable peace-which you and I just drank to-is Churchill's reliance on help from   
Roosevelt." 
 
Pug took a few moments to answer.    'Maybe, but what's an honorable peace?    Churchill would   
want to depose Hitler. Hitler would want to depose Churchill. Both those gentlemen are   
equally firmly in the saddle, and both really represent the national will.    So there you are." 
 
"You are going back to serve as naval aide to President Roosevelt." 
 
Steller said this with a slight interrogative note. 
 
Pug's face registered no surprise.      'I'm going back to the Bureau of Personnel for   
reassignment." 
 
The banker's smile was tolerant and assured.    Well, our intelligence usually gets these things   
right.    Now, Victor, let me have my say, and don't break in until I've finished.    That's all I ask.   
All right?" 
 429 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"All right." 
 
The banker puffed twice at his cigar. "Men of honor talk among themselves, Victor, in a   
special language.    I'm addressing you now in that vocabulary.    'nese are matters of incredible   
delicacy.    In the end, beneath the words there must be a spiritual kinship, With you, Gregor   
jagow and I have felt that kinship. You have been impeccably correct, but unlike so many   
people at the American embassy, you don't regard Germans as cannibals.    You have treated us   
as human beings like yourself.    So did your delightful and beautiful wife.    It has been noticed, I   
assure you.    That you sympathize with England is only natural. 
 
I do myself.    I love England.    I spent two years at Oxford. 
 
"Now, you heard what Gregor said about the Jewish influence around your President.    I know   
you have to deny it, but it is a very serious fact of this war.    We must live with it and do what   
we can about it." 
 
Pug tried to speak.    Steller held up a rigid palm.    "You said you would hear me out, Victor.    In   
the circumstances, we need friends in Washington. Not to use undue influence, as the Jews do   
so shamelessly. Simply to present the other side.    Roosevelt is a visi 
 
man of very broad on, He can be 
 
made to see that American interest requires a graft honorable peace in the West.    For one thing,   
only such a development can free him to handle Japan.    Do you supPose we give a damn about   
japan?    That new pact is all a comedy to keep the Russians worried and quiet. 
 
-Now, Victor-and remember this is under four eyes-we do have such friends.    Not many.    A   
few. Patriotic Americans, who see the realities of the war instead of the propaganda of the   
Jews-and of Churchill, who is just an adventurous megalomaniac and has never been anything   
else. 
 
We hope you'll be another such friend." 
 
Victor Henry regretted that he had drunk up the glass of sherry rather fast.    The conversation   
was taking a turn which needed sharp handling. 
 
He leaned forward. 
 
"Let me go on," said the banker, waving the cigar at him.    "You know of my connection with   
Hermann Goering. To me he is a great figure of European history. His practical grasp of   
affairs and his energy still astound me.    The Fuhrer-well, the Fuhrer is different, he operates on   
a plane above all of us, a plane of prophecy, of grand dreams.    The engineer at the throttle is   
Goering. Nothing in Germany escapes him. Nothing happens that he does not approve and   
know about. 
 
You Americans with your Puritan bias think him a bit of a sultan. 
 
But we Germans love opera and opulence.    It's a weakness.    The field marshal knows that and   
 430 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
plays to it. 
 
Of course, he thoroughly enjoys himself, too.      Why not?      His zest for life is Faustian,   
Rabelaisian. 
 
'Victor, Hermann Goering has established in Switzerland some anonymous, untraceable bank   
accounts.    His resources are enormous. 
 
These bank accounts, after the war, will be the rewards of Germany's honorable friends, who   
have said the right word in the right place for her when it mattered.      It is nothing like   
espionage, where you pay some sneaking wretch for papers or information he hands over.  
 
This is simple gratitude among men of honor, a sharing of benefits in the day of victory.    If our   
friends want the accounts, they will be there. If they don't-" Steller shrugged and sat back.   
"I've said my piece, Victor.    And after you've said yours, this conversation will be as if it never   
existed." 
 
It was one of the few occasions in Victor Henry's life when he was taken totally by surprise.  
 
"That's interesting," he said.    "Extremely interesting."    After a measurable pause he went on,   
"Well!    First, please tell me, if you can, what made you, or General jagow, or Field Marshal   
Goering, think that I might be receptive to this approach.    That's highly important to me, and to   
this whole matter, I assure you." 
 
"My dear chap, the Washington picture is vital, and you're enroute to Washington.    The day   
American supplies to England are shut off, we've won the war.    We've got it won now, really,   
but England is just hanging on, hoping for she doesn't know what.    She'll be flat broke in three   
or four months, and if your Neutrality Act holds, that's the end. Now Victor, the field marshal   
remembers    your interesting visit with the banker GianelliHis    purpose now is exactly what   
Roosevelt's was then, to avoid further useless bloodshed.    He thinks you can help, and General   
jagow is confident that you will."    Stiller gave Pug his most ingratiating smile, crinkling his   
eyes almost shut. 
 
"As for me, I know your exquisite wife is a very sympathetic and friendly woman.    My guess is   
that she has always reflected your real feelings, more than your correct words. I trust I'm   
right." 
 
Victor Henry nodded.    "I see.    That's a clear answer, Herr Steller. 
 
Here's mine, under four eyes. Please tell Field Marshal Goering, for me, to stick his Swiss   
bank account up his fat ass."    Blue smoke wreathed around Steller's shocked face.    His eyes   
went wide and glassy, his face became dark red from his striped collar to his hair, and his scalp   
reddened too, His teeth showed in an ugly smile.    "I remind you, Captain Henry," he said in a   
new slow singsong tone, "that you have not left the Third Reich yet.    You are still in Berlin.   
Field Marshal Hermann Goering is second here only to the Fuhrer." "I'm an officer in the   
United States Navy.    Unless I misunderstood you, or you want to withdraw it"-Victor Henry's   
voice hardened almost to a bark-you've asked me, in his name, to commit treason for money." 
 431 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The banker's nasty smile faded.    In a placating tone, with a soft look, spreading out his hands,   
he said, "My dear Victor, how can you take it in that way? I beg you, think! The highest   
officers in the American armed forces blatantly and openly advocate help for England all the   
time.    What I asked of you was just to present both sides, when the occasion arose, for the sake   
of American security and for peace." 
 
'Yes, as a man of honor.    I heard you.    I really believe you meant it. 
 
General jagow said you Germans were a difficult people to understand. 
 
That is the truth.    I'm giving up.    My assignment here is over." 
 
Victor Henry knew he had hit too hard, but he had reacted as he did in a ball game, on instinct   
and impulse.    He stood, and the banker got to his feet too. 
 
'See here, old top," Steller said gently, 'we Germans are at war, surrounded by foes. If the   
United States is ever in such a situation-and history takes strange turns-you may one day.   
make an approach like this to a man you respect, and find it as difficult as I have.    I think your   
response has been naive and wrong.    Your phrasing was coarse.    SuE, the spiritual quai ity was   
there.    It was an honorable reaction.    I have absolutely no hard feelings.    I trust you have none.   
I place a high value on your goodll, Victor.    And we did have good times at Abendruh, didn't   
we?" 
 
Smiling, Seller held out his smooth thin clean hand.    Pug turned on his heel and walked out of   
the room. Out of the loudly echoing bank he walked, nodding at the door attendanes deep   
bow.    In the warm sunlit Berlin evening, on the sidewalk outside, beautiful German children   
surrounded a one-legged man on a crutch, who was selling pink paper dolls that danced on   
strings.    Victor Henry walked several blocks at a pace that made his heart pound.    The first new   
thought that came to him was that, with his grossly insulting words and acts, he might have   
murdered Ted Gallard. 
 
(from WORLD EMPIRE LOST) 
 
The Falling Crown The winter and spring between the Battle of Britain and our attack on the   
Soviet Union stand in popular history as a breathing spell. 
 
Actually, in these eight months the axis of the war changed, for the British Empire as a reality   
left the stage of history. 
 
In 1939, this momentous event lay shrouded in the future.    A proper name for this war might   
well be "The War of the British Succession," for the real question that was fought out was this:   
after the collapse of the British Empire, which would drag with it all European colonialism,   
what shape was the new world order to take, and under whose rule? 
 
This historic turn, and this momentous issue, Adolf Hitler foresaw. He inspired and mobilized   
Germany to rise and dare all to seize the falling crown. 
 
The feats that our nation performed against odds will someday be justly treated in history,   
 432 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
when passions die and the stain of certain minor excesses'can be seen in perspective.   
Meantime historians write as though only the struggles of the Allies were heroic, as though we   
Germans were a species of metal monster incapable of bleeding, freezing, or hungering, and   
therefore deserving of no credit for our vast victories.    As Hitler said, the winning side writes   
the history. 
 
Yet, in their praise of their own arduous successes, the Allies despite themselves honor us, the   
nation that almost won the British succession, against a combination of all the industrial   
nations in the world except feeble Italy and far-off impoverished Japan. 
 
For all of Hitler's military mistakes, and they were many and serious, my professional   
judgment remains that the German armed forces would have won the war, and world empire,   
but for one historical accident.    His real opponent, roduced by fate at this point in time, was an   
even craftier and more ruthless political genius, with more sober military judgment and greater   
material means for industrialized warfare: Franklin D. Roosevelt. 
 
The nation this man led was in no way comparable to the German people in military valor, as   
test after test in the field eventually showed. But that did not matter.    This great manipulator so   
managed the war that other nations bled themselves almost to death, so as to hand his country   
the rule of the earth on a silver platter. 
 
The United States of America, today the troubled master of the world, lost fewer men in the   
entire war than Germany expended in any one of half a dozen campaigns. Almost twenty   
million soldiers, sailors, and airmen perished in the Second World War.    Of these, America in   
four years of global war lost about three hundred thousand on all fronts including her war with   
Japan!    For this almost bloodless conquest of the earth, which has no parallel in all history, the   
American people can thank that enigmatic, still shrouded figure, the Augustus of the industrial   
age, the Dutch-descended millionaire cripple, Roosevelt. 
 
Franklin D. Roosevelt's world conquest still goes unrecognized. 
 
In the present historical writings on the war, he is granted nothing like the stature he will one   
day have. There is little doubt that he wanted it that way. The Augustan ruler, a recurring   
figure in history, seizes the realities of power under a mask of the humble, benign,   
humanitarian citizen, Nobody since the emperor Augustus ever managed this as Franklin   
Roosevelt did. Even Augustus was not as sonctimonious, for in those days    the Christian   
vocabulary of humility and humaneness was not in vogue to lend such depths to hypocrisy. 
 
Roosevelt's Feat 
 
In his successful waging of the Second World War, Franklin Roosevelt made no major military   
mistakes. That is a record not matched by any world conqueror since Julius Caesar. His   
slogan of "unconditional surrender" was widely called a blunder, by commentators as diverse   
as Goebbels and Eisenhower.    I do not agree, and in its place, I will take up that stricture and   
challenge it. 
 
Our propaganda office called him a tool of the Jews, but of course that was the silliest bosh.   
 433 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roosevelt did nothing to save the Jews. 
 
He knew that any such action would annoy Congress and interfere with winning the war.   
Under his clever facade of a Christian humanitarian liberal, he was one of the coldest, most   
ruthless calculators in history.    He sensed that the Americans liked the Jews no more than we   
did; and they omply confirmed this all through the war in their immigration policies, and at the   
Evian and Bermuda conferences, where they simply abandoned the Jews to their fate. 
 
This author is no admirer of Roosevelt as a person, but the aim of my work is to set down the   
facts as military history should view them. 
 
On such a valuation, Franklin Roosevelt was the mastermind of the war. 
 
Even such a powerful, energetic, and brilliant figure as Adolf Hitler was in the end no more   
than a foil for him. Adventuristic conquerors often pave the way, in this fashion, for the   
dominion of their enemies. 
 
The adventurer sees the opportunity, and with meager means tries to capture it.    He does the   
destroying and the bulldozing.    His iceblooded successor then crushes him and builds on the   
ruins. 
 
Napoleon in the last analysis merely put Wellington's England in the saddle for a century.   
Charles XII hardly has a place in history, except as a foil for Peter the Great.    And the German   
people under Adolf Hitler accomplished nothing in the long run except to hand the British   
succession to the United States under Roosevelt. 
 
Roosevelt's Difficulty 
 
Franklin Roosevelt's problem was that at this great turning point in history he did not lead a   
warlike nation, whereas Adolf Hitler did. 
 
The American people are not cowardly.    But, living in prosperous isolation, they have been the   
spoiled children of modern history. 
 
Spoiled children do not bear well the rigors of the field. Once they entered the war, the   
Americans fought with a logistic train of luxury and self-protection that to the warriors of   
Germany, the Soviet Union, and even England, was laughable. Nevertheless they had the   
riches and the will for this.    The strong can fight any kind of fight, they please. 
 
The Americans have a tradition of militia-like fighting. 
 
Presented with a threat, they drop their pleasures, take up arms, and fight amateurishly but   
bravely to get the thing over with.    They formed this pattern in their revolution, and confirmed   
it in their civil war and the First World War.    Roosevelt understood this. 
 
He had to hold Germany at bay until he could present the chance for world conquest to his   
people in the guise of a threat to their safety.    This, with a masterly exhibition of patient,   
spiderlike waiting, he did. Meantime, he robbed Germany of two certain victories-over Great   
 434 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Britain and over the Soviet Union-by an inspired instrument of indirect war-making, a genuine   
new thing in military history, the so-called Lend-Lease Act. 
 
A Cunning Trick 
 
By the end of 1940, despite her narrow escapes at Dunkirk and in the air battle, Britain was   
sinking to her knees. She had only one recourse left on the planet to save her: the United   
States.    But the Neutrality Act threatened to cut the English off from the American farms and   
factories that were keeping them alive.    They were running out of dollars to pay even for grain   
and oil, let alone the ships, planes, guns, and bullets which they could no longer manufacture   
for themselves in the necessary quantities.    For they lacked labor, materials, and plant, and they   
kept falling further behind under air attack. 
 
The Neutrality Act forced belligerents to pay dollars for United States goods, and to come and   
fetch them.    The Act posed more of a dilemma for Roosevelt than for the British.    For them,   
one clear wise course lay open: negotiated peace with Germany. As this writer has often   
pointed out, had England made such a peace the British Empire would exist today. The Soviet   
Union would have been crushed in a one-front war, and instead of a rampant Bolshevism we   
would see in Russia at worst some pacific, disarmed form of social democracy.    But none of   
this fitted in with Roosevelt's ideas.      He had no intention of allowing Germany to gain   
ascendancy over the Euro-Asian heartland in a world-dominating partnership with the sea lords   
of Britannia. 
 
And so, to circumvent the Neutrality Act, Franklin Roosevelt devised LendLease, which was   
nothing more or less than a Policy to give the British free of charge-and later the Russians too- 
all the war materials they needed to fight us!    The audacity of the trick was breathtaking; the   
disguise was cunning.    And while the record shows that Roosevelt's clever advisers did much   
to push this unprecedented proposal through the stunned, balky Congress, it also clearly shows   
that the revolutionary idea sprang, in the phrase of Sherwood, straight from Roosevelt's   
"forested mind.Roosevelt sold this scheme to the simpleminded, inattentive American people   
with a typical bit of Augustan demagoguery, the famous comparison to a garden hose.    When a   
neighbor's house is on fire, he said at a press conference, one does not bargain with him over   
the sale or renting of the garden hose he needs to put it out.    One gladly lends him the hose, so   
as to keep the fire from one's own house. Once the fire is out, the neighbor returns the hose; or   
if he has damaged it, there is time enough then to settle the account. 
 
This was, of course, shameless and hollow Poppycock. Warships, warPlanes, war materials   
are not garden hoses. To take Roosevelt's comparison at its face value, if your neighbor's   
house is on fire, what you really do is rush over there and fight the fire with him.    You do not   
lend him your hose, and then stand idly by watching him try to cope with the flames.    That this   
silly stuff was swallowed whole by the Americans simply shows how uncannily shrewd   
Roosevelt was in managing them.      During his successful 1940 election campaign for an   
unprecedented third term, he had declared in a famous speech, "I tell you again, and again, and   
again, you boys are not going to be sent into foreign wars." He Was eagerly awaiting a chance   
to go back on this clear pledge. Meantime he had to use tricks and guile to oppose Germany,   
 435 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Real Meaning of Lend-Lease it was impossible for himnci this he knew-to present the case   
to his People in realistic terms. 
 
Otherwise he could have told them in effect, "My friends, this war is for the mastery of the   
world.    Our aim should be to achieve thot mastery ourselves, but with a minimum of blood.   
Let us encourage others to do our fighting for us.    Let us give them all the stuff they need to   
keep fighting. 
 
What do we care?    In developing the industries to produce this Lend-Lease stuff, we will be   
preparing ourselves, industrially and militarily, for world leadership. 
 
They will use up all our early models, our discardable stuff, killing Germans for us.    Maybe   
they will do the whole job for us, but that is doubtful.    We will have to step in at the end, but   
mopping up will be easy.    We will have gained a world victory with the expenditure of a lot of   
hardware, which we    can turn out faster, and in greater quantities, than all the world put   
together, without even feeling the pinch.    The others will shed the blood, and we will take the   
rule." 
 
That was what Lend-Lease meant and that was how it worked. 
 
First the British, and then the Russians, were induced by Lend-Lease to keep on with extremely   
bloody,.      almost hopeless struggles, when the easier, safer, more profitable alternative of   
negotiated peace always lay open to them.    There is reason to think that Stalin's low point late   
in 1941, when his armies and his air force had virtually ceased to exist as coherent battle   
formations and we were smashing toward Moscow, that supreme realist would have proposed   
peace again, if not for the encouragement in words and supplies-not in livesf the United States.   
As it was, the Russian people made sacrifices in blood never matched in all history, to transfer   
world hegemony from one Anglo-Saxon power to another. 
 
And Franklin Roosevelt so maneuvered matters that the British had to beg for this bloodletting   
help!      They were put in the position of being abjectly grateful for the chance to fight   
Roosevelt's battles On December 8, 1940, Churchill wrote the American President a very long   
letter, which deserves a bolder place in history than it now holds. 
 
Churchill once said that he had not become Prime Minister to preside over the dissolution of   
the Empire, but with this letter he dissolved it.    Churchill in this document frankly stated that   
England had come to the end of her rope, in the matter of ships, planes, materials, and dollars;   
and he asked the President to "f,nrJ w.-jvs and.    mpans" to heir) England in the common cause.   
This was what Roosevelt had been icily waiting for in his wheelchair: this written confession   
by the British Prime ,Ainister that without American aid the Empire was finished.    Within two   
weeks he had proposed Lend-Lease to his advisers, and within a month he had laid it before   
Congress. 
 
Empire means rule, and sufficient armed power to enforce the rule. 
 
In Churchill's letter, he acknowledged that his country and his Empire had become powerless   
to enforce their rule, and begged for succor. 
 436 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roosevelt leaped to comply.    Even if England was finished as an imperial power, she remained   
a country of forty millions with a good navy and air force, at war with Roosevelt's archrival; a   
splendid island base just off the coast of Europe, moreover, from which to attack Germany in   
the future.    The first order of business was to keep her fighting. 
 
Bargain War-Making 
 
Despite all the quack language in the act about lending and leasing, the transfer of American   
weapons and materials throughout the war was a gift.    No formal accounting was even kept.   
The President asked, and the Congress granted him, power to send arms and war goods   
wherever he pleased, in whatever quantities he pleased. Certainly the Congress when they   
passed the low would have balked at including Bolshevist countries. But at that time the Soviet   
Union was supposedly Hitler's friend. Later, when war broke out on the eastern front,   
Roosevelt poured a flood of supplies to the Bolsheviks without consulting Congress. The   
Americans complain that the Russians have never shown proper gratitude.    The attitude of the   
Russians is more realistic. Having spilled the blood of perhaps eleven million of their sons to   
help the United States to its present world position, they tend to feel that the tanks and planes   
were paid for. 
 
The Yankees love a bargain.    Lend-Lease was bargain war-making. 
 
For the big corporations, and for millions of workers, it merely meant a tremendous increase of   
prosperity.    The price was painlessly postponed to the future by means    of defense bonds.   
Others did the actual fighting and dying. 
 
Roosevelt and his advisers did discuss the risk that Germany would take Lend-Lease as an act   
of war-which it certainly was-and would formally declare war on the United States.    Since this   
was just what he wanted, he was prepared to run the risk.    America would have responded with   
a militia-like surge. 
 
Little as Adolf Hitler understood the United States, he did understand that.    He had no intention   
of taking on the United States until he had finished with the Soviet Union, an operation which   
was already in an advanced planning stage. 
 
So Germany swallowed Lend-Lease with some harsh words, and the "arsenal of democracy"   
tooled up to help British plutocracy and Russian Bolshevism destroy the Reich, the last bastion   
in Europe against the Red Slav tide. 
 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTE: Most broad statistics of the war are approximations, and the Pigures   
on total deaths vary widely from one source to another. The low rate of eventual American   
losses is a fact. 
 
We planned and fought that kind of war, expending money and machines instead of human   
lives where possible. 
 
Roon seems to think this indicates a deficiency in American valor. 
 437 
 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
We had enough valor to beat the Germans wherever we took them on. 
 
That was all the valor we needed.-V.H. 
 
Traveling to his new post in mid-january, Leslie Slote found himTself staged in Lisbon by a   
shortage of Lufthansa accommodations to Berlin. 
 
He checked into the Palace Hotel in Estoril, Lisbon's palm-lined seaside resort, where   
diplomats, wealthy refugees, Gestapo, and other foreign agents congregated. He thought he   
might pick up some information there while he waited for an air reservation to open up. 
 
Actually, he found Estoril in January an exceedingly chilly and boring place. The Germans   
abounded, but they kept in aloof clusters, regarding other people with supercilious eyes. 
 
He sat in the crowded lobby of the hotel one afternoon gnawing at his pipe, and reading in a   
Swiss newspaper about British successes against the Italians in Abyssinia and North Africa,   
faint rays in the gloom. 
 
The neutral newspaper had been hard to come by.    Fascist and Nazi journals now blanketed   
Portuguese newsstands, with a few scrawny, disgustingly servile periodicals from Vichy   
France.    British and American publications had vanished.    It was a fair barometric reading of   
the way the war was going, at least in the judgment of Portugal's rulers.    A year ago, on Lisbon   
newsstands, papers of both sides had been equally available. 
 
"Meestair Slotel Meestair Leslie Slotel' He jumped up and followed the small pink-cheeked   
page to a telephone near the reception desk. 
 
"Leslie?    Hello, it's Bunky.    How goes it by the old seaside?" 
 
Bunker Wendel! Thurston, Jr had attended the Foreign Service school with Slote, and now held   
the post of second secretary in the American legation in Lisbon. 
 
"Mighty dull, Bunky.    What's up?"    'Oh, nothing much."    Thurston sounded amused.    'It's just   
that you've spoken to me now and then, I believe, about a girl named Natalie Jastrow." 
 
Slote said sharply, "Yes, I have.    What about her?" 
 
"A girl by that name is sitting across the desk from me." 
 
"Who is?    Natalie?"    "Like to talk to her?    When I told her you were here she jumped a ip foot.  
 
"Christ, yes." 
 
Natalie came on the phone laughing, and Slote's heart throbbed at the familiar lovely sound.   
"Hello, old Slote," she said. 
 
"Natalie!    This is so staggering, and wonderful.    What are you doing here?" 
 
"Well, how about you?"    Natalie said.    "I'm as surprised as you are. 
 438 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Why aren't you in Moscow?" 
 
"I got hung up, in Washington and then here.    Is Aaron with you?" 
 
"I wish he were.    He's in Siena." 
 
"What!    Aren't you on your way back to the States?" 
 
Natalie took a moment to answer.    'Yes and no.    Leslie, as long as you're here, can I see you for   
a while?"    "Naturally!    Wonderful! 
 
Immediately!    I'll come in to the legation." 
 
"Wait, wait.    You're at the Palace Hotel, aren't you?    I'll come out and meet you.    I'd rather do   
that."    Bunky Thurston came on the line. "Look, Leslie, I'll put her on the bus.    She'll arrive in   
half an hour or so. If I may, I'll join you two in the Palace lobby at five." 
 
She still had a fondness for big dark hats.    He could see her through the dusty bus window,   
moving down the aisle in a jam of descending Passengers. She ran to him, threw her arms   
around him, and kissed his cheek.    'Hi!    I'm freezing.    I could have worn my ratty beaver coat,   
but who'd think it would be this cold and gray in Lisbon? 
 
Brrr!    It's even colder out here by the sea, isn't it?"    She clapped her hand to her hat as the wind   
flapped it.    "Let's look at you.    Well! No change.    If anything, you look rested." 
 
She said all this very fast, her eyes wide and shiny, her manner peculiarly excited.    The old   
spell worked at once. In the months since he had last seen Natalie, Slote had started up a   
romance with a girl from Kansas named Nora Jamison.    Nora was tall, brunette, and dark-eyed   
like this one, but otherwise as different as a doe from a bobcat: eventempered, affectionate,   
bright enough to be in her third year as a senator's secretary, and pretty enough to play leads   
with a semiprofessional Washington theatre group.    Her father was a rich farmer; she drove a   
Buick convertible.    She was altogether a find, and Slote was thinking seriously of marrying her   
on his return from Moscow. 
 
Nora worshipped and she was better looking than Natalie Jastrow and much easier to manage.   
But this Jewish girl in the big hat put her arm around him and brushed his face with her lips; he   
experienced a stabbing remembrance of what her love was like, and the snare closed on him   
again. 
 
He said, "Well, you know how I admire you, but you do look slightly beat up." 
 
"Do I ever! I've had hell's own time getting here. Let's get out of this wind. Where's the   
Palace Hotel?    I've been to Estoril twice, but I forget." 
 
He said, taking her arm and starting to walk, "It isn't far. 
 
What's the story?    Why didn't Aaron come?    What are you doing here?" 
 
"Byron's arriving tomorrow on a submarine." He halted in astonishment. She looked up at   
 439 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
him, hugged his arm, and laughed, her face alive with joy.    "That's it.    That's why I'm here."   
"He made it through that school?" 
 
"You sound surprised."    "I thought he might find it too much work." 
 
"He squeaked by.    This is his first long cruise.    The sub's stopping here, just for a few days.    I   
suppose you think I'm rattlebrained, but he wrote me to come and meet him, and here I am." 
 
"Nothing you do really surprises me, sweetie. I'm the man you came to visit in Warsaw in   
August '39-" Again she squeezed his arm, laughing. "So I did.    Quite an excursion that turned   
out to be, Hey! 
 
My God, it's cold here! It's a wonder all these palm trees don't Turn brown and die. You   
know, I've been through Lisbon twice before, Slote, and each time I've b(Nn utterly miserable.   
It feels very strange to be happy here." 
 
He asked her about Aaron Jastrow's situation. Natalie said the impact of the note from the   
Secretary of State's office had somehow been frittered away. The discovery that Jastrow's   
lapsed passport showed a questionable naturalization had fogged his case.    Van Wmaker, the   
young consul in Florence, had dawdled for almost a month, promising action and never getting   
around to it; then he had fallen ill and gone for a cure in France, and several more weeks had   
slipped by.    Now Van Wmaker was corresponding with the Department on how to deal with   
the matter. 
 
She had his firm promise that, one way or another, he would work it out. The worst of it was,   
she declared, that Aaron himself really was in no hurry to leave his villa, now that it seemed   
just a matter of unravelling a little more red tape.    He half welcomed every new delay, though   
he went through the motions of being vexed.    This was what was defeating her.    He would not   
fight, would not put any pressure on the consul to settle the thing.    He was writing serenely   
away at his Constantine book, keeping to all his little routines and rituals, drinking coffee in   
the lemon house, taking his walks at sunset, rising before dawn to sit blanketed on the terrace   
and watch the sun come up. 
 
He believed that the Battle of Britain had decided the war, that Hitler had made his bid and   
failed, and that a negotiated peace would soon emerge. 
 
"I suppose I made a mistake, after all, going back to Italy," she said, as they walked into the   
hotel.    "With me around he's perfectly comfortable and not inclined to budge."    Slote said, "I   
think you were right to return.    He's in more danger than he realizes, and needs a hard push.   
Maybe you and I together can shake him free." 
 
"But you're going to Moscow." 
 
"I have thirty days, and I've only used up ten.    Perhaps I'll go back to Rome with you.    I know   
several people in that embassy." 
 
"That would be Marvelous!"    Natalie halted in the middle of the pillared lobby.    "Where's the   
 440 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
bar?" 
 
"It's down at that end and it's very dismal and beery.    It's virtually Gestapo headquarters.    Why?   
Would you like a drink?" 
 
"I'd just as lief have tea, Leslie."    Her manner was oddly evasive. "I haven't eaten a I day.    I w I   
as just wondering where the bar was." He took her to a long, narrow public room full of people   
in sofas and armchairs drinking tea or cocktails.    Walking down the smoky room behind the   
headwaiter, they heard conversations in many languages: German was the commonest, and   
only one little group was talking English. 
 
'Izague of Nations here," Namlie said, as the waiter bowed them into a dark corner with a sofa   
and two chairs, "except that so many look Jewish." 
 
"A lot of them are," Slote said dolefully.    "Too many of them are." 
 
Natalie devoured a whole plate of sugared cakes with her tea. "I shouldn't do this, but I'm   
famished.    I'm big as a house.    I've gained ten pounds in six months at the villa.    I just eat and   
eat." 
 
"Possibly I'm prejudiced, but I think you look like the goddess of love, if a bit travel-worn. 
 
"Yes, you mean these hefty Venus de Milo hips, hey?"    She darted a pleased look at him.    "I   
hope Byron likes hips.    I've sure got'em." 
 
"I hadn't noticed your hips, but I assure you Byron will like them. 
 
Not that I really think you're worrjed.    There's Bunky Thurston." 
 
Slote waved as a little man at the doorway far down the room came toward them.    "Bunky's a   
prince of a fellow." 
 
"He has the world's most impressive mustache," Natalie said. 
 
"It's quite a mustache," Slote said. 
 
The mustache approached, a heavy rounded tawny brush with every hair gleamingly in place,   
attached to a pleasant pink moon face set on a slight body dressed in natty gray flannel. 
 
Slote said, "Hi, Bunky. You're late for tea, but just in time for a drink."    With a loud sigh,   
Thurston sat.    "Thanks.    I'll have a double Canadian Club and water.    What foul weather.    The   
chill gets in your bones. Natalie, here's that list I promised you." He handed her a folded   
mimeographed sheet. "I'm afraid you'll agree that it kills the notion. Now, I couldn't track   
down Conanander Bathurst, but I left word everywhere.    I'm sure he'll call me here within the   
hour." 
 
Slote glanced inquisitively at the paper in Natalie's hand.    It was a list of documents required   
for a marriage of foreigners in Portugal, and there were nine items.    Avidly studying the sheet,   
Natalie drooped her shoulders and glanced from Slote to Thurston. 
 441 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'Why, getting all this stuff together would take months!' "I've seen it done in one month,"   
Thurston said, "but six to eight weeks is more usual. The Portuguese government doesn't   
especially want foreigners to get married here.    I'm not sure why.    In peacetime we send people   
over to Gibraltar, where you go through like greased lightning.    But the Rock is shut up tight   
now." 
 
"Thinking of getting married?"    Slote said to Natalie. 
 
She colored at the dry tone.    "That was one of many things Byron wrote about.    I thought I   
might as well check. It's obviously impossible, not that I thought it was such a hot idea   
anyway." 
 
"Who's Commander Bathurst?"    Slote said. 
 
Thurston said, 'Our naval attache. He'll know exactly when the submarine's arriving." He   
tossed off half his whiskey when the waiter set it before him, and carefully smoothed down his   
mustache with    two forefingers,    looking    around    the    room    with    a    bitter    expression.     
"God,   
Lisbon gives me the creeps.    Forty thousand desperate people trying to get out of the net.    I've   
seen most of the faces in this room at our legation."    Thurston turned to Slote.    This isn't what   
you and I bargained for when we went to Foreign Service school." 
 
'Bunky, you'd better get rid of that Quaker conscience, or you really will crack up.    Remember   
that it isn't us who's doing it.    It's the Germans." 
 
'Not entirely.      I never thought much about our immigration laws until this thing started.   
They're pernicious and idiotic." Bunky Thurston drank again and coughed, empurpling his   
face.    'Forty thousand people. 
 
Forty thousand!    Suppose we admitted them all?    What difference would forty thousand people   
make, for God's sake, in the wastes of Montana or North Dakota?    They'd be a blessing!" 
 
"They wouldn't go there.    They'd huddle in the big cities, where there's still an unemployment   
problem." 
 
Thurston struck the table with a fist. "Now don't you give me that stale drivel, Leslie. It's   
enough that I have to parrot it all day myself. 
 
They'd go anywhere. You know that. They'd sign papers to live out their lives in Death   
Valley.      Our law's inhuman.      Wasn't America started as a sanctuary from European   
oppression?" 
 
Slote took off his glasses, rubbed his eyes, and glanced warily at the people nearest them, four   
elderly men arguing in French.    "Well, I'm not going to defend the law, but how do you draw   
the line?    Or do you have unrestricted immigration?    Do you let in everybody who wants to   
come? 
 
You'd empty southern and eastern Europe. They'd flood our economy, starve, ferment, and   
boil up in a revolution.    What about the Orientals? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Do you break the dike to the west? In ten years the United States would be a big Chinese   
suburb." 
 
Natalie said with a gesture at the room, "He's talking about these few people in Lisbon who   
have escaped from the Germans.    that's all." 
 
"Tried to escape," said T'burston.    "The Germans can take Portugal overnight." 
 
"And I'm talking about the arguments that arise in Congress when You try to alter the law,"   
Slote said, "especially in favor of Jews. 
 
Nobody wants any more competition from them, they're too energetic and smart. 
 
That's the fact of it, Natalie, like it or not."    'We.    could give refuge to all the Jews in Europe,   
all five million of them. We'd only be a lot better off," Thurston said. "Remember your   
Russian?    Wealth is life," he said.    And if that's a bit too simple, it's certainly true that wealth is   
brains."    He leaned toward Natalie, lowering his voice. 
 
'If you want to see the head of the Gestapo in Portugal, he's just walking in, and with him is the   
German ambassador.    Charming man, the ambassador.    My wife really likes him." 
 
Natalie stared.    "Is he the one with the scar?" 
 
"No, I don't know who that one is, though I've seen him around. 
 
I'm sure he's Gestapo too.    The ambassador's the one in the gray suit." 
 
The three men sat not far from them, and the headwaiter fluttered and grinned eagerly, taking   
their orders. 
 
"They look so ordinary," Natalie said. 
 
"The Germans    are quite ordinary,"    Slote said. "It's a little    scary,    in fact, how much    like   
Americans they are." 
 
Gloomily, Natalie said, "Those people at the table next to them are obviously Jews.    Drinking   
and laughing, side by side with the Gestapo. 
 
Eerie." 
 
Thurston said, "I know them. They bought their way out of Belgium, and they still don't   
believe they can't buy their way into the United States. Most of the Jews here have been   
stripped penniless, but there are a handful of those. They're in the casino night after night,   
whooping it up.    Fish in the net, jumping and flopping, still enjoying the water while they can."   
Thurston finished his drink, smoothed his mustache, and waved his glass at the waiter.    "I want   
another.    I've had some awful interviews today.    Lisbon is a very sad and horrible place right   
now.    My request for a transfer is in.    The question is whether I'll wait.    I may just quit the   
service.    I've never realized before how nice it is to have a wealthy Eather." 
 443 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Slote said to Natalie, "Am I taking you to dinner?" 
 
'Please, I'd love that." 
 
'How about you, Bunky?    Will you join us?    Let's all go upstairs to my suite for a while.    I want   
to change my shirt, and all that." 
 
"No, I have a dinner appointment.    I'll sit here and have my drink with Natalie.    I left word for   
Bathurst to page me here." 
 
Slote stood up.    "Well, thanks for all you've done." 
 
"I can do wonders for people who don't need help." 
 
Slote told Natalie the number of his suite, and left.    Later she found a pencilled note stuck in   
his doorjamb: N-door's open.    She walked into a very large living room, looking out onto the   
purple sea beyond a long iron-railed balcony.    Old heavy gilt and green furniture, gold cloth   
draperies, gilded mirrors, and large dark old paintings filled the room. Slote sang in a remote   
gushing shower.    She yelled through an open bedroom door, "Hey!    I'm here."    The water shut   
off, and he soon appeared in a plaid robe, towelling his head.    "How about these digs? Fit for a   
rajah, what?    The legation had it reserved for some petroleum big shot and he didn't show.    I've   
got it for a week." 
 
'It's fine."    She dropped heavily in a chair. 
 
"What's the matter?" 
 
'Bathurst finally called.    Briny's sub has been re-routed to Gibraltar. 
 
It won't come to Lisbon at all.    No explanation, that's just how it is." "I see.    Well, too bad.   
Maybe you can get to see him at Gibraltar." "Thurston doesn't think so, but he's going to the   
British embassy tomorrow morning, first thing, to find out.    He's being very kind. Especially   
since it's obvious he thinks I'm a damned fool. 
 
No doubt you do, too. )P She looked up at him with a defiant scowl that was familiar and   
beguiling, took off her hat, and tossed her hair. 
 
"What had you told him about Briny, anyway?    And about me?    He seemed to know quite a   
bit." 
 
"Oh, we had too much wine one night and I cried on his shoulder about my tragic love life.    I   
was very nice about Byron, I assure you, considering."    bet.    Say, this is quite a lay She said   
with a trace of malice, "Yes, I'll out at that.    It'll bankrupt you." 
 
'Not in the few days I'll be here." 
 
"Me, I've dropped my bags in a flea trap back in town, sharing a room with a Poor old Jewish   
lady from Rotterdam, whose husband got pulled off the train in Paris.    I haven't had a shower   
since Sunday." 
 444 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Look, why not mole in here?    There's an extra room for a maid. 
 
I'll sleep in there.    Look at that bed.    A football field.    It's yours." 
 
"Nothing doing.    Listen, Slote, if I can get to Gibraltar I'll marry Byron.    That's what he wants."   
Slote, combing his hair at a mirror framed by trumpeting gilded cherubs, stopped and gave her   
a pained skeptical look.    She went on nmously, "I know it sounds harum-scarum and wild." 
 
Her eyes suddenly shone, and she laughed.    "But in point of fact, I want to do it myself." 
 
"Well, I suppose I should congratulate you, Natalie.    God knows I wish you well." 
 
"Oh, I know you do, Slote.    Don't bother telling me how bizarre 
 
this is.    Some things are just inevitable.    I love Byron."    all "Well, the place is at your disposal,   
anyway.    They eat dinner late here.    Take a shower." 
 
"And climb into the same old underwear?" Natalie shook her head, looking thoughtful. "I   
noticed a shop downstairs.    Let me see what Lisbon can offer a big heifer like me." 
 
ho SI 
 
She came back shortly, carrying a x and looking y. "Did you mean that invitation?    I bought a   
pile of stuff.    Maybe it's my trousseau! 
 
A fast half hour of shopping.    They had all these things from Seville, cheap and just Yummy.   
Byron's eyes will pop out of his head, if he ever shows up. 
 
"Are you low on money now?" 
 
"My dear, I'm still rolling in it.    That's one thing about sitting on that Siena hill, with nothing to   
spend it on!    Aaron pays me like clockwork and it just accumulates.    Really, may I stay?    I hate   
the idea of going back to town tonight.    That poor old woman gives me the horrors." 
 
'I said the place is yours." 
 
"I can't register." 
 
"Don't worry." 
 
"All right."    She paused at the bedroom door and turned, holding the box in both arms.    Her   
intense dark glance shook the diplomat. 
 
"People Wouldn't understand about us, would they, Slote?" 
 
"There's nothing to understand about me.    You're the puzzle." 
 
"You didn't used to think I was puzzling." 
 
"I thought I had you figured out.    I'm paying a steep price for oversimplifying."    "You were an   
egotistical fool.    I am very fond of you." 
 445 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Thanks, Jastrow. Go take your goddamned shower." Next morning a buzzing at the suite   
door woke Slote.    Tying on a robe, he came yawning out of the tiny maid's room, and blinked.   
There in a blaze of sunshine sat Natalie in a dazzling white wool dress with a broad red gold- 
buckled belt, watching a waiter fuss over a breakfast on a wheeled table.    'Oh, hi," she said,   
smiling brightly and touching her carefully coiffed hair. "I didn't know whether you wanted to   
get up.    I ordered eggs for you, just in case.    Everything's so cheap and plentiful here!" 
 
'I'll brush my teeth and join you.    You're all spilled up!    How long have you been awake?" 
 
'Hours and hours.    I'm supposed to wait for Byron in the bar here at eleven o'clock today.    That   
was the original plan." 
 
Slote rubbed his eyes and peered at her. 'What's the matter with you? His sub's enroute to   
Gibraltar."    'That's what that man Bathurst said. Suppose he's mistaken?" 
 
"Natalie, he's the naval attache." 
 
'I know that."    Shaking his head, Slote signed for the breakfast and left the room. 
 
Soon he returned in a shirt, slacks, and sandals, and found her eating with appetite. She   
grinned at him. 'Forgive me for being a pig, dear. What a difference sunlight makes, and   
coffee!    I feel Marvelous."    He sat down and cut into a ripe Spanish melon.    "Sweetie, do you   
honestly expect Byron Henry to materialize in the bar of this hotel at eleven o'clock?    Just on   
your sheer willpower?" 
 
"Well, Navy signals get crossed up like any others, don't they? 
 
I'm going to be there."    'It's just irrational, but suit yourself." 
 
'Do you like my dress?    I bought it yesterday, right out of the window of that shop."    "Very   
becoming." 
 
She kept glancing at her watch.    "Well, wish me luck," she said at last, dropping her napkin on   
the table.    "I'm off." 
 
"Do you intend to sit in the bar all day, like patience on a monument?" 
 
"Don't be cross with me, Leslie." 
 
"I'm not.    I'd just like to plan the time." 
 
"Well, obviously, if he hasn't showed by noon or thereabouts, the next thing is to find out how   
I get to Gibraltar." 
 
"I'll call Bunky on that, and I'll come down at noon." 
 
"Will you, please?    Thanks, Leclie, thanks for everything.    That bed's wonderful, I haven't slept   
so well in months." 
 
She could not quite keep the mischief out of her face as she said this and left with a nonchalant   
 446 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
wave.    Clearly, thought Slote, she was relishing his discomfiture.    The tables were turned, and   
he had to endure it until he could Turn them again. 
 
He judged his chance was now at hand.    Leslie Slote intended to take every possible advantage   
of this encounter. He could not understand Natalie's resolve to squander herself on Byron   
Henry.    He had made a fearful mistake in his early treatment of this magnificent girl, and now   
he wanted to retrieve it.    Slote knew how a divorced man must feel, finding himself thrown   
together with an ex-wife he still loved. Between them stood a barrier of old quarrels and new   
proprieties-it had effectively kept him out of the big bed last night-but beneath all that lay a   
deep bond. 
 
If it had not been for Natalie's fortuitous passion for the strange skinny Henry kid, he believed,   
they would by now be back together, very likely married. And he honestly thought he was   
more worthy of her and better suited to her. 
 
Natalie might thrash about here in Lisbon for a while, he calculated; her willpower was   
formidable; but Gibraltar was probably impossible to get to. She would have to go back to   
Italy.    He would accompany her to Siena, pry Aaron Jastrow loose, and send them both home.   
If necessary he would wire Washington for a travel time extension.    If he could not win Natalie   
back during all this, he sadly overestimated himself and the tie between them.    He had been her   
first lover, after all.    Slote believed that no woman ever really forgot the first man who had had   
her, ever got him quite out of her system. 
 
He finished his breakfast at leisure, then telephoned Thurston. 
 
"Morning, Bunky- What did you find out about Natalie's going to Gibraltar?" 
 
"Forget it Les.    That submarine's here." 
 
Slote had seldom heard worse news, but he suppressed any emotion in His voice.    "it is?    How   
come?" 
 
"I don't know.    It came in at dawn.    It's tied up down at the river, near the customhouse." 
 
"Then what on earth was Bathurst talking about?" 
 
"He's mighty puzzled and he's going down there later to talk to the skipper.    That submarine   
had orders to go to Gibraltar." 
 
"How long will it be berer' "The origin al schedule called for three days." Thurston's voice   
turned uckish.    "Tough luck, Les. 
 
Fantastic girl.    I'd sweat out the three days and p then see." 
 
In self-defense Slote said calmly, "Yes, she's all right, but she used to be a lot prettier."    He   
dressed and hurried downstairs.    In the dark bar there were only a handful of Germans, who   
turned suspicious faces to him.    He went striding through the lobby. 
 
'Here, Slote!    Look behind you!"    Natalie's voice rang like joyous bells. 
 447 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Half screened by potted palms, she sat on a green plush sofa with Byron. Before them on a   
coffee table, beside an open dispatch case, lay a pile of documents.    The girl's cheeks flamed,   
her eyes were gleaming, her whole face brilliantly animated.    Byron Henry jumped up to shake   
hands. He appeared just the same, even to the tweed jacket in which Slote had seen him for the   
first time slouched against a wall in Siena. 
 
Slote said, "Well, hello there!    Did Natalie tell you we had some very wrong information?" 
 
Byron laughed.    "It wasp't wrong, exactly, but anyway, here we are." 
 
His glance swept the lobby.    "Say, this place has a queer smell of Berlin. 
 
Isn't it full of Germans?" 
 
"They swarm, darling.    Don't say anything about anything." 
 
Excitedly shuffling the documents, Natalie pulled at Byron's hand. 
 
"I can't find your certificate of residence."    "It's clipped with yours." 
 
Then he's got everything," Natalie exclaimed to Slote. 
 
'Everything! 
 
All by the regulations, translated into Portuguese, notarized, and the notary seals authenticated   
by Portuguese consuls.    The works."    As Byron dropped beside her, she put her hand in his   
thick hair and gave his head a yank.    'I thought you were lousy at paperwork, you devil. 
 
How in God's name did you manage this?" 
 
Slote said, 'Are you really sure everything's there? I've never seen regulations as tough as   
these.    Suppose I check that stuff over for you."    -Oh, please, Leslie?    Would you?"    Natalie   
said, making room on the sofa and handing him the documents and the sheet Thurston had   
given her.    Red ink check marks ran down the side of the page. 
 
'Homed you assemble all this?"    Slote said, starting to examine the papers. 
 
Byron explained that as soon as he had learned of the scheduled cruise to Lisbon, he had   
obtained an emergency four-day pass, and had flown to Washington to find out at the   
Portuguese embassy what the marriage regulations were. The naval attache there, Captain   
D'Esaguy, had turned Out to be a friend of his from Berlin; the captain had been his tennis   
doubles partner for a while, playing against his father and the Swedish attachs.    IYEsaguy had   
gone right to work.    "It's surprising what those fellows can accomplish in a few days when they   
want to," Byron said.    "I rounded up some of the papers, but the Portuguese consuls themselves   
did the hardest ones." 
 
"That's the Foreign Service everywhere," said Slote, methodically turning over one paper after   
another and glancing at the check list. 
 
 
 448 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"The wheels either Turn glacially, or so fast you can't see them whiz-well, Byron, I honestly   
think you, or this Portuguese navy captain, or both of you, did it. Everything seems to be   
here." 
 
"What now?"    Natalie said. 
 
"Will you marry me?"    Byron said, very solemnly. 
 
Natalie said, 'I sure will, by God." They burst out laughing.    With a melancholy chuckle, Slote   
slipped the papers into the folder which Byron had labelled in neat red block letters:   
MMMIACIE.    "Suppose I telephone Tlurston and ask him what you do next?    Tburstonjs my   
friend here in the legation, Byron."    Byron Henry slowly, gratefully smiled, and Slote could not   
but see how appealing the smile was.    "Thanks a lot.    Will you?    I'm not thinking too clearly at   
the moment.)P 
 
"No?    On the whole, I'd say you're doing all right." 
 
Returning a few minutes later, he saw them holding hands on the sofa, looking adoringly at   
each other and both talking at once.    He hesitated, then approached them.    "Sorry.    Problems." 
 
Natalie looked up at him, startled and frowning.    "What now?" 
 
"Well, Bunky's bowled over by what you've done, Byron, just impressed as hell.    He's at your   
service and wants to help.      But he doesn't know what he can do about that twelve-day   
requirement for posting bonds. 
 
Then there's the Foreign Office's authentication of the consuls' signatures. 
 
He says that usually takes a week.    So-" Slote shrugged, and dropped the folder on the table. 
 
"Right, D'Esaguy mentioned both those points," Byron said.    "He thought they could be gotten   
around.    I stopped off at the navy ministry on the way here this morning and gave his uncle a   
letter.    His uncle's a commodore, or something.    He was awfully nice to me, but he only speaks   
Portuguese.    I think he's working on those snags.    I'm supposed to go back to the ministry at   
one o'clock.    Could Mr. 
 
Thurston meet us there?    That might be a real help." 
 
Slote looked from Byron to Natalie, whose mouth was twitching with amusement. She still   
held Byron's hand in her lap.    'I'll call back and ask him.    You've certainly been forehanded."   
"Well, I sort of wanted this to come off."    With some stupefaction, Bunkey Thurston agreed   
over the telephone to meet them at the navy building at one. 
 
"Say,    Leslie, I thought you    called this ensign of hers a sluggard and a featherhead. He's   
organized this thing like a blitzkrieg." 
 
'Surprised me."    "You have my sympathies." 
 
"Oh, shut up, Bunky.    I'll see you at one."    "You're coming too?" 
 449 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Yes, oh yes. 
 
"You're a glutton for punishment." 
 
A tall    man    in Navy dress    blues leaned    on the    fender of an automobile    outside the hotel,   
smoking a very black, very fat cigar. 
 
"Hey, Briny! 
 
Is the exercise on?"    'It's on."    Byron introduced him to atalie and Slote as Lieutenant Aster, his   
executive officer.    Aster took in the girl with a keen, rather greedy glance of pale small blue   
eyes.    He was broader and heavier than Byron, with thick wavy blond hair growing to a peak   
on his forehead, and a long face that looked genial because the corners of his mouth turned   
upBut it was a tight tough mouth. 
 
'Say, Natalie, that picture of you that Briny keeps mooning over doesn't do you justice.    Hop in,   
everybody. 
 
I phoned the skipper, Briny, and told him you'd made contact. 
 
You're off the watch list while we're here." 
 
'Great, Lady.    Thanks."    Not sure she had heard this right, Natalie said, "Lady?"    The executive   
officer's smile was a bit weary. 
 
'That happened to me in my plebe year at the Academy.    With a name like Aster, I guess it had   
to. My name's    Carter,    Natalie,    and by all means    use it." Driving into the city,    the    two   
submariners described how the S-45, a hundred fifty miles out of Lisbon, had in fact been   
ordered to Gibraltar.    The captain, who knew about Byron's plans, had expressed his regrets but   
altered course to the south.    Within an hour reports came in to the captain that the number two   
main engine was down, the forward battery was throwing off excessive hydrogen, an   
evaporator had salted up, and a general plague of malfunctions was breaking out in the old   
boat, necessitating an emergency call in Lisbon for two or three days of alongside repairs.   
Aster, who brought in the reports, gave his opinion, which was backed by the Chief of the   
Boat, that it might be hazardous to proceed to Gibraltar.    All this was done with a straight face,   
and with a straight face the captain accepted the executive officer's recommendation and turned   
back to Lisbon. 
 
"How can you possibly get away with that?"    said Slote.    "Won't you all be court-martialled?" 
 
"Nobody was lying,- Aster said with an innocent smile. t4 We have the engine records to   
prove it.    These old S-boats just gasp and flounder along, and at practically any moment you   
could    justify    an order    to    abandon    ship.    ming    into    sbon COLd    was    highly 
commendable   
prudence." 
 
Natalie said to BYron, "And you submerge in an old wreck like that?" 
 
"NVell, the S-45 has made four thousand, seven hundred and twenty-three dives, Natalie.    It   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should be good for a few more." 
 
"Diving is nothing," said Lady Aster.    ('You pull the plug and she goes down; you blow air and   
she pops up.    It's going from one place to another that's kind of a strain on the old hulk.    But we   
manage.      By the way, everybody's invited aboard after the ceremony." tm Me?      On a   
submarine?") Natalie tucked her skirt close around her 
 
ghs. 
 
'The captain wants to congratulate you. He was pretty nice about coming in to Lisbon, you   
know." 
 
"We'll see," Natalie said.    'Slote!    Are you trying to maim us all?" 
 
"Sorry, that truck came out rut of nowhere,)' said Slote, pulling the car back on the bumpy   
road.    He was driving too fast. 
 
Henry shaking hands in the sunshine outside the navy minist , Bunker 'Thurston gave Ensign   
Henry a prolonged curious scrutiny.    'I'm glad to meet a fellow with such a knack for getting   
things done." 
 
"This thing's not done yet, by a long shot, sir.    Thanks for offering to help out." 
 
"Well, come along, and let's see what happens. You've got some strong pull on your side.   
D'Esaguy seems to be something like a deputy chief of naval operations." 
 
Judging by the number of anterooms and armed guards outside his office, the size of the room,   
the magnificence of the furniture, and the effulgence of his gold braid and combat ribbons,   
D'Esaguy certainly held some exalted post.    He was a short dark man, with an elongated stern   
Lati, face, and heavy hair graying at the sides.    He held himself, and shook hands, and gestured   
as he welcomed them, with noble grace; and to Natalie he made a deep bow, his black eyes   
showing a spark of admiration. He turned businesslike and rattled rapidly to Thurston in   
Portuguese. 
 
-He says these things take time," Thurston reported.    "He would like to invite us all to lunch." 
 
Byron glanced at Natalie, and said, "That's very cordial of him. 
 
Does he know we only have three days?" 
 
"I'm not sure you ought to press him," Thurston muttered. 
 
"Please tell him what I said." 
 
'Okay." 
 
The Portuguese officer listened gravely to Thurston.    His eyes were on Byron.    A wrinkle of   
his mouth, a flash of fun in the sombre face, acknowledged the impatience of a young lover.   
He turned and rapped an order to an assistant only slightly less crusted with gold braid than   
 451 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
himself, who sat at a small desk. The assistant jumped up and went out. After a minute of   
heavy silence he returned with a bouquet of red roses. He gave these to D'Esaguy, who handed   
them to Natalie Jastrow with a bow and a few charmingly spoken words. 
 
Thurston translated, "The dew will not dry on these roses before you are married." 
 
"Good God.    How beautiful.    Thank you!"    Natalie's voice trembled. 
 
She stood holding the roses, looking around at the men, blushing. 
 
"You know, I'm beginning to believe it!    For the very first time." 
 
"The exercise is on, lady," said Lieutenant Aster.    "Cancel now, if you're ever going to." 
 
"Cancel?"    She took Byron's arm.    "Nonsense.    Commence firing!" 
 
"Hey, a Navy wife," said Lieutenant Aster. 
 
D'Esaguy, trying alertly    to    follow this    chatter,    asked Thurston    to    translate.      He    burst out   
laughing, took Natalie's hand, and kissed it. 
 
"Come," he said in English.    "A leetle luncheon." 
 
The lunch was long and excellent, in a restaurant with a lordly view, much like a San Francisco   
panorama, of the Lisbon hills and the broad sparkling river. The conunodore seemed in no   
hurry at all. 
 
Thurston kept checking his watch, knowing that most government offices would shut by four- 
thirty or five.    At three D'Esaguy said casually that perhaps they might see now how the little   
business was coming along. In an enormous black Mercedes limousine they commenced a   
whirling tour of office buildings. Thurston tried to explain what was happening, but after a   
while he gave up, because he wasn't sure. 
 
Sometimes the commodore descended for a few minutes by himself, sometimes he took the   
couple along to sign a ledger or a document, with 'Thurston accompanying them.    An official   
invariably waited at the door to greet them and to lead them past crowded anterooms into dusty   
old inner offices, where fat pallid old d& partment heads got awkwardly out of their chairs to   
bow to D'EsaguyAbout two hours later they arrived at an office familiar to Thurston, where   
civil marriages were registered. 
 
It was closed for the day and the blinds were drawn.    As the black limousine came to a stop,   
one blind went up and the door opened.    A huge old woman in a brown smock, with visible   
chin whiskers, led    them through dark empty rooms    to an inner office where a chandelier   
blazed. 
 
At an ancient desk, fussing with papers, sat a dark frog-faced man with gold-rimmed glasses,   
several gold teeth, and three thick gold rings. 
 
He smiled at them and spoke to Thurston in Portuguese. 
 452 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thurston translated his questions; the man scratched with a blotchy pen on many of Byron's   
documents and kept stamping them. 
 
Natalie, Byron, and the two witnesses-Aster and Slote-signed and signed. After a while the   
man stood, and with a lewd gold-flecked smile held out his hand to Natalie and then to Byron,   
saying brokenly, 'Good luck for you." 
 
"What's this now?"    Natalie said. 
 
'y, you're married," 'Thurston said.    "Congratulations." 
 
'We are?    Already?    When did we get married?    I missed it." 
 
"At one point there, where you both signed the green book.    That was it." 
 
"I haven't the faintest recollection." 
 
Byron said, "Nor have I. However, I'll take your word for it. 
 
Let's have that ring, Lady." 
 
Aster put it in his hand. He slipped the yellow band on Natalie's finger, swept her into his   
arms, and kissed her. Meantime Thurston told D'Esaguy how -the couple had missed the   
moment of marriage, and the Portuguese officer laughed. He laughed again when Thurston   
explained the American custom of kissing the bride.    Natalie said that D'Esaguy must kiss her   
first.    With marked pleasure, the old aristocrat executed the privilege on her lips.    Then he left,   
after cour y handshakes all around, as Byron gathered up his sheaf of documents and paid the   
fees. 
 
Slote was the last to kiss her. Natalie hesitated, looking into his eyes, and said, "Well, old   
Slote, I seem to have done it, don't I? 
 
Wish me well." 
 
"Oh, I do, I do, Jastrow.    You know that. 
 
She gave him a cool brief    on the mouth, putting her free hand on his neck. 
 
When they emerged into the late golden sunshine, the black limousine was gone.    The office   
door closed behind them and Slote felt something loose and grainy thrust in his hand.    It was   
rice. 
 
Lieutenant Aster grinned a strange cold thin-lipped grin at him and winked a sharp blue eYe-   
At a signal from Aster, the three men pelted the couple. 
 
Natalie, brushing rice from her dress, wiped her eyes with a knuckle. 
 
"Well, that certainly makes it official!    Now what happens?" 
 
"if you don't know," said Lady Aster, "Byron's got a lot of fast explaining to do." 
 453 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Natalie choked and turned brick red.    "My God, Briny, who is this character?" 
 
"Lady's spent too much time submerged," said Byron.    "He has trouble raising his mind to sea   
level." 
 
'Marriage is holy and beautiful," said Lady Aster.    "But before you hop to it, how about visiting   
the old S-45 for a minute?    The skipper's sort of expecting us." 
 
"Of course, of course," Natalie said hurriedly.    "I want to see the S45- I'm dying to.    By all   
means." 
 
"Have you any idea where you'll go after that?"    Leslie Slote dryly put in. 
 
Byron said, "Well, I figured there'd be a place-a hotel, something." 'Lisbon's jammed to   
bursting," said Slote. 
 
"My God, so it is.    I never gave it a thought," Natalie said. 
 
'y not take my place?"    said Leslie Slote.    "That's suite, if ever I saw one."    Natalie looked very   
surprised and glanced at Byron. 
 
of you, Siote, but I wouldn't dream of it." "We'll find something," Byron said, shaking his   
head. 
 
'Oh, but his place is out of the Arabian Nights," said Natalie, adding very casually, 'I had a   
drink there last night.    Would you do such a thing for us, old Slote?" 
 
'Leslie can stay with me," Thurston said.    "No problem at all. 
 
Pick me up at the legation, Les.    I have to rush there now." 
 
"It's all set," said Slote.    "Mile you two visit the submarine, I'll go to the hotel and dear out." 
 
"Bless you.    Thank you.    My bags," said Natalie distractedly, "they're in Mrs.    Rosen's room.   
Maybe I should get them!    No, I have things to throw in.    I'll get 'em later.    Thanks, Slote.    And   
you too, Bunky. Thanks for everything." 
 
Slote signalled at a passing taxicab.    "Good luck." 
 
Natalie was astonished at the small size of the submarine, at its ugliness, and at its rustiness.   
"Good heavens!"    she shouted over the clanks and squeals of the crane moving overhead, as   
they got out of the cab.    "Is that the S-45?    Briny, honestly, don't you get claustrophobia when   
you dive in that thing?" 
 
"He's never stayed awake long enough to find out," said Aster. They 
 
a honeymoon 
 
"That's sweet were walking toward a gangway that was only a couple of planks nailed together.   
Sailors lounged on the low Hat black forecastle, staring at the girl in white with an armful of   
 454 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
roses.    "One day when we're submerged he'll open his eyes and begin screaming." 
 
(11 don't mind anything but the low company," said Byron, "and the body odors.      It's   
especially marked among the senior officers. 
 
when I sleep I don't notice it." 
 
A young tousle-headed sailor at the gangway, wearing a gun slung low on his hip, saluted   
Aster, gave Natalie a yearning respectful glance, and said, "Capon wants you-all to wait for   
him on the dock, sir." 
 
"Very well." 
 
Soon a figure in a blue uniform, with the gold stripes of a lieutenant, emerged from the rust- 
streaked black sail-the housing that rose amidships over the conning tower-and crossed the   
gangplank to the dock. 
 
The captain was shaped rather like his submarine, clumsily thick in the middle and tapering   
abruptly to either end.    He had big browm eyes, a broad nose, and a surprisingly boyish face. 
 
"Captain Caruso, this is my wife," said Byron, jolting Natalie with the word. 
 
Caruso took her hand in a white fat Paw.    "Well, congratulations! 
 
Byron's a good lad, in his short conscious intervals." 
 
"DO You really sleep that much?"    Natalie laughed at Byron. 
 
it ic It's pure slander.    I seldom close my eyes on this boat," said Byron, except to meditate on   
my folly in going to sub school. 
 
That I admit I do very frequently." 
 
"Eighteen hours at a stretch, he can meditate," said Aster. 
 
"That's solid gold meditating." 
 
Two sailors in dungarees came up out of an open hatch on the forecastle and crossed the   
gangway, one carrying a bottle of champagne in an ice bucket, the other a tray of water glasses.   
here we go.    Navy Regs don't allow us to consume spirituous liquors on board, M.    Hen " d e   
captain,    and again she felt the lit rs rY said ai the joyous    jolt. He popped the cork and   
ceremoniously ur as the ilor 
 
poured sa held out one glass after another. 
 
"To your happiness," he shouted, as the crane went by overhead with a wild clanging.  
 
"To You, God bless you," yelled Natalie, "for bringing men here." 
 
'To number two engine," bellowed Lady Aster, "to the evaporators, the exhaust system, and the   
 455 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
forward battery.    Never has there been such I massive breakdown on a naval vesse l." 
 
Byron silently lifted his glass to his captain and executive officer. 
 
They drank.    The crane rumbled away. 
 
"Captain," said Lady Aster, as Caruso refilled the glasses, "do you think that picture in Byron's   
room does Natalie justice?" 
 
"Not in the least," said the captain, looking at her with liquid womanloving Italian eyes. 'It   
doesn't begin to."    ually seen he u nlaes how I feel.    Now that you've act r, sir, don't you at least   
five 
 
agree with me that what has to be done in Lisbon may take 
 
days?"    "Three," snapped Captain Caruso, the dreamy look vanishing. 
 
"Exactly seventy-two hours." 
 
"Aye    aye, sir."    'And    you'd better produce    some damned    convincing malfunction    reports,   
Lady."    The captain tossed off his wine and smiled at Natalie. 
 
"Now, can I offer you the hospitality of the boat for a little while?" She followed the officers   
into the rusty sail and down a hatch. 
 
The ladder was cold and greasy, with narrow slippery rungs hat caught at Natalie's high heels.   
She had to lower herself through a second round hatch and down another ladder into a tiny   
room full of machinery, strongly conscious of her exposed legs and glad that they were pretty   
and that her skirt was narrow. 
 
"This is the control room," Byron said, helping her down.    "Up above was the conning tower." 
 
Natalie looked around at solemn-faced sailors in dungarees, and at the valves, knobs, dials,   
handles, big wheels, twisted cables, and panels of lights fining all the green-painted bulkheads.   
Despite a humming exhaust blower, the close, warm air smelled sourly of machinery, cooking,   
old cigars, and unwashed men.    "Briny, do you really know what all these things are?" 
 
'He's learning," said Lady Aster.    "Between hibernations." 
 
They stepped through an open watertight door to the tiny wardroom, where Natalie met two   
more young officers.      On the table stood a heartshaped white cake, iced in blue with a   
submarine, cupids, and Mr. 
 
and Mrs.    Byron Henry.    She squeezed herself into the place of honor at the head of the table,   
opposite the captain.    Byron and Lady Aster sat crouched against the bulkhead, to avoid a bunk   
folded back over their heads. 
 
Somebody produced a sword, Natalie cut up the cake, and the captain sent what was left to the   
crew's quarters.    The two glasses of champagne were going to Natalie's head.    She was half- 
 456 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
dizzy anyway from the rush of events and the longing that blazed at her from the young men's   
eyes. Over the coffee and cake she laughed and laughed at Lady Aster's jokes, and decided that   
the old submarine, for all its cramped squalor, its reek of machine and mazes, was a mighty   
jolly vessel. 
 
Byron looked more desirable to her by the minute, and she kissed him often. 
 
Before they left the S-45, Byron took his bride to a tiny cabin and showed her the narrow black   
aperture near it(he deck, beneath two other bunks, where he slept.    'I ask you," he said, would   
anybody spend extra time in that morgue slot through choice?" 
 
"The alternative might be more frightful," said Lady Aster, over Natalie's shoulder. "Like   
staying awake.when Natalie and BYron came out on deck into cool fresh air, crewmen on the   
forecastle    waved and cheered.    Natalie    waved back and some    bold sailors    whistled. The   
taxicab, called by the gangway watch for them, started off with a great clatter. The driver   
jammed on his brakes, jumped out, and soon Natalie and Byron heard him cursing in   
Portuguese as he threw aside shoes and tin cans.    The crew laughed and yelled until the cab   
drove away,    "I daresay poor Slote's left the hotel by now." Natalie    snuggled against her   
husband, 'We'll collect my bags and go there, right?    Wait till you see it.    It was terrible of me   
to jump at it like that, but honestly, Briny, it's the royal suite." 
 
In Natalie's room, in a boardinghouse on a side street, an old woman snored in an iron bed.   
"Well Slote's place must be better than this, " Byron whispered, glancing at the cracked ceiling   
and at the roaches on the peeling wallpaper, scurrying to hide from the electric light. Natalie   
swiftly gathered her things and left a note with her key on the table.    At the door she turned to   
look at Mrs. Rosen, lying on her back, jaw hanging open, gray hair tumbled on the pillow.   
What kind of wedding night had Mrs. 
 
Rosen had, she thought, with the husband whose silver-framed face smiled brownly on her   
bedside table, her one memento of the wretched man dragged off a French train by Germans?   
Natalie shivered and closed the door. 
 
The desk clerk at the Palace Hotel evidently had been informed and tipped by Slote, for he   
yielded up the key to Byron with a greasy grin. 
 
The newlyweds had to give him their passports.    Natalie felt a touch of fear, handing over the   
maroon American booklet that set her off from Lisbon's forty thousand other Jews. 
 
"I just thought of something," she said in the elevator.    "How did you register?" 
 
"Mr.    and Mrs naturally.    Big thrill." 
 
"I'm still Natalie Jastrow on that passport." 
 
"So you are." The elevator stopped. He took her arm. "I wouldn't worry about it." "But   
maybe you should go back and explain." 
 
"Let them ask a question first." 
 457 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
As the bellboy opened the door to the suite, Natalie felt herself whisked off her feet. "Oh,   
Byron, stop this nonsense.    I'm monstrously heavy.    You'll slip a disk."    But she clung to his   
neck with one hand and clutched her skirt with the other, excited by his surprising lean   
strength. 
 
"Hey!"    he said, carrying her inside, "I see what you meant. 
 
Royal suite is right." 
 
When he put her down she darted ahead into the bedroom.    Natalie had a slight nag of worry   
about the negligee she had left hanging in Slote's bathroom, and the new sexy underwear in a   
bureau drawer.    It might take some explaining!    But all the stuff was gone- here, she had no   
idea. She was puzzling over this when Byron appeared in the french window of the bedroom,   
on the balcony. "This is great out here, all right. Cold as hell, though. Fabulous string of   
lights along the water.    Did you notice the champagne?    And the lilies?" 
 
'Lilies?" 
 
"In there." 
 
In a corner of the living room, beside champagne in a silver cooler on a marble table, stood a   
bouquet of red and white calla lilies, and beside them Slote's small white card, with no writing.   
The doorbell rang: A bellboy gave Natdlie a box from the lingerie shop. 
 
She hurried into the bedroom and opened it.    There lay the underclothes Slote had cleared Out,   
a many-colored froth of silk and lace. 
 
"What's that?"    Byron said from the balcony. 
 
'Oh, some stuff I bought in a lobby shop," Natalie said airily. 
 
"I guess Slote told them I'd be here." She picked up a peach nightgown, and with mock   
witchery draped it against her bosom.    "Not bad for an academic type, hey?" 
 
Then she saw a note in Slote's handwriting, lying under the sill. 
 
Byron started to come in.    She ran for the french door and shut it on him. 
 
"Give me a minute.    Open the champagne." 
 
The note read: Wear the gray, jas-trow. You always looked angelic in gray. Confidential   
communication, to be destroyed.    Yours till death. 
 
S. 
 
The words brought a mist to Natalie's eyes.    She tore the note to bits and dropped them in a   
wastebasket.    In the next room she heard a cork pop.    She pulled from the box the gray silk   
nightdress laced and trimmed in black, and quite forgot Leslie Slote, as she speedily showered   
and perfumed herself.    She emerged from the bedroom brushing her long black hair down on   
 458 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
her shoulders.    Byron seized her.... 
 
... Wine, lilies, and roses; the dark sea rolling beyond the windows under a round moon; young   
lovers separated for half a year, joined on a knife-edge of geography between war and peace,   
suddenly married, far from home; isolated, making love on a broad hospitable bed, performing   
secret rites as old as time, but forever fresh and sweet between young lovers, the best moments   
human existence offers-such was their wedding night. The human predicament sometimes   
seems a gloomy tapestry with an indistinct, baffling design that 5mrIs around and inward to   
brilliant naked lovers.    The Bible starts with this centerpiece.    Most of the old stories end with   
the lovers married, retiring to their sacred nakedness. But for Byron and Natalie, their story   
was just beginning. 
 
The lavish pulses and streams of love died into the warm deep sleep of exhausted lovers: Mr.   
and Mrs.    Byron Henry, Americans, slumbering in wedlock in the Palace Hotel outside Lisbon,   
on a January night of 1941, one of the more than two thousand nights of the Second World   
War, when so much of mankind slept so badly. 
 
ATALM opened her eyes, awakened by the warbling and chirping of birds. Byron sat beside   
her, smoking. A cool breeze was blowing from an open door to the balcony. In a pink- 
streaked sky, the wan moon and one star hung low over the choppy sea. 
 
"Hi.    Listen to those birds!    How long have you been awake, Byron?" 
 
"Not long, but I'm really wide awake.    Wide awake and still trying to believe it." 
 
She sat up. The bedclothes slipped from her breasts as she kissed him softly, sighing with   
satiated pleasure.    "Gosh, that air's icy, isn't it?" 
 
"I can close the door." 
 
"No, no, the sea smell is lovely." She pulled the blanket to her neck, nestling beside him.   
After a silence she said, "Byron, how does a submarine work?" 
 
He glanced down at her.    His arm was around her, caressing her shoulder. "Are you kidding?" 
 
"No.    Is it hard to explain?" 
 
Not at all, but why talk about that?" 
 
"Because I want to know." 
 
"Well, it's a hell of a topic to take up with a beautiful naked girl, but okay.    I'll tell you how a   
submarine works.    To begin with, it's built so that it just about floats when ballasted.    So when   
you flood the diving tanks with a few tons of seawater you go right down, and when you blow   
the water out with compressed air, you pop up again. 
 
You begin with marginal buoyancy, and by changing the water ballast you become a rock or a   
cork as desired.    That's the general idea.    The details are numerous and dull." 
 459 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Well, is it safe?    How much have I got to worry about?" 
 
"Less than if I were a New York traffic cop." 
 
"You get hazardous duty pay." 
 
"That's because civilians, like congressmen and you, yourself, have the illusion that it's scary   
and risky to dive a boat under the water. No submariner will ever argue Congress out of that." 
 
"But when you go deep, isn't there quite a risk of being crushed?" 
 
'No.    A sub's just a long watertight steel tube, braced to hold off sea pressure.    That's the inner   
bull, the pressure hull.    it's the real ship.    The outside that you see is just a skin for tanks, open   
at the bottom.    The water sloshes in and out.    The inner hull has a test pressure depth.    You   
never submerge near that.    Nobody to this day knows how deep the old S-45 can go. 
 
We ride on a thick cushion of safety." 
 
"Submarines have been lost." 
 
"So have ocean liners and sailing yachts.    when men are trapped in a bull on the ocean bottom,   
tapping out Morse code, it makes a good story, but it's only happened a couple of times.    Even   
then there are ways of escaping, and we're all trained in them." 
 
"But when you Hood the boat to go down, can't the Hooding get out of hand? Don't mile,   
darling.    It's all a mystery to somebody like me. 
 
'I smile because you ask good questions.    But as I told you, the main tanks are outside the real   
hull.    They're just stuck on.    When they Hood, you're awash, waterlogged.    For diving there's a   
small sealed tank inside, the negative tank.    It can hold about twelve tons of sea water. Flood   
negative and down you go fast.    When you're at the depth you want, you blow negative, and   
there you are, hanging. You spread your bow planes, and you're sort of like a fat airplane,   
flying slowly through thick air.    Submanners are picked men, and great guys, darling, and all   
seventy-five of them dearly want nothing to go wrong! 
 
There are no slobs on a submarine. 
 
That's the truth about submarines, and this is one peculiar conversation to be having in I bed   
with a new wife." 
 
Natalie yawned.    "You're making me feel better.    That rusty little boat scared me." 
 
"The new fleet submarines are luxury liners compared to the S-45," Byron said.    'I'll go to one   
of those next."    She yawned again, as a patch of pink light appeared on the wall. 
 
"Bless my soul, is that the sun?    Where did the night go?    Draw the curtains." 
 
Byron walked naked to the windows and closed the heavy draperiesAs he returned to her in the   
gloom, she thought with piercing pleasure how handsome he was-a sculptured male figure- 
 460 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
alive, warm, and brown. 
 
He settled de her.    She leaned over him and gave him a kiss. 
 
When the young husband strongly pulled her close she pretended for a moment to fight him   
off, but she couldn't choke down her welling joyous laughter. As the sun rose outside the   
screening curtains on another day of war, Byron and Natalie Henry went back to lovemaking.  
 
They breakfasted at noon in the sunny sitting room, where the air was heavy with the scent of   
roses. Their breakfast was oysters, steak, and red wine; Natalie    ordered it, saying it was   
precisely what she wanted, and Byron called it a perfect menu.    They ate in dressing gowns,   
not talking much, looking deep in each other's eyes, sometimes laughing at a foolish word or at   
nothing at all.    They were radiant with shared, gratified desire. 
 
Then she said, "Byron, exactly how much time do we have?" 
 
"well, seventy-two hours from the time we came alongside would be half past two, Thursday." 
 
Some of the pure gladness in her eyes dimmed.    "When.    That soon? 
 
Short honeymoon." 
 
"This isn't our honeymoon.    I'm entitled to twenty days' leave.    I reported straight to the S-45   
from sub school.    I'll take those twenty days once you're back home.    When will that be?" 
 
She leaned her head on her hand.    "Oh, dear.    Must I start thinking?" 
 
"Look, Natalie. Why not send Aaron a wire that we're married, and go straight home?" "I   
can't do that." 
 
"I don't want you going back to Italy." 
 
Natalie raised her eyebrows at his flat tone.    "But I have to." 
 
"No, you don't.    Aaron's too cute," Byron said.    "Here, let's finish this wine.    As long as you or   
I or somebody will do the correspondence and dig in the library and keep after the kitchen, the   
gardeners, and the plumbers, he won't leave that house.    It's that simple.    He loves it, and he   
doesn't scare easily.    He's a tough little bird, Uncle Aaron, under the helplessness and the head   
colds.    What do you suppose he'd do if you sent him that wire?" 
 
Natalie hesitated, "Try to get me to change my mind. If that failed, make a real effort to   
leave." 
 
"Then it's the best favor you can do him." 
 
"No.    He'd make a mess of it.    He's not good with officials, and the stupider they are the worse   
he gets.    He could really trap himself. 
 
Leslie Slote and I together can get him on his way in short order, and this time we'll & it."   
"Slote?    Slote's enroute to Moscow." 
 461 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"He's offered to stop off in Rome and Siena first.    He's very devoted to Aaron." 
 
"I know who he's devoted to." 
 
Natalie said softly with a poignant look, "Jealous of Leslie Slote, Briny?" 
 
"All right.    Sixty days." 
 
"What, dear?"    "Co back there for two months.    No more.    That should be plenty.    If Aaron's   
not out by April first or before, it'll be his own doing, and you come home.    Book your own   
transportation, right now." 
 
Natalie's wide mouth curved wryly.    'I see.    Are you giving me orders, Byron?"    "Yes.) She   
rested her chin on her palm, contemplating him with surprised eyes "You know, that feels   
pretty good being ordered around. I can't say why.    Possibly the delicious novelty will wear   
off.    Anyway, lord and master, I'll do as you say.    Sixty days." 
 
"All right," Byron said.    "Let's get dressed and see Lisbon." 
 
"I've seen Lisbon," said Natalie, "but I'm all in favor of coming up for air." 
 
Dropping the key at the desk, Byron asked for their orts. With a heavy-lidded look, the   
swarthy short clerk disappeared through a door. 
 
"Look at those fellows," Byron said.    Half a dozen Germans, in belted black raincoats despite   
the sunshine, were talking together near the lobby entrance, looking hard at everybody who   
came in and went out. 
 
'They might as well be wearing boots and swastikas.    what is it about them?  
 
Those raincoats?    The big brims on the hats?    The bronze sunburns? 
 
How do they find time for sunbathing?" 
 
"I recognize them with the back of my neck.    It crawls," Natalie said. 
 
The desk clerk emerged from the door, busily shuffling papers. 
 
"Sorry, Passports not ready yet." 
 
"I need mine!"    Natalie's tone was strident. 
 
The clerk barely lifted his eyes at her.    "Maybe this afternoon, madame," he said, turning his   
back. 
 
After the languors of the bedroom, the cold sunny outdoors felt bracing. Byron hired a tad to   
drive them into and around Lisbon.    The city was no Rome or Paris for sights, but the rows of   
pastel-colored housesgreen, pink, blue-perched along the hills above a broad river made a   
PrettY picture.    Byron enjoyed himself, and he thought his bride was having fun too; she clung   
to his arm and smiled, saying little. 
 462 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The peculiar rwxture of Moorish and Gothic styles in the churches, and in the great fortress   
commanding the city's highest hill, brought back to Byron his dead-and-gone fine arts   
drudgery.    They left the cab to descend arm in arm the steep, narrow, extremely small streets of   
the Alfama, where ragged children swarmed in and out of cracking crazy houses hundreds of   
years old, and open shops the size of telephone booths sold fish, bread, and meat scraps.    It was   
a long wandering walk. 
 
"Where did the cab promise to meet us?"    Natalie spoke up in a strained tone, as they tra versed   
an alley where the stinks made them gasp. 
 
"Everything all right?"    he said. 
 
She wearily smiled.    "At the risk of sounding like every stupid woman tourist in the world, my   
feet hurt." 
 
'y, let's go back.    I've had plenty of this." 
 
"Do you mind?" 
 
She said not a word as they drove along the river road back to the hotel.    When he took her   
hand it was clammy.    Entering the hotel, she pulled at his elbow.    "Don't forget-passports." 
 
It proved unnecessary.    With the key, the desk clerk, showing large yellow false teeth in an   
empty grin, handed him two maroon booklets. 
 
Natalie snatched hers and riffled through it as they walked to the elevator. 
 
"Okay?"    he said. 
 
"Seems to be.    But I'll bet anything the Gestapo's photographed it, and yours too." 
 
"Well, it's probably routine in this hotel.    I don't think the Portuguese are denying the Germans   
much nowadays.    But what do you care?" 
 
When she went into the bedroom of the suite to put away her coat and hat, Byron followed,   
took her in his arms, and kissed her.    She responded, she held him close, but her manner was   
apathetic.    He leaned back with a questioning look. 
 
"Sorry," she said.    "I have a thundering headache.    Burgundy for breakfast may not be just the   
thing, after all.    Luckily I have some high-powered pills for this.    just let me take one." 
 
Soon she came back from the bathroom smiling.    "Okay.    Proceed." 
 
He said, "It couldn't work that fast." 
 
"Oh, it will.    Don't worry." 
 
They kissed, they lay on the bed, Byron was on fire to make love and tried to please her, but it   
was as though a spring had broken in Natalie. 
 463 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
She whispered endearments and tried to be loving.    After a while he sat up, and gently raised   
her.    "All right.    What is it?" 
 
She crouched against the head of the bed, hugging her knees. 
 
"Nothing, nothing!    What am I doing wrong?    Maybe I'm a little tired. 
 
The headache's not gone yet." 
 
"Natalie."    He took her hand, kissed it, and looked straight into her eyes. 
 
"Oh, I guess nobody can experience such joy without paying. 
 
That's all.    If you must know, I've been in a black hole all afternoon. 
 
it started when we didn't get our passports back, and those Germans were standing there in the   
lobby.    I got this horrible sinking feeling. 
 
All the    time    we    were sightsecing,    I    was having panicky    fantasies,    The hotel would keep   
stalling about my passport, and you'd sail away in the submarine, and here I'd be, just one more   
Jew stuck in Lisbon without papers." 
 
"Natalie, you never turned a hair all through Poland.    You've got your passport back now." 
 
"I know.    It's sheer nonsense, just nervous and pie on, too many wonderful things happening   
too fast.    I'll get over it." 
 
He caressed her hair.    "You fooled me.    I thought you were enjoying Lisbon." 
 
"I loathe Lisbon, Briny.    I always have.    I swear to God, whatever else happens, I'll regret to   
my dying day that we married and spent our wedding night here.    It's a sad, painful city.    You   
see it with different eyes, I know- You keep saying it looks like San Francisco. 
 
But San Francisco isn't full of Jews fleeing the Germans.    The Inquisition didn't baptize Jews   
by force in San Francisco, and burn the ones who objected, and take away all the children to   
raise them as Christians.    Do you know that little tidbit of history?    It happened here." 
 
Byron's face was serious, his eyes narrowed.    "Maybe I read it once." 
 
"Maybe?    If you had, how could you forget?    Anybody's blood should run cold at such cruelty.   
But somehow, what's happened to Jews in Europe over the centuries is just a matter of course.   
What was Bunky's pretty phrase?    Fish in a net." 
 
Byron said, "Natalie, I'll do anything you want about the religion. 
 
I've always been prepared for that.    Would you want me to become Jewish?" 
 
'Are you insane?"    She turned her head sharply to him and her eyes had an angry shine.    She   
had looked like this in Kenigsberg, giving him a rude abrupt good-bye.    'Why did you insist on   
getting married? 
 464 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
That's what's eating at me.    just tell me that.. We could have made love, you know that, all you   
wanted.    I feel tied to you now with a rope of raw nerves.    I don't know where you're going.    I   
don't know when I 'll ever see you again. 
 
I only know you're sailing away 'nursday in that damned submarine. 
 
Why don't we tear up those Portuguese documents?    Let everything be as it Was.    My God, if   
we ever find ourselves in a human situation, and if we still care, ive can get properly married.   
This was a farce." 
 
"No, it wasn't.    It's the only thing I've wanted since I was born. 
 
Noil, I've got it.    We're not tearing up any papers.    You're my wife." 
 
"But God in heaven, 'why have you gone to all this trouble?    Why have you put yourself in this   
mess?" 
 
"Well, it's like this, Natalie.    Married officers get extra allowances." 
 
She stared at him.    Her taut face relaxed, she slowly, reluctantly smiled, and thrust both her   
hands in his hair.    "I see!    Well, that makes a lot of sense, Briny.    You should have told me   
sooner.      I can understand greed."      Mouth to mouth, they fell back on the bed, and the   
lovemaking started to go better, but the telephone rang. It rang and rang and rang, and the   
kisses had to stop.    Byron sighed, "Could be the S-45," and picked up the receiver.    "Yes?    Oh,   
hello.    Right.    That's thoughtful of you.    Nine o'clock?    Wait."    He covered the mouthpiece.  
 
'Thurston apologizes for intruding.    He and Slote thought we might conceivably want to have   
dinner in a special place.    Best food in Lisbon, best singer in Portugal." 
 
'Good heavens.    Old Slote is uncovering a masocmstic streak." 
 
'Yes or no?"    'As you wish." 
 
Byron said, They mean to be nice. why not? We have to eat. Get away Emm the black   
raincoats." 
 
He accepted, hung u, and took her in his arms. 
 
The restaurant was a brick-walled low room, illuminated only by table candles and the logs   
blazing in an arched fireplace.    Jews, many in sleek dinner clothes, filled half the tables.    Two   
large British parties side by side made most of the noise in the sedate place. 
 
Directly in front of the fire a table for six    empty, longingly eyed by customers clustering in a   
small bar.    The four Americans sat at another favored table near the fire. 
 
Over Portuguese white wine, Bunky Thurston and the newlyweds soon grew merry.    Not Slote;   
he drank a lot but hardly spoke or smiled.    The firelight glittered on his square glasses, and   
even in that rosy light his face looked ashen. 
 465 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'I don't know if you youngsters are interested in the war, by the way," Thurston said over the   
meal.    'Remember the war?    There's news." 
 
"If the news is good I'm interested," Natalie said.    "Only if it's good."    "Well, the British have   
captured Tobruk."    Natalie said, 'Is Tobruk important?"    Byron exclaimed, 'Important!    It's the   
best harbor between Egypt and Tunis. that's mighty good news." "Right," Thurston said.   
"they're really roaring across North Africa now.    Makes the whole war look different." 
 
Slote broke his silence to say hoarsely, 'They're fighting Italians." 
 
He cleared his throat and went on, "Byron, did you actually read the list of books I gave you in   
Berlin?    Natalie says you did." 
 
"Whatever I could find in English, yes.    Maybe seven or eight of]t of ten." 
 
The diplomat shook his head.    "Extraordinary heroism." 
 
"I don't claim I understood them all," Byron said.    "Sometimes my eyes just pas"ed over words.   
But I plowed on through." 
 
"What books?"    Thurston said. 
 
"My darling here became slightly curious about the Germans," said Natalie, "after a Luftwaffe   
pilot almost shot his head off.    He wanted to know a little more about them.    Slote gave him a   
general syllabus of German nineteenth-century romanticism, nationalism, and idealism. 
 
"Never dreaming he'd do anything about it," Slote said, turning his blank firelit glasses toward   
her. 
 
"I had all this time in Siena last year," Byron said.    "And I m,as interested." 
 
"What did you find out?"    said Thurston, refilling Byron's glass. 
 
"You    couldn't get    me to    read German    philosophy if the    alternative were    a    firing squad."   
'Mainly that Hitler's always been in the German bloodstream," Byron said, "and sooner or later   
had to break out. 
 
That's what Leslie told me in Berlin.    He gave me the list to back up his view.    I think he pretty   
well proved it.    I used to think the Nazis had swarmed up out of the sewers and were something   
novel.    But all their ideas, all their slogans, and practically everything they're doing is in the old   
books.    That thing's been brewing in Germany for a hundred years." 
 
"For longer than that," Slote said.    "You've done your homework well, Byron.    A plus."    'Oh,   
balderdash!"    Natalie exclaimed.    "A plus for what?    Repeating a tired cliche?    It' s only novel   
to Byron because American education is so shallow and because he probably didn't absorb any   
he got."    "Not much," Byron said.    'Mostly I played cards and ping-pong." 
 
"Well, it's very evident." His bride's tone was sharp. "Or you wouldn't have gone boring   
through that one-sided list of his like a blind bookworm, just to give him a chance to patronize   
 466 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
you." 
 
'I deny the patronizing and the one-sidedness," said Slote.    "Not that it matters, Jastrow-I guess   
I'll have to call you Henry now-but I think I covered the field, and I admire your hubby for   
tackling the job so earnestly."    "The whole thesis is banal and phony," Natalie said, "this idea   
that the Nazis are a culmination of German thought and culture. Hitler got his radsm from   
Gobineau, a Frenchman, his Teutonic superiority from Chamberlain, an Englishman, and his   
Jew-baiting from Lueger, a Viennese political thug.    The only German thinker you can really   
link    straight    to Hitler    is    Richard    Wagner.    He was    another    mad    Jew-hating    socialist,   
and   
Wagner's writings are all over Mein Kampf. 
 
But Nietzsche broke with Wagner over that malignant foolishness. 
 
Nobody takes Wagner seriously as a thinker, anyway.    His music disgusts me too, though that's   
neither here nor there. I know you've read more in this field than I have, Slote, and I can't   
imagine why you gave Byron such a dreary loaded list. 
 
Probably just to scare him off with big names.    But as you ought to know, he doesn't scare." 
 
'I'm aware of that," Slote said.    Abruptly he splashed wine into his glass, filling it to the brim,   
and emptied it without pausing for breath. 
 
"Your veal's    getting cold," Byron    said to his bride. This unexpected edgy clash between   
Natalie and her ex-loyer was threatening to get out of hand. 
 
She tossed her head at him and impatiently cut a bit of meat, talking as she ate.    'We created   
Hitler, more than anybody. We Americans. Mainly by not joining the League, and then by   
passing the insane Smoot-Hawley tariff in 1930, during a deep depression, knocking over   
Europe's economy like a row of dominoes. After Smoot-Hawley the German banks closed   
right and left. The Germans were starving and rioting. Hitler promised them jobs, law and   
order, and revenge for the last war. And he promised to crush the Communists.    The Germans   
swallowed his revolution to fend off a Communist one.    He's kept his promises, and he's held   
the Germans in line with terror, and that's the long and short of it.    Why, there isn't a German in   
a thousand who's read those books, Briny.    It's all a thick cloud of university gas. 
 
Hitler's a product of American isolation and British and French cowardice, not of the ideas of   
Hegel and Nietzsche."    "University gas is good, my dear," Slote said, 'and I'll accept it."    He   
touched his spread fingertips together, slouched in his chair, regarding her with a peculiar   
smile at once superior and frustrated.    "In the sense that in any time and place the writings of   
the philosophers are a kind of exhaust gas of the evolving social machinery-a point that Hegel   
more or less makes, and that Marx took and vulgarized.    But you can recover from an analysis   
of the gas what the engine must be like and how it works. And the ideas may be powerful and   
true, no matter how produced. 
 
German romanticism is a terribly important and powerful critique of the way the West lives,   
Jastrow.    It faces all the nasty weaknesses." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Such as?"    Her tone was mean and abrupt. 
 
A rush of argument broke from Slote, as though he wanted to conquer her with words in   
Byron's presence, if he could do nothing else.    He began stabbing one finger in the air, like   
exclamation points to his sentences. 
 
"Such as, my dear, that Christianity is dead and rotting since Galileo cut its throat.    Such as,   
that the ideas of the French and American revolutions are thin fairy tales about human nature.   
Such as, that the author of the Declaration of Independence owned Negro slaves.  
 
Such as, that the champions of liberty, equality, and fraternity ended up chopping off the heads   
of helpless women, and each other's heads. 
 
The German has a very clear eye for such points, Natalie.    He saw through the rot of imperial   
Rome and smashed it, he saw through the rot of the Catholic Church and broke its back, and   
now he thinks Christian industrial democracy is a rotting sham, and he proposes to take over by   
force.    His teachers have been telling him for a century that his turn is coming, and that cruelty   
and bloodshed are God's footprints in history.    That's what's in the books I listed for Byron,   
poured out in great detail.    It's a valid list.    There was another strain in Germany, to be sure, a   
commonsense liberal humanist tendency linked with the West.    The 'good Germany!"    I know   
all about it, Natalie.    Most of its leaders went over to Bismarck, and nearly all the rest followed   
the Kaiser.    When his time came, Hitler had a waltz.    Now listen!" 
 
In a solemn tone, like a priest chanting a mass, beating time in the air with a stiff finger, Slote   
quoted: "The German revolution will not prove any miuff or gentler because it was preceded   
by the Critique of Kant, by the Transcendental Idealism of Fichte.    These' doctrines served to   
develop revolutionary forces that only await their times, to break forth. 
 
Christianity subdued the brutal warrior passion of the Germans, but it could 'not quench it.   
When the cross, that restraining talism", falls to pieces, then will break forth again the frantic   
Berserker rage.    The old stone gods will then arise from the forgotten ruins and wipe from their   
eyes the dust of centuries.    Thor with his giant hamtwr will arise again, and he will shatter the   
Gothic cathedrals." 
 
Slote made an awkward, weak gesture with a fist to represent a hammer-blow, and went on:   
"'Smile not at the dreamer whowarns you against Kantians, Fichteans, and the other   
philosophers.    Smile not at the fantasy of one who foresees in the region of reality the same   
outburst of revolution that has taken place in the region of intelt. 
 
The thought precedes the deed as the lightning the thunder. Ger thunder is of true German   
character.    It is not very nimble, but rumbles along somewhat slowly.    But come it will, and   
'when you hear a crashing such as never before has been heard in the world's history, then   
know that at last the German thunderbolt has fallen." "Heine-the Jew who composed the   
greatest German poetry, and who fell in love with German philosophy-Heine wrote that," Slote   
said in a quieter tone.    "He wrote that a hundred and six years ago." 
 
Behind    him    chairs rasped,    and    a    party    in    evening    clothes,    cheerily    chattering    in   
German,   
 
 
 
 
 
 
flanked by three bobbing, ducking waiters, came to the big table by the fire.    Slote was jostled;   
glancing over his shoulder, he looked straight into the face of the Gestapo chief, who amiably   
smiled and bowed.    With him was the man with the scarred forehead they had seen in the hotel,   
and    another    German    with    a    shaved    head,    and three giggling    Portuguese    women in   
bright   
evening dresses. 
 
"End of philosophy seminar," muttered Bunky Thurston. 
 
"Why?"    said Byron. 
 
"Because for one thing," Natalie snapped, "I'm bored with it." 
 
As the Germans sat down, conversation died throughout the restaurant. The Jews were looking   
warily toward them. In the lull, only the boisterous and oblivious British parties sounded   
louder. 
 
'Who are those English people?"    Natalie said to Thurston. 
 
'Expatriates, living here because it's cheap and there's no rationingAlso, I guess, because it's out   
of range of Luftwaffe bombs," Thurston said. 'The British embassy staff isn't crazy about   
them." 
 
'That's a remarkable quote from Heine," Byron said to Slote. 
 
'I wrote a paper on Hegel and Heine at Oxford."    Slote smiled thinly. 
 
"Heine was fascinated by Hegel for a long time, then repudiated him. I translated that passage   
for an epigraph. The rhetoric is rather purple. So is Jeremiah's. Jewish prophets have one   
vein." As they were drinking coffee, a pink spotlight clove the dark room, striking a gray   
curtain on a little platform.    Bunky Thurston said, "Here he comes. He's the best of the fado   
singers." 
 
'The best of what?" Byron said. A pale dark-eyed young man, in a black cloak with thick   
fringes, stepped through the curtain holding an onion-shaped guitar. 
 
"Fado singers.    Fate songs.    Very pathetic, very Portuguese." 
 
At the first chords that the young man struck-strong sharp sad chords, in a hammering rhythm- 
the restaurant grew still.    He sang in a clear high florid voice, looking around with his black   
eyes, his high bulging forehead pink in the spotlight.    Natalie murmured to Thurston, "What   
song is that?"    "That's an old one, the fado of the students." 
 
'What do the words mean?" 
 
Oh, the words never amount to anything.    just a sentence or two. 
 
That one says, 'Close your eyes. Life is simpler with your eyes closed."' The glance of the   
newlyweds met.    Byron put his hand over Natalie's. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The young man sang several songs, with strange moments of speeding UP, slowing down,   
sobbing, and trilling; these evidently were the essence of fado, because when he performed   
such flourishes in the middle of a song, the Portugu in the room applauded and sometimes   
cheered. 
 
"Lovely " Natalie murmured to Bunky Thurston when a song ended. 
 
"Thank you."    He smoothed his mustache with both hands.    "I thought you'd find it agreeable.   
It's something different." 
 
"Spielerl Kennen Sie 'O Sole Mio' singen?"    The shaven-headed German was addressing the   
singer.    He sat only a few feet from the platform. 
 
Smiling uneasily, the singer replied in Portuguese, gesturing at his oddly shaped guitar, that he   
only performed fado songs.    In a jolly tone, the German told him to sing "O Sole Mio" anyway.   
Again the young man made helpless gestures, shaking his head.      The German pointed a   
smoking cigar at him, and shouted something in Portuguese that brought dead quiet in the   
restaurant, even among the British, and froze the faces of the three women at his table.    With a   
piteous look around at the audience, the young performer began to do "O Sole Mio," very   
badly. 
 
The German    leaned back, beating time    in the air with his cigar. A thick pall fell in the   
restaurant. 
 
Natalie said to Thurston, "Let's leave now." 
 
"I'm for that." 
 
The singer was still stumbling through the Italian song as they walked out.    On the counter at   
the entrance, under a picture of him, phonograph records in paper slipcovers were piled.    "If   
that first song is there," Natalie said to Byron, "buy me a record." 
 
He bought two. 
 
The streetlights outside were brighter than the illumination in the restaurant, and the wind was   
cutting.    Leslie Slote, tying a muffler around his neck, said to Byron, when do you leave?" 
 
"Not till day after tomorrow." 
 
'Years hence, the way I'm counting time," said Natalie with a note of defiance, hugging her   
husband's arm. 
 
"Well, Natalie, shall I try to get us on a plane to Rome Saturday?" 
 
"Oh, wait.    Maybe he won't leave.    I can always hope." 
 
"Of course."    Slote held out his hand to Byron.    "If I don't see you again, congratulations, and   
good luck, and smooth sailing." 
 470 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Thanks.    And thanks for that suite.    It was brash of us to put you out of it." 
 
"My dear fellow," said Slote, "it was quite wasted on me." 
 
All her limbs jerking, Natalie woke from a nightmare of Gestapo men knocking at the door.   
She heard real knocking in the darkness. 
 
She lay still, hoping that a trace of the nightmare was hovering in her fogged brain, and that the   
knocking would stop.    It did not. 
 
She looked at her luminous watch and touched Byron's warm hairy leg. 
 
"Byron!    Byron!" 
 
He raised himself on an elbow, then sat up straight.    "What time is it?" 
 
"Quarter to two." 
 
The knocking became faster and louder.    Byron jumped from the bed and slipped into a robe.  
 
"Briny, be careful about letting anyone in!    First make sure who it is." 
 
Natalie left the warm nest of the bed and was putting on a negligee, shivering in the chilly   
night air, when Byron opened the bedroom door. 
 
"It's only Aster, so don't be scared." 
 
"What does he want?" 
 
that's what I'm finding out." 
 
The door shut. Natalie went and leaned her ear against it, and heard Tobruk mentioned.   
Humiliated at having to eavesdrop, she rattled the knob and went in.    The two young men rose   
from the sofa where they sat hunched in talk.    Lieutenant Aster, in a blue and gold uniform and   
white peaked cap, was eating an apple. 
 
"Hi, Natalie.    This is one terrible thing to do, breaking in on honeymooners," he said cheerily.   
"Talk about extrahazardous duty!" 
 
"What's the matter?" 
 
Byron said, "Change of orders, nothing serious or urgent, no sweat 'Right.    Matter of fact I was   
just shoving off."    Lieutenant Aster dropped the apple core in a tray.    "I have to round up some   
crew members that had overnights.    It's going to be an interesting tour of Estoril and Lisbon   
after dark.    See you, Byron." 
 
With a grin at her, and a brief tip of his rakishly tilted hat, the lieutenant left. 
 
"Well?    Tell me."    Natalie confronted her husband, arms folded. 
 
Byron went to the red marble fireplace and touched a match to papers under a pile of kindling   
 471 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
and logs.    "The S-45 leaves this morning." 
 
"This very morning, eh?    Too bad.    Where to?" 
 
"I don't know.    The fall of Tobruk has changed the mission-which to tell you the truth, I never   
exactly knew in the first place. 
 
Something about surveying submarine facilities in the Mediterranean." 
 
"Well.    A-11 right.    I guess I asked for this.    My entire married life-as it may yet turn outut   
short by one third." 
 
"Natalie, stir married life starts when you get back from Italy." 
 
He put his arm around her and they stood watching the fire brighten. 
 
"It's going to be very long, happy, and fruitful.    I plan on six kids." 
 
This made the young wife laugh through her gloom and put a hand to his face.    "Oh lord.    Six!   
I'll never last the course.    jimmy, that fire feels Marvelous.    Did we finish the wine before we   
went to sleep? 
 
Look and see."    He brought a glass of wine and lit a cigarette for her. 
 
"Briny, one thing you should know. Back in November, Aaron was so sick he thought he   
might die.    I had to take him to a specialist in Rome.    It was a kidney stone.    He lay in the   
Excelsior for two weeks, really in torture.    Finally it cleared up, but one night, when he was   
very low, Aaron told me that he'd left everything he has to me.    And he told me what it added   
up to.    I was amazed."    She smiled at him, sipping her wine.    Byron looked at her with slitted   
eyes.    "I guess he's sort of a miser, like most bachelors.    That's one reason he moved to Italy.   
He can live handsomely there on very little. 
 
Aaron's actually kept nearly all the money he made on A Jew's Jesus, and it brings in more   
every year.    The book on Paul earned quite a bit too. 
 
And before that he'd saved a lot of his professor's salary. 
 
Living in Italy, he hasn't even,paid taxes.    Aside from the value of his house, Aaron's worth   
more than a hundred thousand dollars.    He lives just on his interest.    The money is invested   
back in New York. I had no idea of any of this. Not the slightest. That he would leave   
anything to me never crossed my mind. 
 
Nevertheless, that's how things stand."    Natalie took Byron's chin in her hand and pushed it this   
way and that.    'What are you    looking so grim about?    I'm telling    you    you've    married    an   
heiress." 
 
Byron poked a fallen red coal back into the fire. "Damn. He's really cute. Cuter than I   
thought." 
 472 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Are you being fair?    Especially with your plan for six kids?" 
 
"Possibly not." Byron shrugged. "Do you have enough money to get home with? You're   
coming home in two months, no matter what." 
 
"I know.    I agreed to that.    I have plenty.    Whew, that fire's beginning to scorch."    She reclined   
on a couch before the blaze. 
 
The negligee fell away, and the light played warmly on her smooth legs. 
 
"Briny, does your family know you intended to get married?" 
 
"No.    No sense making trouble when I wasn't sure it would come off. 
 
I did write Warren."    'Is he still in Hawaii?" 
 
"Yes.    He and Janice love it.    I think you and I may well land there. 
 
The Navy keeps beefing up the Pacific Fleet. Warren thinks we'll be fighting japan soon.   
That's the feeling all through the Navy." 
 
"Not Germany?" 
 
'No. It may sound strange to you, sitting here, but our people still don't get excited about   
Hitler.    A few newspapers and magazines froth around, but that's about it." 
 
He sat on the floor at her feet, looking at the fire, resting his head against her soft uncovered   
thigh.    She caressed his hair. 
 
"Exactly when do you leave, and how?" 
 
"Lady's going to corue back for me at six." 
 
"Six?    Why, that's hours and hours.    Big big chunk of our marriage left to enjoy.    Of course you   
have to pack." 
 
"Ten minutes." 
 
"Can I go with you to the boat?" 
 
"I don't see why not." 
 
With a deep sigh, Natalie said, "Why are you sitting on the floor? 
 
Come here." 
 
There was no dawn.    The sky turned paler and paler until it was light gray.    Mist and drizzle   
hid the sea.    Lieutenant Aster picked them up in a rattling little French car; the back seat was   
packed with four glum sailors smelling of alcohol and vomit.    He drove with one hand, leaning   
far out to work a broken windshield wiper, keeping the accelerator on the floor. 
 473 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The foggy road along the river was empty, and they reached Lisbon quickly. 
 
The submarine was dwarfed by a very rusty tramp steamer berthed directly ahead, with an   
enormous Stars and Stripes painted on its side, an American flag flying, and the name Yankee   
Belle stencilled in great drippy white letters on bow and stern.    Its grotesquely cut-up shape   
and crude revetted plating looked foreign, and thirty or forty years old. 
 
It rode so high in the water that much of its propeller and mossy red bottom showed. 
 
Jews lined the quay in the drizzle, waiting quietly to go aboard, most of them with cardboard   
suitcases, cloth bundles, and frayed clothes. The children-there were quite a number-stood   
silent, clinging to their parents.      At a table by the gangway, two uniformed Portuguese   
officials, under umbrellas held by assistants, were inspecting and stamping papers. Policemen   
in rubber capes paced up and down the queue.    The rail of the ship was black with passengers   
staring at the quay and the Lisbon bills, as freed prisoners look back at the jail to savor their   
liberty. 
 
"When did that ocean greyhound show up?"    Byron said. 
 
"Yesterday morning. It's an old Polish bucket, and the crew are mostly Greeks and Turks,"   
Aster said.    "I've tried talking to them. 
 
The pleasanter ones seem to be professional cutthroats.    I gather the Jews will be packed in like   
sardines in five-decker bunks, for which they'll pay the price of deluxe suites on the Queen   
Mary.    These fellows laughed like hell about that."    He glanced at his wristwatch. 
 
"Well, we cast off at 0715.    Good-bye, Natalie, and good luck. 
 
You were a beautiful bride, and now you're a beautiful Navy wife." 
 
The exec stepped aboard, smartly returning the salute of the gangway watch.    On the dock near   
the gangway, unmindful of the rain beginning to fall, a sailor was hugging and kissing a dump y   
Portuguese trollop dressed in red satin.    Byron held out his arms to his wife, with a glance at   
the sailor and a grin, She embraced him.    "You fool. 
 
Your trouble is, you went and married the creature." 
 
"I was drunk," Byron said.    He kissed her again and again. 
 
A boatswain's whistle blew on the submarine, and a loudspeaker croaked, "Now station the   
special sea details."    "Well, I guess this is it," he said.    'So long." 
 
Natalie was managing not to cry; she even smiled. 'Getting married was the right idea, my   
love.    I mean that.    It was an inspiration, and I adore you for it.    I feel very married.    I love you   
and I'm happy." 
 
"I love you." 
 
Byron went aboard the submarine, saluting as he stepped on deck. 
 474 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the thickening drizzle, her raincoat pulled close, her breath smoking in the damp frigid air,   
Natalie stood on the dock, smelling wharfside odorstar, machinery, fish, the sea-hearing the   
bleak cry of the gulls, and feeling for the first time what she had gotten herself into.    She was a   
Navy wife all right!    Three men in black trench coats and oversized fedora hats came strolling   
along the quay, cy inspecting the refugees, who either tried to ignore them or peered at them in   
horror. Women pulled their children closer. The men halted near the gangway; one pulled   
papers from a black portfolio, and they all began talking to the officials at the table.   
Meanwhile on the submarine sailors in pea coats pulled in the gangplank. The boatswain's   
whistle blew; the loudspeaker squawked.    Appearing on the narrow little bridge in foul-weather   
clothes, the captain and Lieutenant Aster waved. 
 
"Good-bye, Natalie," Captain Caruso called.    She did not see Byron rome out on the forecastle,   
but after a while noticed Men standing near the anchor among the sailors, in a khaki uniform   
and a brown windbreaker, hands in his back pockets, trousers flapping in the breeze.    it was the   
first time she had ever seen Byron in a uniform; it made him seem different, remote, and older.   
Aster was shouting orders through a megaphone. Colored signal flags ran up. The sailors   
hauled in the lines. Byron walked along the forecastle and stood opposite his bride, almost   
close enough to reach out and clasp hands.    She blew him a kiss. His face under the peaked   
khaki cap was businesslike and calm. 
 
A foghorn blasted.    The submarine fell away from the dock and black water opened between   
them. 
 
"You come home, now," he shouted. 
 
"I will.    Oh, I swear I will." 
 
"I'll be waiting.    Two months!" 
 
He went    to His duty    station.      With a    swish    of water from    the propellers, the low black   
submarine dimmed away into the drizzle. 
 
Craaal Craaal Craaal Mournfully screeching, the gulls wheeled and followed the fading wake. 
 
Natalie hurried up the quay, past the Gestapo men, past the line of escaping Jews, whose eyes   
were all fixed in one direction-the gangway table they still had to pass, where the Portuguese   
officials and the three Germans were comparing papers and laughing together. 
 
Natalie's hand sweatily clutched the American passport in her pocket. 
 
"Hello, old Slote," she said, when she found a telephone and managed to make the connection.   
"This is Mrs.    Byron Henry.    Are you interested in buying me a breakfast?    I seem to be free.   
Then let's push on to Italy, dear, and get Aaron out.    I have to go home." 
 
In Washington Victor Henry was reassigned to War Plans.    He did not hear from Roosevelt at   
all. People said the President was unaccountable, and from firsthand knowledge, the naval   
captain was beginning to believe it. But he was untroubled by the assignment, though he had   
 475 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
craved and expected sea duty. 
 
More than anything else-more than the gray hairs beginning to show at his temples, more than   
the sharper lines on his forehead and around his mouth, more than his calmer pace on the   
tennis court-his contentment with still another desk job showed how Victor Henry was   
changing. 
 
Washington in January 1941, after London and Berlin, struck him as a depressing panorama of   
arguments, parties, boozing, confusion, lethargy, and luxury, ominously like Paris before the   
fall.      It took him a long time to get used to brilliantly lit streets, rivers of cars, rich   
overabundant food, and ignorant indifference to the war.    The military men and their wives,   
when Pug talked to them, discussed only the hairline advantages that the distant explosions   
might bring in their own tiny lives. Navy classmates of his calibre were stepping into the   
major sea commands that led to flag rank.    He knew he was regarded as a hard-luck guy, a   
corner sunk by bureaucratic mischance. 
 
But he had almost stopped caring.    He cared about the war; and he cared about the future of the   
United States, which looked dark to him. 
 
The Navy was as preoccupied as ever by japan.    Every decision of the President to strengthe n   
the Atlantic Fleet caused angry buzzes and knowing headshakes in the Department, and at the   
Army and Navy Club. 
 
When he tried to talk about the Germans, his friends tended to regard him askance; a bypassed   
crank, their amused glances almost said, trying to inflate his importance by exaggerating minor   
matters he happened to know about.    The roaring debate over Lend-Lease, in Congress and the   
newspapers, seemed to him a farrago of illogic and irrelevance.    It suited Hitler's book at the   
moment not to declare war on the United States-that was all.    It apparently suited the American   
people in Turn to fake neutrality while commencing a sluggish, grudging effort on the British   
side, arguing every inch of the way.    These two simple facts were being lost in the storm of   
words. 
 
Pug Henry was content in the War Plans Division because here he worked in another world, a   
secret, very small world of hard-boiled reality. 
 
Early in January, with a few other officers in War Plans, he had begun conversations" with   
British military men.    In theory, Lord Burne-Wilke and his delegation were in Washington on   
vague missions of observing or purchase. Supposedly the talks were low-level explorations   
binding on nobody, and supposedly the President, the Army Chief of Staff, and the Chief of   
Naval Operations took no cognizance of them.    In fact, by the first of March these conferences   
were finishing up a written war operations plan on a world scale. The assumption was that   
japan would sooner or later attack, and the key decision of the agreement lay in two words:   
"Germany first."    It heartened Victor Henry that the American Army and Air Corps planners   
concurred in this, and ajso, to his considerable surprise and pleasure, Admiral Benton and two   
other naval colleagues    who had thought the war through-unlike the rest of the Navy,    still   
rolling along in the greased grooves of the old drills and war games against "Orange," the code   
 476 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
name for japan. 
 
It was clear to Pug Henry that if japan entered the war, with her annual steel production of only   
a few million tons, she could not hold out long if Germany were beaten.    But if the Germans   
knocked out the British and got the fleet, they could go on to conquer whole continents, getting   
stronger as they went, whatever happened to japan. 
 
From his conversations at the Army and Navy Club he knew that this "Germany first" decision   
would, if it came out, create a fearsome howl. 
 
He was one of a handful of Americans-perhaps less than twenty, from the President downward- 
who knew    about it. This was a peculiar    way to run national    affairs, perhaps; but to his   
amazement, which never quite faded, this was how things were going. To be part of this   
crucial anonymous work satisfied him. 
 
It was passing strange to arrive in the morning at the drab little ofices in a remote wing of the   
old Navy Building, and sit down with the British for another day of work on global combat   
plans, after reading in the morning papers, or hearing on the radio, yesterday's shrill LendLease   
argument in Congress.    Pug could not get over the cool dissembling of the few high officials   
who knew of the "conversations." 
 
He kept wondering about a form of government which required such deviousness in its chiefs,   
and such soothing, cajoling fibs to get its legislators to act sensibly. 
 
Once the planners, weary after a hammering day,    sat in their shirt-sleeves around a radio,   
listening to General Marshall testify before a Senate committee.    They heard this Army Chief   
of Staff, whose frosty remote uprightness made Henry think of George Washington, assure the   
senators that no intention existed for America to enter the war, and that at present there was no   
need for any large buildup of its armed forces.    The planners had just been discus an allocation   
of troops based on an American army of five million in 1943, a projection of which Marshall   
was well aware. 
 
'I don't know," Pug remarked to Burne-Wilke, "maybe the only thing you can say for   
democracy is that all other forms of government are even worse."    "Worse for what?"    was the   
air commodore's acid reply. 
 
"If other forms are better for winning wars, no other virtue counts." 
 
Pug got along well with Burne-Wilke, who had fully grasped the landing craft problem.   
Among the planners, a labored joke was spreading about Captain Henry's girlfriend, 'Elsie'; this   
was in fact a play on L.c. 
 
(landing craft), which he kept stressing as the limiting factor of operations in all theatres.    Pug   
had worked up formulas converting any troop movement across water into this and quantities   
of landing craft, and these formulas threw cold water on many an ambitious and plausible plan. 
 
Somebody would usually say,    'Pug's girl    Elsie acting    up again";    and Burne-Wilke always   
 477 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
supported his insistence on this bottleneck. 
 
Henry seldom encountered Pamela Tudsbury, whom the air commodore had brought along as   
his typist-aide.    Tucked in an office in the British Purchasing Nhssion, she evidently worked   
like a dog, for her face was always haggard.    A glad shock had coursed through him when he   
first saw Pamela, standing at Burne-Wilkes elbow, regarding him with glowing eyes. She had   
not written that she was coming.    They met for a drink just once.    Pug amplified all he could on   
his letter about the meeting with Ted Gallard. She looked extremely young to him; and his   
gust of infatuation with this girl after the bombing miwon seemed, in the bustling Willard bar   
in Washington, a distant and hardly believable episode. Yet the hour with her was warmly   
pleasurable. Any day thereafter when he saw her was a good day for him. He left these   
encounters to chance.    He did not telephone her, nor ask her to meet him again; and while she   
always acted glad to see him, she made no move to do so more often. 
 
As a college boy thinks about fame, and an exile about going home, this Navy captain of forty- 
nine once in a while mused on what a romance with the young Englishwoman might be like;   
but it was the merest daydreaming. He remained devoted to his wife, in his fashion.    Rhoda had   
received her husband back with a puzzling mixture of moods-demonstrative affection, and   
even lust, alternating with spells of heavy gloom, coldness, and loud irascibility over her move   
back to Washington from New York She levelled off to a low-temperature detachment,   
busying    herself with Bundles for Britain    and her old-time    music    committees,    and making   
numerous trips to New York for one reason or another. She sometimes mentioned Palmer   
Kirby, now one of the chairmen of Bundles for Britain, in a most casual way.    Rhoda went to   
church with Pug, and sang the hymns, and relayed gossip about unfaithful Navy wives, all   
exactly as before.    She was plainly disappointed when Pug went back to War Plans instead of   
getting a command at sea.    But they settled back into their old routines, and Pug soon was too   
preoccupied to worry much about Rhoda's moods, which had always been jagged. 
 
News about their children intermittently drew them together. 
 
Byron's offhand letter about his hasty marriage in Lisbon was a shock. 
 
They talked for days about it, worrying, agonizing, comforting each other, before resigning   
themselves to live with the fact.    Warren as usual sent the good news.    His wife was returning   
to Washington to have her baby, and he had been promoted to lieutenant. 
 
Pug turned fifty on a Sunday early in March.    He sat in church beside his wife, trying, as he   
listened to the choir sing "Holy, Holy, Holy," to shake off a sense that he had not-dssed all the   
right turns in life. He counted his blessings.    His wife was still beautiful, still capable of love; if   
she had failings, what woman didn't?    His two sons were naval officers, his daughter was self- 
supporting and clever. 
 
Perhaps his career had gone off the rails, but he was serving in a post where he was doing some   
good. 
 
He could not really complain. 
 478 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rhoda, as she sat there beside him, was thinking mainly about the fact that her husband, for the   
first time since his return from abroad, would soon be meeting Palmer Kirby face to face.  
 
Asnowstorm clogged the capital on the night of Rhoda's dinner party. By quarter past seven her   
guests, including Kirby, had straggled in, brushing and stamping off snow, but the dinner was   
still stalled.    Pug was mussing. 
 
In the cramped hot kitchen of an elegant little furnished house on Tracy Place, rented from a   
millionaire bachelor who was now the ambassador to Brazil, Rhoda made a last-minute check   
of the dinner and found all in order: soup hot, ducks tender, vegetables    on the boil, cook   
snarling over the delay.    She sailed out to her guests after a scowl in the hallway mirror and a   
touch at her hairdo.    Rhoda wore a silvery dress molded to her figure; her color was high, her   
eyes bright with nervous excitement. In the living room, Kirby and Pamela Tudsbury were   
talking on the big couch, Madeline and Janice had their heads together in a corner, and on   
facing settees before a log fire, Alistair Tudsbury and Lord Burne-Wilke were chatting with the   
recently elected Senator Lacouture and his wife.    It was a hodgepodge company, but since it   
was only for a hurried dinner before a Bundles for Britain concert, she was not too concerned.   
Pug's meeting with Kirby was the chief thing on her mind. 
 
"We'll wait ten more minutes."    Rhoda sat herself beside the scientist. "Then we'll have to eat.   
I'm on the committee." 
 
"Where is Captain Henry?"    Pamela said calmly.    Her mauve dress came to a halter around her   
neck, leaving her slim shoulders naked; her tawny hair was piled high on her head. Rhoda   
remembered Pamela Tudsbury as a mousy girl, but this was no mouse, Rhoda recognized   
Kirby's expression of lazy genial appetite. 
 
'I'm blessed if I can say. Military secrecy covers a multitude of sins, doesn't it?" Rhoda   
laughed.    "Let's hope he's working on defense, and not a blonde." 
 
"I very much doubt that it's a blonde," said Pamela.    "Not Captain Henry."    "Oh, these goody- 
goody ones are the wors my dear. 
 
That's a dinine dress." 
 
"Do you like it?    Thank you."    Pamela adjusted the skirt.    "I feel all got up for a pantomime,   
almost.    I've been in uniform day and night for weeks." 
 
"Does Lord Burne-Wilke drive you that hard?" 
 
"Oh no, Mrs. Henry. There really are masses of things to do. I feel so lucky at being in   
Washington, that I guess I work off my guilt with the late hours." 
 
"The Waring Hotel then would be the best bet, Pamela?"    Kirby's tone took up the conversation   
Rhoda had broken into. 
 
"If they've repaired the bomb.damage.    By now, they should have. 
 479 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Germans went after Buckingham Palace very hard, and the whole neighborhood took quite   
a beating, but that was back in October." 
 
I'll shoot a cable to the Waring tomorrow." 
 
"Why, Palmer, are you going to London?"    said Rhoda. 
 
Kirby turned to her, crossing his long legs.    "It appears so." 
 
"Isn't that something new?" 
 
"It's been in the works for a while." 
 
"London!    How adventurous."    Rhoda laughed, covering her surprise. 
 
Mrs.      Lacouture's voice rose above the talk.      "Janice, should you be drinking all those   
martinis?" 
 
"Oh, Mother," said Janice, as the white-coated old Filipino, a retired Navy steward hired by   
Rhoda for the evening, shakily filled the glass in her outstretched hand. 
 
'That baby wig be born with an olive in its mouth," remarked the senator.    The two Englishmen   
laughed heartily, and couture's pink face wrinkled up with self-satisfaction. 
 
" So, you did see Byron," Janice said to Madeline.    "When was this?" 
 
'A couple of weeks ago.    His submarine put in at the Brooklyn Navy Yard overnight.    He took   
me to dinner."    "How was he?"    "He's-I don't know-more distant.    Almost chilly.    I don't think   
he likes the Navy much." 
 
'Maybe he doesn't like being married much," Janice said.      'I never heard of anything so   
peculiar!    A couple of days of whoop-de-do in Ilsbon, and back she goes to Italy, and off he   
chugs in his little S-boat.    y on earth did they bother to get married?" 
 
"Well, possibly a Jewish girl would insist," Madeline said in arch tones. 
 
Janice laughed shortly.    "That may well be.    I'll say this, she's a mighty bright and pretty one."   
She grimaced, moving her large stomach under her flowing green gown, trying to get more   
comfortable. 
 
"Ugh, what a bloated cow I am.    This is what it all leads to, honey. 
 
Never forget it.    And how's your love life?"    'Oh dear.    Well-" Madeline glanced toward her   
mother.    "You remember that trombone player?    With the big sad eyes, the one who dressed all   
in brown?" 
 
"That Communist?    Oh, Madeline, don't tell me-" 
 
"Oh, no, no. 
 480 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bozey was an utter drip.    But I went with him to this peace rally at Madison Square garden.    It   
was really something, Jan! 
 
Packed, and this gigantic red, white, and blue sign stretching clear across the garden-nm Ys   
men NoT comiNG'-Madeline waved her hands far apart-"and all these Loyalist Spain songs,   
and these mass chants they do, and novelists and poets and college professors making red-hot   
antiwar speeches and whatnot.    Well, there was this other fellow in our box.    He writes horror   
programs.      He's very successful, he makes about five hundred dollars a week, and he's   
handsome, but he's another Communist."    Madeline sneezed, blew her nose, and looked slyly at   
Janice.    "What do you think would jolt my family more, Byron's Jewish girl or a Communist?   
Bob comes from Nhnnesota, he's a Swede at least. 
 
He's awfully nice."    Janice said, "What about that boss of yours?" 
 
"Hugh Cleveland?    What about him?" 
 
The two young women regarded each other.    Wry knowing wrinkles turned up the corners of   
Janice's mouth.    Madeline colored under the rouge and powder on her pallid face.    "Yes?    Why   
the grin, Janice?" 
 
She drank most of her martini. 
 
"Oh, I don't know.    You keep taking up with one impossible fcllo'A, after another." 
 
"If you mean am I lying in wait for Mr.    Cleveland," Madeline said with her father's briskness,   
"you're about as wrong as you can be. 
 
He's a paunchy pink-haired freckled man, ten years older than I am, and personally I regard   
him as a snake." 
 
"Snakes have the power to hypnotize, dear." 
 
" Yes, rabbits and birds.    I'm neither." 
 
Rhoda went to a small Chinese Chippendale desk to answer the telephone. "Oh, hello there,"   
she said.    "Where are you?... Oh, my gawd... of course... yes, naturally.    Okay.    I'll leave your   
ticket at the box office.    Yes, yes, they've been here for hours. 
 
Right.    Bye, dear." 
 
She hung up, and fluttered her long pale hands at the company. 
 
"Well, let's drink up.    Pug sends apologies.    He's at the White House and he doesn't know when   
he can get away.") In Washington, when the absent diner is at the White House, the empty   
chair is not an embarrassment. Quite the contrary. Nobody asked what Victor Henry was   
doing at the executive mansion, or indeed commented on Rhoda's words. 
 
She put Burne-Wilke on her right and the senator on her left, saying, "After all these years   
protocol still baffles me. 
 481 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
How do you choose between a United States Senator and a British lord? 
 
I'm favoring our foreign guest, Senator." 
 
"Absolutely proper," said Lacouture. 
 
Alistair Tudsbury said, "Lord Burne-Wilke will gladly yield you his seat on this occasion,   
Senator, if he can take yours when Lend-Lease comes to a vote."    "Oh, done, done," exclaimed   
the air commodore, whose bemedalled dress uniform dazzled Rhoda. 
 
Everyone laughed, Tudsbury loudest of all.    "Haw haw haw!"    The correspondent's belly shook   
under a vast expanse of wrinkled waistcoat, spanned by an enormous suspension of gold chain.   
Rhoda said, "Well, what good spirits!    I was half afraid our English friends would eat Senator   
Lacouture alive." 
 
The senator wrinkled his eyes. "You British aren't that hard up for meat ye are you?" He   
added after the laugh, "No, seriously, Rhoda, I'm glad you brought us together. Maybe I've   
convinced our friends that I'm not a Nazi-lover, but just one fellow out of ninety-six, with my   
own point of view.    I certainly don't go for this talk of Senator Wheeler's, that LendLease will   
plow under every fourth American boy. That's way out of bounds.    But if Roosevelt wants to   
send England arms free of charge, why the devil doesn't he come out and say so, instead of   
giving us all this LendLease baloney?    It insults our intelligence." 
 
"I went to a peace rally in New York," Madeline piped up.    "One speaker told a good story.    A   
p tramp stops a rich man on the street. 'Please, mister, give me a quarter, Im starving," he says.   
The rich man says, "My dear fellow, I can't give you a quarter. 
 
I can lend you or lease you a quarter." 
 
Senator Lacouture burst out laughing.    "By God, I'll work that into my next speech." 
 
From across the table, Palmer Kirby said, "Are you sure you want to draw on a Communist   
source?"    "Was that one of those Commie meetings? 
 
Well, a story's a story." 
 
"It's so crazy," said Janice.    'I got stuck in a raid on Pennsylvania Avenue this afternoon, in   
front of the White House. We just couldn't move. The newsreel people were there, taking   
pictures of the pickets. Communists with signs marching round and round in a circle, chanting,   
'The Yanks are not coming," and next to them a mob of women kneeling and praying, right   
there on the sidewalk in the snow, The Christian Mothers of America.    They'll pray there round   
the clock, my driver said, until LendLease is defeated or vetoed.    Honestly! 
 
Coming from Hawaii, I get the feeling the country's going mad." 
 
"It just shows how broad the opposition to this thing is," said the senator. "Cuts across all   
lines." 
 
"On the contrary," put in Kirby, "both extremes seem to be against helping England, while the   
 482 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
mass in the middle is for it."    Senator Lacouture waved a flat hand in the air.    "No, sir.    I've   
been a middle-of-the-roader all my life.    You should hear some of the quiet talk in the Senate   
dining room.    I tell you, if they didn't have to worry about the big-city Jews-and I don't blame   
the Jews for feeling as they do, but this issue can't be decided on any parochial basis-there'd be   
twenty more votes on my side of the fence right now.    I still think they'll end there.    The nose   
count changes every day.    If the ground swell continues for another week, we'll lick this thing." 
 
The street door opened and closed.    Victor Henry came into the dining room, brushing flakes   
of snow from his blue bridge coat. 
 
"Apologies to all hands," he said, doffing the coat.    "No, no, don't get up, I'll just join you, and   
change my duds later." 
 
But the men were all standing. Victor Henry walked around the table for handshakes, and   
came last to Palmer Kirby.    "Hello," he said. 
 
"It's been a long time." 
 
"Sure has.    Too long." 
 
Only Rhoda knew the scientist well enough to note that his smile was awkward and artificial.   
At this moment, which she had been dreading for a couple of weeks, Rhoda had a surprising   
sensation-pleasure and pride that two such men loved her. She felt no trace of guilt as her   
lover clasped hands with her husband of twenty-five years.    Kirby was more than a head taller   
than Captain Henry, and in the columnar black and white of full dress he was a magnificent   
fellow.    Yet Pug was impressive too: erect, short, thickset, his tired eyes in deep sockets very   
shrewd and alive, his whole bearing charged with energy-her own husband, just back from the   
White House.    Rhoda felt lucky, beautiful, desired, pleasantly confused, and quite safe.    It was   
actually one of the nicest moments in her life, and it went off like a dream.    Pug took his seat   
and began eating shrimp cocktail. 
 
"Say, it's a bit late for this," he remarked to Kirby, "but I sure want to thank you for driving   
Rhoda up from New York last summer to see Byron at sub school.    That was a long way." 
 
Kirby spread his big hands. y, it was great to get a look at a submarine base. Your friend   
Captain Tully really gave us the ten-dollar tour." 
 
"Red Tully is 4-0," Pug said.      'I sort of suspect he nudged Byron through that school.   
However, I've asked no questions." 
 
It was exciting as a play for Rhoda, that the two men were actually talking straight off about   
that fateful trip.    She said gaily, "Oh, Pug, you're always selling poor Briny short- Red told us   
he was the champion of his Plass in the training tank.    Caught on to the lung right away, and   
did his escape perfectly the first time cool as a fish. 
 
Why, when we were there they had him instructing in the tank." 
 
"That's self-preservation, not work.    Briny's always been good at that." 
 483 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"That's a talent, too," said Pamela Tudsbury. 
 
Pug looked at her with a trace of special warmth.    "Well, Pamela, one can't get far without it,   
that's true.    But it's the talent of a tu e." 
 
"Honestly!    Did you ever?"    Rhoda said to Lord Burne-Wilke. 
 
"What a father." 
 
Mrs. Lacouture uttered a little shriek. The old steward was offering soup to Lord Burne- 
Wilke, and distracted by the Englishman's medals, he was tilting the tray. The open soup   
tureen went slipping toward Rhoda, and her silver dress was seconds away from ruin.    But as   
the tureen came sliding off the tray, Rhoda, who had a watchful eye for servants, plucked it out   
of the air, and with the quick controlled movements of a cat in trouble, set it on the table, not   
spilling a drop. 
 
Pug called out over the gasps and laughter, "Well done." 
 
"Self-preservation runs in the family," Rhoda said.    Amid louder laughter, Alistair Tudsbury   
started a round of applause. 
 
"By God!    Never have I seen anything so neat," exclaimed Senator Lacouture. 
 
Everybody had a joke or a compliment for Rhoda.    She became exhilarated. Rhoda loved to   
entertain.    She had the ability to nail down details beforehand, and then breeze airily through   
the evening. 
 
Rhoda told stories of mishaps at dinner parties in Berlin, and began to reminisce with sharp   
satire about the Nazis.    Forgotten was her former friendliness to the Germans; she was now the   
Bundles for Britain lady, partisan to the core.    Palmer Kirby, getting over his nervousness in   
Pug's presence, threw in his experiences at a Nuremberg Parteitag. Pug offered an account of   
the slide at Abendruh, making the women giggle. 
 
Then Lord Burne-Wilke gave jocular anecdotes about the arrogance of captured Luftwaffe   
pilots. 
 
Senator Lacouture interrupted him.    "Lord Burne-Wilke, were you people ever really in trouble   
last year?" 
 
"Oh, rather."    The air commodore told of the dwindling of planes and pilots through July and   
August, of the week in September when the count of pilots fell below the survival minimum, of   
the desperate pessimism in the R.A.F all through October, with London burning, civilians   
dying in large numbers, no night fighters available, and the Luftwaffe still coming on and on,   
setting fire to residential districts and bombing and spreading the fires, trying to break the city's   
spirit. 
 
Lacouture probed with more questions, his pink face growing sober. 
 
The R.A.F, the air commodore said, was anticipating a new, larger onslaught in the spring and   
 484 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
summer.    The submarine sinkings, at their present rate, might ground the British planes for lack   
of fuel.    An invasion would then be in the cards.    'Mind you, we hope to weather all this," he   
said, "but this time, Hitler may have the wherewithal.      He's expanded his armed forces   
massively.    We haven't been idle either.    But unfortunately a lot of our stuff is ending up these   
days at the bottom of the Atlantic."    Lacouture's fingers were rolling little balls of bread.    He   
looked straight at the air commodore.    "Well," he said, 'nobody's comparing the British and the   
Nazis as people, as civilizations. You people have been fine, and I'll tell you, possibly we   
should be hearing a bit more of this stuff up on the hill."    Lord Burne-Wilke, with a humble   
little bow that made the party laugh, said, "I'm available."    While the others had dessert, Victor   
Henry changed into his dress uniform.    The guests were wrapping up to brave the snow when   
he rejoined them.    He helped Pamela Tudsbury into her coat, scenting perfume that stirred his   
memory. 
 
She said over her shoulder, "There's news of Ted." 
 
For a moment Victor Henry didn't understand.    On the Bremen she had slipped across the joke   
about Hitler in just that swift quiet way. 
 
"Oh? 
 
Really?    Good or bad?" 
 
"Won't you telephone me?" 
 
"Yes." 
 
"Do.    Please do.    Do." 
 
The party separated into three cars, with Pug driving the British guests. He said to the air   
commodore, as they stopped on Massachusetts    Avenue at a red light that made a cherry- 
colored halo in the falling snow, "You scored some points with Senator Lacouture."    "Words   
over wine," said the air commodore, shrugging. 
 
w 
 
v v ell!    Nobody's seen Constitution Hall looking like this before," Rhoda said, "or ever will   
again, maybe.    It's fantastic." 
 
Every seat was filled.    All the men in the orchestra, and many up the long side slopes wore full   
dress stilts or goldsted military uniforms. The women made a ' sea of uncovered skin, bright   
colors, and winking gems. 
 
Great American and British flags draped the stage. Rhoda had taken for herself two boxes   
nearest to the President's.      The Lacoutures with Janice, the air commodore, and Alistair   
Tudsbury were ensconced in the choicer.    one, and she and Pamela sat at the rail in the other,   
with Pug and Kirby cehind them, and Madeline in the rear. 
 
A commotion arose in the aisle behind them among police guards and latecomers.    A murmur   
 485 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
washed across the auditorium, and the Vice President and His wife stepped into the presidential   
box, into a blue-white spotlight.    The audience stood and applauded.    Henry Wallace responded   
with a self-conscious smile and a brief wave.    He looked like an intelligent farmer, unhappily   
wearing full dress for some anniversary.    The orchestra struck up "The Star-Spangled Banner,"   
and then 'God Save the King." 
 
The British anthem, with the nearness of Pamela Tudsbury's bare white shoulders, awakened   
the London days and nights in Victor Henry's mind. 
 
As the audience settled in its seats and the violins began the slow introduction of a Haydn   
symphony, Pug's thought wandered through the blitz, the bombing run over Berlin, the German   
capital showing yellow    in the 'light under the Hare of the exploding gas, Pamela flinging   
herself at him as he came into his apartment. The music broke into a dancing allegro and   
brought him back to the present. Pug studied the profile of his wife, sitting in her usual   
concertgoing pose-back straight, hands folded in lap, head tilted to suggest attentive pleasure.   
He thought how charming she could be and how splendidly she had carried off the dinner.    A   
wisp of guilt touched him for the affection he felt for Pamela Tudsbury. Victor Henry was   
inexpert at self-excuse, having done too few things in his life of which he disapproved. 
 
Rhoda herself couldn't have been more at ease.    The music of Haydn delighted her.    She loved   
being highly visible in her new silver dress in a box so near the Vice President. She was   
pleased that the concert was a sellout.    She looked forward to the supper-dance afterward.    All   
this splendid fun was actually work in the noblest of causes, and her name stood high on the   
committee list.    How could things be better? 
 
Only Palmer Kirby's news that he was going to England troubled her a bit.    She meant to ask   
him more questions about that. 
 
No doubt Dr. Kirby had his    thoughts, and Pamela    hers. The two intruders    on the long   
marriage, with the husband and wife, looked much like dozens of other foursomes in boxes   
along both sides of the cavernous hall: attractive people, elegantly clad, calmly listening to   
music.    Kirby was sitting behind Rhoda, Pug in back of Pamela Tudsbury. 
 
A stranger might have guessed that the tall people were one pair, the short ones another, except   
that the smaller woman seemed young for the naval officer with the weathered face and heavy   
eyebrows. 
 
During the intermission crush, Victor Henry and Dr.    Kirby were left together by the ladies in   
an overheated lobby foul with smoke. 
 
Pug said, 'How's for a breath of air?    Looks like the snow's stopped." 
 
"You're on." 
 
Chauffeurs were stamping by their limousines on the fresh snow. 
 
It was bitter cold.    A few young music lovers from the rearmost seats, in sweaters and parkas,   
 486 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
chatted with smoking breaths on the slushy steps of the hall. 
 
Pug said, "Anything very new on uranium?" 
 
The scientist looked at him with head aslant.    "what's uranium?" 
 
"Are you that far along?"    Pug grinned. 
 
Kirby slowly shook his head, making a discouraged mouth. 
 
"Are the Germans going to beat us to it?"    The answer was a shrug. 
 
'As you know, I'm in War Plans," Victor Henry said curtly.    "I'm pushing you on this because   
we ought to have the dope, and we can't get it.    If this other thing is really in the works, maybe   
we're just playing tic-tac-toe in our shop." 
 
Kirby stuited his pipe and lit it.    "You're not playing tic-tac-toe. It's not that close.    Not on our   
side." 
 
"Could we be doing more about it?" 
 
"One hell of a lot more.    I'm going to England on this.    They're apparently far ahead of us." 
 
"They've been ahead on other things," Pug said.    "That's something nobody mentions in this   
brainless Lend-Lease dogfight.    We have to be goddamned glad we've got the British scientists   
on our side, and we better break our necks to keep them there." 
 
"I tend to agree.    But we're ahead of them in many things too." 
 
Kirby puffed his pipe, squinting at Pug.    "Are you happy to be home?" 
 
"Happy?" Pug scooped up snow and packed a snowball. The crunching snow in his warm   
hands always gave him an agreeable flash of childhood. 
 
"I'm too busy to think about it.    Yes, I guess I'm happy."    He pegged the snowball over the cars   
into the empty street. "Rhoda was sick of Berlin, and being there by myself was certainly   
grim." 
 
"She's a superb hostess, Rhoda," said Kirby. "I've never attended better dinner parties than   
hers. That was something, the way she rescued that tureen." The pipe in his teeth, Kirby   
uttered a harsh laugh.    "Really something." 
 
"Among her other talents," said Pug, "Rhoda's always been a born juggler." 
 
Kirby wrinkled his whole face.    "It's pretty sharp out here at that, eh? 
 
Let's go back." 
 
At the top of the stairs they encountered Madeline hurrying out, her white fox coat wrapped   
close around her long dress, a red shawl on her hair tied under her chin. 
 487 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Where are you off to?"    her father said. 
 
"I told Mom i wouldn't be able to stay through.    Mr.    Cleveland's back from Quantico.    I have   
to see him." 
 
"Will you come to the dance afterward?" 
 
Madeline sneezed.    'I'm not sure, Dad." 
 
"Take care of that cold.    You look fierce.t The two men went inside. Madeline clung to the   
wooden rail, hastening down the slippery steps. 
 
Awaiter %with a sandwich and a double martini on a tray was knocking at the door of Hugh   
Cleveland's suite when Madeline got there. 
 
The rich familiar voice sounded peevish.    'It's open, it's open, come on in." 
 
Her employer, wearing an unbecoming purple silk robe, sat with his stocking feet up on an   
imitation antique desk, talking into a telephone and making pencil notes on a racing form.   
"What about Hialeah?"    he was saying.    "Got anything good there for tomorrow?"    He waved at   
her, putting his hand for a moment over the mouthpiece.    "Hey Matty!    I thought you weren't   
going to make it.    Sign that.    Give him a buck." 
 
The waiter, a small dull-eyed youngster, hovered in the room, staring with a vacuous grin as   
Cleveland talked to the bookmaker.    "Mr. 
 
Cleveland, I just want to tell you I'm a big fan of yours," he blurted when Cleveland hung up.   
"I really think you're terrific.    So does my whole family. 
 
We never miss the amateur hour." 
 
'Thanks," Cleveland rumbled with a heavy-lidded look, fingering his sandy hair.      'Want   
anything, Matty?"    'A drink, thanks.    I've got a cold." 
 
'Bring her another double," said Cleveland, with a sudden charming smile at the waiter.    'And   
get me three Havana cigars. Monte Cristos, if there are any. See how fast you can do it."   
"Yes, sir, Mr. 
 
Cleveland."    'How was Quantico?"    Madeline threw her coat on a chair and sat down, blowing   
her nose. 
 
"The stage'll work fine.    The commandant's all excited.    He thinks it's a wonderful recruiting   
stunt."    Yawning, Cleveland lit a cigar and explained the arrangements for the broadcast that he   
had made with the commandant. 'He showed me all over the camp. I saw a real combat   
exercise.    Jesus, those marines shoot live ammunition over each other's heads! 
 
I'll be deaf for a week," he said, rubbing his ears.    "I guess they won't put you through that." 
 
"Me?    Am I going there?"    "Sure.    Tomorrow." 
 488 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'What for?" 
 
'Screen the performers, get the personal stuff on them, and all that. 
 
They've already got an amateur thing going there, it turns out. 
 
They call it the Happy Hour."    Madeline said, "The Happy Hour's an old custom all through the   
service."    'Really?    It was news to me. 
 
Anyhow, that makes it a cinch."    He described the arrangements for her interview at Quantico.  
 
The doorbell rang.    Blowing her nose, Madeline went to answer it. 
 
"I think I've got a fever.    I don't want to go and interview a lot of marines." 
 
A girl with dyed black hair stood simpering in the doorway, in a yellow coat and yellow snow   
boots, showing stained teeth in a thickly painted mouth. Her smile faded when Madeline   
opened the door. 
 
"I was looking for Mr.    Hugh Cleveland." 
 
"Right here, baby," he called. 
 
The girl came into the suite with uncertain steps, peering from Cleveland to Madeline. 
 
"What is this?"    she said. 
 
"Wait in there," he said, indicating the bedroom with his thumb. 
 
"I'll be along." 
 
The girl closed the bedroom door behind her.      Ignoring Cleveland's embarrassed grin,   
Madeline snatched her coat and jerked on one sleeve and the other.    'Good-night.    I'll talk to   
you tomorrow." 
 
"You've got a drink coming."    "I don't want it.    I want to get to bed. I'm shivering." 
 
Cleveland came padding to her in stocking feet and put his hand on her forehead.    She pushed   
it away. 
 
"You have no fever." 
 
"Don't touch me, please." 
 
"What's the matter?" 
 
"I just don't like to be touched." 
 
The waiter knocked at the door and came in.    'Double martini, sir, and the Monte Cristos." 
 
"Great.    Thanks."    Cleveland offered the tray to Madeline when the waiter left.    "Here.    Take   
 489 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
off your coat and drink up."    Both hands jammed in her coat pockets, Madeline said, "It's not   
fair to keep a prostitute waiting.    All she has to sell is time." 
 
Hugh Cleveland slowly grinned, putting down the tray.    "Why, Madeline Henry." 
 
"I'm sorry.    I feel extremely lousy.    Good-night." 
 
Cleveland strode to the bedroom.    A murmur of voices, and the girl, tucking money in a shiny   
yellow purse, emerged from the room. 
 
She gave Madeline a tough unpleasant sad glance, and left the suite. 
 
"Sit down and have your drink. Here's all the dope on Quantico" -he flourished a manila   
envelope-'and    who    to    see,    and the    list of    the Performers.      If    you're still not    feeling   
well   
tomorrow just call me, and I'll have Nat or Arnold come down and take over.    #$ "Oh, I guess   
I'll manage."    Madeline sat, throwing her coat back on her shoulders, and drank. 
 
"How are your folks?" 
 
"Fine." 
 
"Any interesting guests at dinner?" 
 
"Alistair Tudsbury, for one." 
 
"Tudsbury!    Say, there's genius.    There's a man I'd like to meet. 
 
He's got style, Tudsbury, and a superb radio voice.    But he'd never come on Who's in Town.   
Who else?" 
 
"Air Commodore Burne-Wilke, of the R.A.F." 
 
"Is an air commodore somebody?" 
 
"From what my father says, he more or less ran the Battle of Britain." Wrinkling his nose,   
Cleveland put his feet on the desk again. 
 
"Hmmm.    Not bad.    The Battle of Britain's awfully tired, though, isn't it? 
 
I don't know if he'd mean anything today, Matty.    The audience has had the Battle of Britain,   
up to here." 
 
"I wouldn't dream of asking him."    "I would."    Hands clasped, two fingers pressed judidously   
to his chin, Cleveland shook his head.    "No. 
 
Dated.    I say balls to the Battle of Britain."    "There was Senator Lacouture." 
 
Her employer's thick sandy eyebrows rose.    "Now, he's hot.    That's right, isn't he an in-law of   
yours, or something?" 
 
'His daughter married my brother."    The one on the submarine?" 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"No.    The aviator."    'What do you think?    Would Lacouture come to New York?" 
 
'For the chance to attack Lend-Lease, I think he'd go to Seattle." 
 
"Well, Lend-Lease is front-page.    Not that one person in forty knows what it's all about.    Let's   
get Lacouture.    Do you mind talking to him?" 
 
"No."    Madeline finished her drink and stood. 
 
'Fine.    Set him up for Monday if you can.    We're kind of blah on Monday."    Madeline tapped   
the envelope in her hand, regarding it absently. 
 
The drink was making her feel better. "There are Happy Hours at all the Navy bases, you   
know," she said.    "Practically on every ship. 
 
Probably in the Army camps, too.    Couldn't you do another show like this every now and then?   
It's something different."    Cleveland shook his head.    'It's a one-shot, Matty.    just a novelty.   
The regular amateurs are the meat and potatoes."    "If we get in the war," Madeline said, "they'll   
start drafting talented people, won't they? There'll be camps all over the country." "Well,   
could be." With his most engaging smile, he waved a thumb at the bedroom door. "Sorry   
about her, kid.    I thought you weren't coming tonight."    "It doesn't make the slightest difference   
to me, I assure you." 
 
'You really disapprove of me.    I know you do.    The way my wife does. 
 
You've had a good upbringing." 
 
'I hope so."    "Well, see, I wasn't that fortunate." 
 
"Good-night, Hugh." 
 
"Say, listen."    With an amused genial squint, Cleveland scratched his head.    "There might be   
something in that Happy Hour thing at that, if we do get in the war.    It might be a series in   
itself.    Start a file on Wartime Ideas, Matty.    Type up a memo on that and stash it away." 
 
"All right."    "Your father's an insider.    Does he think we'll get in the war?" 
 
"He thinks we're in it.the Cleveland stretched and yawned. 
 
'Really?    But the war's sort of petering    out, isn't it? Nothing's happening, except for the   
messing around in Greece and Africa." 
 
"The Germans are sinking a couple of hundred thousand tons a month in the Atlantic." 
 
"Is that a lot? It's all relative, I'd imagine. I guess Hitler's got it won, though." Cleveland   
yawned again. 'All right, Matty. See you back in New York." When the girl had gone,   
Cleveland picked up the telephone, yawning and yawning.    "Bell captain... Cleveland.    Oh, is   
that you, Eddy?    Fine. 
 
Listen, Eddy, she looked all right but I was busy.    I sent her down to the bar for a while.    Black   
 491 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
hair, yellow coat, yellow purse. 
 
Thanks, Eddy." 
 
The sloiv movement of a Brahms symphony was putting Victor Henry in a doze, when a tap   
and a whisper roused him, "Captain Henry?" 
 
The girl usher appeared excited and awed.    "The White House is on the telephone for you." 
 
He spoke a few words in his wife's ear and departed. During applause after the symphony,   
Rhoda said, looking around at his still empty chair, "Pug's evidently gone back to the White   
House." 
 
"Man's life isn't his own, is it?"    Kirby said. 
 
"When has it ever been?" 
 
Pamela said, "Will he rejoin you at the dance?" 
 
Rhoda made a helpless gesture. 
 
An hour or so later, Victor Henry stood at the entrance to the grand ballroom of the Sboreham,   
glumly surveying the scene: the brilliantly dressed dancers crowding the floor; the stage   
festooned with American flags and Union jacks; the huge spangled letters, BUNDLISS FOR   
BIUTAJN,    arching    over    the    brassy    orchestra; and the    long    jolly    queues    at two 
enormous   
buffets laden with meats, salads, cheeses, and cakes.    The naval aide at the White House had   
just told him, among other things, of thirty thousand tons sunk in the North Atlantic in the past   
two days. 
 
Alistair Tudsbury came capering past him, with a blonde lady of forty or so quite naked from   
the bosom up except for a diamond necklace. 
 
The correspondent's gold-chained paunch kept the lady at some distance, but her spirits seemed   
no less hilarious for that.    He dragged his had leg a bit as he danced, obviously determined to   
ignore it. 
 
"Ah, there, Pug!    You're glaring like Savonarola, dear boy." 
 
"I'm looking for Rhoda." 
 
"She's down at the other end.    You know Irina Balsey?" 
 
"Hello, Ifina."    The blonde lady giggled, waving fingers at Henry. 
 
"Did Pamela come to the dance?"    'She went back to the office. 
 
The little prig's doing the overworked patriot." 
 
Tudsbury twirled the blonde away with vigor ill-suited to his size and lameness.    Crossing the   
dance floor, Victor Henry saw his wife at a little round side table with Palmer Kirby. 
 
 
 fine party." 
 
 
 
 
'Hello, dear!" she called. "So you escaped! Get yourself a plate and join us. The veal is   
Marvelous."    "I'll bring you some," said Kirby, hastily rising.    "Sit down, Pug."    "No, no, Fred.   
I have to run along." 
 
"Oh, dear," Rhoda said.    "You're not staying at all?" 
 
"No, I just came to tell you I'll be gone overnight, and longer. 
 
I'm heading home to pack a bag, and then I'll be off."    possibly Palmer Kirby said to him with a   
stiff smile, "Sorry you can't stay. 
 
It's 
 
'Make the best of it.    You won't find such living in London." 
 
"Oh, damn," Rhoda said. 
 
Pug bent over his wife and kissed her cheek.    "Sorry, darling. 
 
Enjoy the dance."    The figure in blue disappeared among the dancers. 
 
Rhoda and Palmer Kirby sat without speaking.    The music jazzily blared. Dancers moved past   
them, sometimes calling to Rhoda, "Lovely party, dear. Marvellous." She was smiling and   
waving in response when Kirby pushed aside his half-full plate of cooling food.    "Well, I leave   
for New York at seven tomorrow, myself.    I'd better turn in.    It was an excellent dinner, and a   
fine concert.    Thanks, Rhoda."    'Talmer, I just have to stay another half hour or so."    Kirby's   
face was set, his large brown eyes distant and melancholy.    Rhoda said, "Well, will I see you   
again before you go to London?" 
 
"I'm afraid not." 
 
With an alert searching look at him, she deliberately wiped her mouth with a napkin.    "I'll walk   
out with you." 
 
In the crowded lobby, Rhoda stopped at a full-length mirror. 
 
Primping her hair, glancing at Kirby now and then in the glass, she spoke in a tone of the most   
careless chitchat.    "I'm sorry.    I meant to tell Pug as soon as he got back.    But he had so much   
to do, with his new job.    And he was so relieved to be home.    I just couldn't, that's all." 
 
Kirby nodded, with a cold expression. 
 
She went on, 'All right.    Then along came this awful jolt, ByTon marrying this girl in Lisbon.   
It took both of us days and days to simmer down. And hard upon that Janice arrived, all   
pregnant and whatnot.    I mean, this close prospect of becoming grandparents, for the first time- 
you've just got to let me pick my momen dear.    It won't be easy at best." 
 
"Rhoda, you and Pug have many things that bind you together.    I fully realize it."    She turned   
and looked in his eyes, then went back to her primping. 
 493 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Don't we?" 
 
He said, frowning at her image in the mirror, "I've been very uncomfortable tonight.    I really   
want to get married again, Rhoda. 
 
I've never felt that more strongly than I did at your dinner table." 
 
"Palmer, don't give me an ultimatum, for heaven's sake.    I can't be rushed."    Rhoda faced him,   
speaking rapidly, shifting her eyes around the lobby, and smiling at a woman who swished by   
in trailing orange satin. 
 
'Or rather, do just as you please, dear.    Bring back an English wife, why don't you?    You'll find   
dozens of fine women there eager to adore you, and delighted to come to America."    "I won't   
bring home an English wife."    He took her hand, glancing up and down her body with a sudden   
smile.    "My God, how pretty you look tonight!    And what a fine dinner you put on, and what a   
grand success this dance is!    You're quite a manager.    My guess is I won't get back till May.   
That should be plenty of time, Rhoda.    You know it should be. 
 
Good-bye." 
 
Rhoda went back to the dance, much relieved.    That last moment had cleared the air.    At least   
until May, she could go on juggling. 
 
Wearing owlish black-rimmed spectacles, Pamela Tudsbury clattered away at a typewriter, in   
her mauve evening dress and fancy hairdo. 
 
A desk lamp lit the machine; the rest of the shabby,    windowless little office was in half- 
darkness.    A knock came on the door. 
 
"Bless my soul, that was quick!"    She opened the door to Victor Henry, in a brown felt hat and   
brown topcoat, carrying a canvas overnight bag. She walked to a silex steaming on a small   
table amid piled papers, pamphlets, and technical books.    "Black you drink it, with sugar, as I   
recall. 
 
"Good memory." 
 
She poured two cups of coffee and settled into the swivel chair by the typewriter.    They sipped,   
regarding each other in the lamplight. 
 
"You look absurd," Pug Henry said. 
 
'Oh, I know, but he wants it by eight in the morning."    She took off the glasses and rubbed her   
eyes.    "It was either get up at five, or finish it tonight.    I wasn't sleepy, and I hadn't the faintest   
desire either to dance or to stuff myself." 
 
'What are you working on?"    She hesitated, then smiled.    "I daresay you know a lot more about   
it than I do.    The annex on landing craft." 
 
"Oh, yes.    That one.    Quite a document, eh?"    "It seems like sheer fantasy.    Can the United   
 494 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
States really develop all those designs and build those thousands of machines by 1943?" 
 
'We can, but I have no reason to think we will.    That isn't an operation order.    It's a plan." 
 
He relished being alone with her in this tiny, dreary, dimly lit office. 
 
Pamela's formal half-nudity had a keener if incongruous sweetness here: a bunch of violets, as   
it were, on a pile of mimeographed memoranda.    He said gruffly, "Well, what's the dope on   
Ted Gallard?" 
 
'I received a letter from his squadron commander only yesterday. 
 
It I s quite a long story.    The nub of it is that three R.A.F prisoners in his hospital escaped,   
made their way to the coast, and got picked up and brought home. Teddy was supposed to   
break out with them. 
 
But after your visit he got a room of his own and special surveillance. So he couldn't. 
 
They think that by now he's been shipped to Germany and put in a camp for R.A.F prisoners.   
That's the story.    He'll be well treated, simply because we're holding so many Luftwaffe pilots.   
Still, you can see why I've no particular desire just now to go to posh supper-dances." 
 
Victor Henry glanced at the wall clock.    "It was my doing, then, that he couldn't get out." 
 
"That's ridiculous."    'No, it's a fact.    I hesitated before talking to the Luftwaffe about him, you   
know. I figured it would call attention to him and give him a special status. I wasn't sure   
whether that would be good or bad.    Sometimes it's best to leave things as they fall." 
 
"But I asked you to find out what you could about him." 
 
"Yes, you did." 
 
"You relieved me of a couple of months of agonizing."    He said, "Anyway, it's done.    And now   
you know he's still alive.    That's something.    I'm very glad to hear it, Pam.    Well-I guess I'll go   
along." 
 
"Yes, you did." "Where to?" With a surprised grin, he said, "You know better than that."   
"You can always just shut me up.    You're not leaving the country?" 
 
He pointed at the small suitcase.    "Hardly." 
 
'Because we're finishing up here very soon," she said, (i and in that case I might not see you for   
a long while." 
 
Pug leaned forward, elbows on knees, clasping his hands.    He felt little hesitation in confiding   
to her things he never told his wife. 
 
Pamela was, after all, almost as much of an insider as he was. 
 
'The President's had a bad sinus condition for weeks, Pam.    Lately he's been running a fever.   
 495 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
This Lend-Lease hubbub isn't helping any. 
 
He's taking the train to Hyde Park to rest up for a few days, strictly on the q.t. I'm to ride with   
him.    It's a big surprise.    I thought, and sort of hoped, he'd forgotten me."    She laughed.    'You're   
not very forgettable.    You're a legend in Bomber Command, you know. The American naval   
officer who rode a Wellington into the Berlin flak for the fun of it."    'rhat's a laugh," said Pug.   
'I was crouching on the deck the whole time with my eyes tight shut and my fingers in my ears. 
 
I still shudder to think what would have happened if I'd been shot down and survived.  
 
The U.S. naval attache to Berlin, riding over Germany in a British bomber!    Lord almighty,   
you were angry at me for going." 
 
'I certainly was."    Pug stood, buttoning his coat.    "Thanks for the coffee.    I've been yearning for   
coffee ever since I had to skip it to put on my monkey suit." 
 
'It was a splendid dinner.    Your wife's wonderful, Victor.    She manages things so well.    The   
way she picked that bowl out of the air, like a conjurer!    And she's so beautiful."    "Rhoda's all   
right.    Nobody has to sell Rhoda to me." 
 
Pamela put on her glasses and ran a sheet of paper into the typewriter. 
 
'Good-bye, then," Pug said, adding awkwardly, "and maybe I'll see you before you go back   
home." 
 
'That would be nice."    She was peering at scribbled papers beside the typewriter.    "I've missed   
you terribly, you know.    More so here than in London." 
 
Pamela slipped these words out in the quiet manner peculiar to her. 
 
Victor Henry had his hand on the doorknob.    He paused, and cleared his throat.    "Well-that's   
Rhoda's complaint.    I get buried in what I'm doing." 
 
'Oh, I realize that." She looked up at him with eyes glistening roundly through the lenses.   
"Well? You don't want to keep the President waiting, Captain Henry." N the dark quiet   
railroad station, two Secret Service men lifted the President from the limousine and set him on   
his feet.    He towered over them in a velvet-collared coat, his big-brimmed soft gray hat pulled   
low on his head and flapping in the icy wind. Holding one man's arm, leaning on a cane, he   
lurched and hobbled toward a railed ramp, where be drew on gloves and hauled himself up into   
the rear car, jerking his legs along. Victor Henry,    many yards    away,    could see the huge   
shoulders heaving under the overcoat.    A tall woman with a nodding brown feather in her hat   
and a fluttering paper in her hand scampered up and touched Victor Henry's arm.    'You're to go   
in the President's car, Captain." 
 
Climbing the ramp, Pug realized why the President had put on gloves. The steel rails were so   
cold, the skin of his hands stuck to them. 
 
A steward led Victor Henry past a pantry where another steward was rattling ice in a cocktail   
 496 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
shaker.    "You be stayin' in heah, suh.    When you ready, de President innite you join him." 
 
The room was an ordinary Pullman sleeper compartment.    The strong train smell was the same.   
The green upholstery was dusty and worn. 
 
Victor Henry hung coat and cap in a tiny closet, brushed his hair, cleaned his nails, and gave a   
flick of a paper towel to his highly polished shoes.    The train started in a slow glide, with no   
jolt and no noise. 
 
'Sit down, sit down, Pug!" The President waved from a lounge chair. "What'll you have?   
Whiskey sours are on the menu, because Harry drinks them all night long, but we can fix up   
almost anything." 
 
"Whiskey sour will be fine, Mr.    President.    Thank you." 
 
Harry Hopkins, slouching on a green sofa, said, "Hello, Captain." 
 
Though Roosevelt was supposed to be ill, Hopkins looked the worse of the two: lean, sunken- 
chested, gray of skin.    The President's color was high, perhaps feverish, his black-rimmed eyes   
were very bright, and a perky red bow tie went well with the gay relaxed look of his massive   
face. 
 
He bulked huge in the chair, though his legs showed so pitiftffly skeletal through the trousers.   
It crossed Pug's mind that Washington and Lincoln too had been oversized men. 
 
"How are you on poetry, Pug?"    said the President, in the cultured accents that always sounded   
a bit affected to the Navy man. "Do you know that poem that ends, 'There isn't a train I   
wouldn't take, no matter where it's going'?    Golly, that's the way I feel.    just getting on this train   
has made me feel one hundred percent better."    The President put the back of his hand to his   
mouth, and harshly coughed. 
 
"Well, ninety percent.    If this were a ship, it would be one hundred percent." 
 
"I prefer a ship too, sir." 
 
"The old grievance, eh, sailor?" 
 
"No, sir, truly not.    I'm quite happy in War Plans." 
 
"Are you?    Well, I'm glad to hear it.    Of course, I haven't the faintest notion of what you're   
cooking up with those British fellows." 
 
'So I understand, sir." 
 
Eyebrows mischievously arched, the President went on, 'No, not the foggiest.    When your draft   
that    the Secretary    of    War    got yesterday    bounces back    to    Lord Burne-Wilke,    and    he 
sees   
corrections in what looks like my handwriting, that will be an accidental resemblance." 
 
"I'll remember that." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Yes, indeed.    On the very first page of the forwarding letter, if you recall, there's a sentence   
that begins, When the United States enters the war."    Somebody, with a handwriting just like   
mine, has crossed out that perfectly terrible clause, and written instead, 'In the event that the   
United States is compelled to enter the war."      Small but important change!"      A steward   
passed'a tray of drinks.    The President took a tall glass of orange.. "Doctor's orders.    Lots and   
lots of fruit juice. Harry, do you have that ituce. 
 
thing with you?" 
 
"Right here, Mr.    President." 
 
"Well, let's get at it.    I want to have a snack, and then try to sleep a little- How do you sleep on   
trains, Pug?" 
 
"Fine, sir, if I can just get the heat right.    Usually I roast or freeze." 
 
The    President    threw    his head    back. "Ha,    ha!    By George,    I'll    tell you    a    state    secret-
the   
President of the United States has the same trouble! 
 
They're building a special armored car for me now. I told them, I said, I don't care about   
anything else, but that heating system had better work! Harry, let's get in our order for a   
snack." He glanced at his watch. "Are you hungry, Pug? I am. I'll tell you another state   
secret.    The food at the White House leaves something to be desired. 
 
Tell them I want sturgeon and eggs, Harry.    I've been thinking of sturgeon and eggs for days." 
 
Hopkins went forward. 
 
The President's car, so far as Pug could tell, was a regular Pullman lounge car, rearranged to   
look like a living room.    He had expected something more imposing.    Roosevelt leaned one   
elbow on the chair arm, and rested a hand on his knee, looking out of the window in a calm   
majestic manner.    'I really am feeling better by the minute.    I can't tell you how I love being   
away from the telephone.    How are your boys? The naval aviator, and that young submariner?" 
 
Victor Henry    knew that Roosevelt    liked    to display    his    memory,    but it    still    surprised   
and   
impressed him.    "They're fine, sir, but how do you remember?"    The President said with almost   
boyish gratification, "Oh, a politician has to borrow the virtues of the elephant, Pug. The   
memory, the thick hide, and of course that long inquisitive nose!    Ha ha ha!" Hopkins returned   
to the sofa, stooping with fatigue, zipped open his portfolio, and handed Captain Henry a   
document three pages long, with one dark facsin-,ile page attached.    "Take a look at this." 
 
Pug read the first page with skepticism that shifted to amazement, while the train wheels gently   
clack-clacked. He leafed through the sheets and looked from Hopkins to the President, not   
inclined to speak first. 
 
What he    held in his hands was a summary from army intelligence sources of a startling   
German operation order, purportedly slipped to a civilian in the American embassy in Berlin   
 
 
 
 
 
 
complete surprise. 
 
Franklin Roosevelt said, "Think it's genuine?"    "Well, sir, that photostat of the first page does   
look like the German military documents I've seen. The headings are right, the look of the   
typece, the paragraphing, and so forth." 
 
What about the content?" 
 
"Well, if that's genuine, Mr.    President, it's one incredible intelligence break."    The President   
smiled, with fatigued tolerance for a minor person's naivete.    "If is the longest two-letter word   
in the language." 
 
Hopkins said hoarsely, 'Do the contents seem authentic to you?" 
 
'I can't say, sir.    I don't know Russian geography that well, to begin with." 
 
'Our Army people find it plausible," Hopkins said.      'y    would anybody fake a staggering   
document like that, Captain?    A complete operation order for the invasion of the Soviet Union,   
in such massive detail?" 
 
Pug thought it over, and spoke carefully.    "Well, sir, for one thing they might be hoping to prod   
the Soviet Union to mobilize, and so kick off a two-front war.    In that case the army might   
depose or kill Hitler. Then again, it could be a plant by German intelligence, to see how much   
we pass on to the Russians.    The possibilities are many." 
 
'That's the trouble," said the President, yawning.    "O ur ambassador in Russia has begged us not   
to transmit this thing.    He says Moscow is flooded with such stuff.    The Russians assume it all   
emanates from British intelligence to start trouble between Stalin and Hitler, so as to get the   
Germans off England's back." The President coughed heavily for almost a minute. He sat   
back in his chair, catching his breath, looking out at streetlamps of a small town sliding past.   
He suddenly appeared very bored. 
 
Harry Hopkins leaned forward, balancing the drink in both hands. 
 
"There's a question about giving this document to the Russian ambassador here in Washington,   
Pug. Any comment?"      Pug hesitated;    a    political problem    like this    was not in    his reach.   
President Roosevelt said, with a trace of annoyance, "Come on, Pug." 
 
"I'm for doing it."    'Why?"    said Hopkins. 
 
"What's there to lose, sir?    If this thing turns out to be the McCoy, we'll have scored a big point   
with the Russkis.    If it's a phony, well, so what?    They can't be any more suspicious of us than   
they are." 
 
The weary tension of Harry Hopkins's face dissolved in a warm, gentle smile.    "I think that's a   
remarkably astute answer," he said, "since it's what I said myself."    He took the document from   
Pug and zipped it into the briefcase. 
 
"I'm more than ready to eat that sturgeon and eggs," said Franklin Roosevelt, "if it's cooked." 
 499 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Let me go and check, Mr.    President."    Hopkins jumped to his feet. 
 
Tossing on the narrow bunk, Pug sweated and froze in the compartment for an hour or so,   
fiddling with the heat controls in vain. 
 
He settled down to freeze, since he slept better in cold air.    The slow, even motion of the train   
began to lull him. 
 
Rap, rap.    'Suh?    The President like to speak to you.    You want a robe, suh?    The President say   
not to bother dressing.    just come to his room." 
 
"Thanks, I have one." 
 
Pug passed shivering from his cold compartment to the President's bedroom, which was far too   
hot.    The famous big-chinned face of Franklin Roosevelt, with the pince-nez glasses and jaunty   
cigarette holder, looked very strange on a slumped large body in blue pajamas and   
coffeestained gray sweater.    The President's thin hair was rumpled, his eyes bleary.    He looked   
like so many old men look in bed: defenseless, shabby, and sad, his personality and dignity   
stripped from him.    There was a smell of medicine in the room.    The picture disturbed Victor   
Henry because the President appeared so vulnerable, unwell, and unimportant; and also   
because he was only seven, or eight years older than Pug, yet seemed decrepit. The blue   
blanket was piled with papers. 
 
He was making pencil notes on a sheaf in his hand. 
 
"Pug, did I break in on your beauty rest?" 
 
"Not at all, sir." 
 
"Sit down for a moment, old top." The President removed his glasses with a pinch of two   
fingers, and vigorously massaged his eyes. 
 
On the bedside table several medicine bottles tinkled as the train clacked over a bumpy rail.   
"Lord, how my eyes itch," he said.    "Do yours?    Nothing seems to help.    And it's always worse   
when I get these sinus attacks."    He clipped papers and dropped them on the blanket. 
 
"Something I've promised myself to do-if I ever find the time, Pug-is to write out a   
memorandum of the things that come to me in just one day. Any day at random, any twenty- 
fgur-hour period. You'd be amazed." He slapped at the papers. "It would be a valuable   
sidelight on history, wouldn't it?    For instance.    just take tonight's laundry that I've been doing.   
Vichy France seems about to sign a full alliance with Hitler. Threaten to cut off their food and   
starve them out? 
 
That's what the British advise. Give them even more food, bribe them to hold out against   
Hitler?    Our ambassador's idea.    But when we send the French more food, the Germans simply   
swallow up more of what the French produce.    So where are you?-Now.    Here."    He picked lip   
a clipped document.    "The Japanese foreign minister is meeting with Hitler. 
 500 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
You've read about that.    What are they up to?    Shall we move the Asiatic fleet from Manila to   
Singapore, to make them think twice about jumping on the French and Dutch East Indies?   
That's the British idea. 
 
Or shall we pull everything in the Pacific all the way back to the west coast, for prudence's   
sake?    That's what my Chief of Naval Operations wants.    I'd like your opinion on that, by the   
way.    Here's another touchy item-the Azores.    Grab them before Hitler invades Portugal and   
takes them himself?    Or if we grab them, will that make him invade Portugal?" 
 
The President flipped through more papers as though they were butcher and grocer bills.    "Oh   
yes.    Selective Service.    This is bad. 
 
From Stimson.    The authorizing bill will run out in a few months. 
 
We have to start new legislation rolling now.    But after the Lend-Lease battle, Congress will be   
in no mood to extend the draft. 
 
And if they don't we'll be militarily helpless.-Morgenthau.    Treasury is bedevilling me to freeze   
all the funds of Germany and Italy here, but State says no, we've got four times as much   
invested in those countries as they've got with us.-Morgenthau again. The British agreed to   
sell all their investments here to give us their remaining dollars, and Morgenthau told Congress   
they would, and now the British are dragging their feet.    There's ever so much more.    that's part   
of One day's basketful, old chap.    I mean, a historian would certainly find a cross section like   
that    interesting,    wouldn't he?    I had a check made    on the papers of Wilson and Lincoln.   
Nothing like it ever turned up. 
 
I am definitely going to do it one day." 
 
Roosevelt coughed long and hard, closing his eyes, wincing, and putting a hand to his back.   
The gesture threw him off balance in the swaying train, and the large body began to topple   
over like a tipped barrel. 
 
Victor Henry jumped to steady his shoulder, but the President's long powerful arm had caught   
an edge of the bed.    -Thanks, Pug.    This train isn't supPOsed to go more than thirty-five miles   
an hour. 
 
They're shading it up there."    He rubbed his back.    'I get a stabbing pain when I cough, but Doc   
McIntyre assures me it's a pulled muscle. 
 
just so it isn't pleurisy! 
 
I really can't afford pleurisy right now.    I'd better have more of that cough medicine.    Would   
you hand me that spoon and that bottle with the red stuff? Thank you, old fellow." The   
President took a spoonful of the medicine, making a face.    Tilting his large head to one side in   
the way all the nightclub clowns imitated, Roosevelt fixed the Navy captain with a sharp look   
from bloodshot eyes.    'Pug, the U-boats keep working westward with this new wolf-pack tactic.   
The sinkings are outrunning the combined capacity of our yards plus the British yards to build   
 501 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
new bottoms.    You're aware of all that." 
 
"I've been hearing plenty about it at our conferences, sir." 
 
"You accept the British figures of sinkings?" 
 
"Oh, yes, Mr.    President." 
 
"So do I. The minute Lend-Lease passes, we'll be sending out a vast shipment of stuff.    Now,   
none of that stuff must land on the ocean floor instead of in England.      That's terribly   
important." 
 
Roosevelt's offhand remark about Lend-Lease surprised Victor Henry, who was deeply   
worried, as the British were, about the violent debate in the Senate.    "You think Lend-Lease   
will pass, sir?" 
 
-Oh, the bill will pass," said the President absently.    "But then what? 
 
Seventy ships are standing by now to be loaded.    This shipment simply caimot be scattered and   
sunk by the U-boats, Pug.    The British need the stuff.    They need even more the morale boost   
of seeing it arrive.    The problen, is getting it through as far as Iceland.    From there the British   
can convoy them, but not from here to Iceland. 
 
They're simply stretched to the breaking point.    Well?    What do we do?" 
 
Victor Henry said uncomfortably, under the President's questioning gaze, "Convoy, sir?" 
 
The President heavily shook his head.    "You know the answer on that, Pug, as of this moment." 
 
In the Lend-Lease fight, the issue of convoying was red-hot. 
 
The Lacouture group was screaming that if Lend-Lease passed, the warmongers would next   
demand to convoy the ships that carried the supplies, and that convoy meant immediate war   
with Germany.    The President was publicly insisting that American policy would not change in   
the Atlantic: neutrality patrol," not convoy. 
 
Roosevelt's grim flushed face creased in the sly mischievous look that was becoming familiar   
to Pug.    "I've been thinking, however. 
 
Suppose a squadron of destroyers went out on an exercise?    Not convoying, you understand.   
Not convoying at all.    just practicing convoy procedures.    Just professional drill, you might say.   
The Navy is always drilling, isn't it? 
 
That's your job.    Well, suppose they chose to travel with these vesselsstrictly for drill purposes,   
you understand-just this once? And to avoid difficulties and complications, suppose all this   
were done highly informally, with no written orders or records? Don't you suppose the U- 
boats might be a bit discouraged to see sixteen or so Benson-class United States destroyers out   
there screening those ships?" 
 502 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Discouraged, yes.    Still, what happens will depend on their instructions, Mr.    President." 
 
"They've got instructions not to tangle with our warships," Roosevelt said, sounding and   
looking very hard.    "That's obvious." 
 
Victor Henry's pulse was quickening.    "They've never encountered our destroyers in a convoy   
screen, sir.    Suppose a U-boat closes and fires a torpedo?" 
 
"I don't believe it will happen," Roosevelt said shortly.    "The ships may never even be sighted   
by the Germans before the British take over the convoy.      The North Atlantic weather's   
atrocious now.    And most of the U-boat action is still on the other side of Iceland."    He was   
fitting a cigarette in his holder as he spoke. Victor Henry swiftly snapped his lighter and   
offered a flame.    "Thanks.    This is against doctor's orders, but I need a smoke.    Pug, I want this   
thing done, and I'm thinking you might handle it and go out with the destroyers." 
 
Captain Henry swallowed his astonishment and said, "Aye aye, sir." 
 
'It's very much like that airplane transfer, which you handled so well. Everything depends on   
doing it in the calmest, quietest, most unobtrusive way.    The point is to make no records, and   
above all no history, but simply to get those ships silent and safe as far as Iceland.    Can it be   
done?" 
 
The Navy captain sat hunched for perhaps a minute, looking at the President.    "Yes, sir." 
 
"With an absolute minimum of people in the know?    I haven't even discussed this thing with   
Harry Hopkins." 
 
"Admiral Stark    and Admiral King would    have    to    know,    of course,    sir. And    Commander,   
Support Force, and the officer in tactical    command    of the screen. Everybody else in the   
exercise will just obey orders." 
 
Roosevelt laughed and puffed at his cigarette. "Well! If you    can keep it down to three   
admirals and one other officer, that will be swell. 
 
But a lot of personnel will take part in this exercise.    There'll be talk." 
 
Victor Henry said stonily, "Not very much."    Franklin Roosevelt raised his busby eyebrows.   
"Mr.    President, what do we do if a U-boat does attack?    I agree it's unlikely.    But suppose it   
happens?" 
 
Roosevelt regarded him through wreathing cigarette smoke. "This is a gamble that it won't   
happen." 
 
"I know that, sir." 
 
"You understand that a combat incident destroys the whole purpose the President said, "and   
you know the other implications." 
 
"Yes, sir." 
 503 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Now tell me," said the President, in a much milder manner, "what do you honestly think of the   
idea?    It's my own.    If you think it's bad, say so, but tell me why." 
 
Sitting forward hunched, elbows on his knees, ticking off points with an index finger against   
his other hand, Victor Henry said, "Well, sirto begin with, those U-boat fellows may never see   
us, as you say. 
 
If they do, they'll be surprised.    They'll radio for instructions. 
 
We may run into a trigger-happy, type, but I doubt it.    I know those German submariners. 
 
They're excellent professional officers. This is a policy decision that will have to go up to   
Hitler.    That'll take time.    I think the ships will get through without incident, Mr.    President." 
 
"Grand!" 
 
"But it'll only work once.    It's a policy surprise.    It's too risky to repeat." 
 
Roosevelt sighed and nodded.    "That's it.    The whole situation is terrible, and some kind of risk   
has to be taken. The British say that before the next big convoy goes, they'll have many   
damaged destroyers back in action. 
 
We're also giving the Canadians some coast guard cutters-in confidence, Pug-to help close this   
gap to Iceland.    It's this first Lend-Lease shipment that is crucial."    The President gathered up   
the papers stacked around on his blanket.    'Would you put these in that case?"    As Victor Henry   
was closing the dispatch case the President said through a yawn, using both arms to ease   
himself down into the bed, "How have those conferences with the British been going?" 
 
"Excellently, on the whole, Mr.    President." 
 
The President yawned again.    "It was so important to start this pattern of joint staff work.    I'm   
very happy about it." He snapped off his bed lamp, leaving the room dimly lit by recessed   
lights in the walls. "They've been giving you some trouble about Singapore, haven't they?" 
 
"Actually we just put that issue aside, sir.    There was no resolving it." 
 
"You can Turn out the lights, Pug.    The button's by the door." 
 
'Yes, sir." 
 
One blue light, and the President's cigarette end, still glowed in the darkness.    His voice came   
weary and muffled from the bed.    "We'll run into that time and again.    They want to hold on to   
their Empire, naturally.    But the job is to beat Hitler.    Those are different undertakings.    They'll   
insist to the end that they're one and the same. 
 
Well-we'll chat again about that exercise in the morning, Pug." 
 
The President used his tricky word with sardonic relish. 
 
"Aye aye, sir." 
 504 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'And when you come back from that little sea jaunt-which you ought to enjoy, for a change-I   
want you and your wife and family to come to dinner with us.    just a little quiet dinner.    Mrs.   
Roosevelt often speaks of you."    "Thank you, Mr.    President.    I'm very honored." 
 
"Good-night, old top." 
 
The red cigarette end went out in an ashtray.    As Victor Henry put his hand on the doorknob,   
the President suddenly said, "Pug, the best men I have around me keep urging me to declare   
war.    They say it's inevitable, and that it's the only way to unite the people and get them to put   
their backs into the war effort.    I suppose you agree with them?" 
 
The Navy captain said after a pause, looking at the bulky shadow in blue light, "Yes, Mr.   
President, I know." 
 
It's a bad thing to go to war," said the President.    "A very bad thing. 
 
If the moment is coming, it isn't here. Meantime I shall just have to go on being called a   
warmonger, a coward, and a shillyshallyer, all rolled in one.    that's how I earn my salary.    Get a   
good rest, Pug." 
 
(from WORLD EMPIRE LOST) 
 
Provocation in the Atlantic As our U-boat campaign in 1941 began to show better results,   
Franklin Roosevelt stepped up his countermoves,. Each month brought a new story, undrama tic   
to the newspaper reader but ominous to our staff, of bolder and bolder moves by Roosevelt to   
deny us freedom of the seas.    He occupied Greenland, putting the United States Navy astride   
the convoy routes in the gap between Canadian escorting and British escorting, just where our   
U-boats were making their best scores. The American admiral, King, arrogantly declared that   
the "Western hemisphere began at the twenty-sixth line of western longitude."    This line took   
in all the best hunting grounds of the U-boats, including the Bahamas, the Caribbean, and the   
Azores. The American    Navy,    in addition to its "neutrality patrol," did some surreptitious   
convoying, relying on German forbearance and congressional ignorance to get away with such   
flagrant acts of war. Finally in May the President proclaimed "an unlimited national   
emergency," coming out with sly hints that if things kept going so badly, his countrymen might   
actually i have to shed a little blood. This was his public justification for the ever increasing   
interfererce on +he side of Englnnd. 
 
But long before that, in January, full-scale military staff conferences of the British and United   
States forces, exceeding in scope anything between Germany and Italy, had already taken place   
in Washington, in great secrecy.      There it was agreed that when global war broke out,   
"Germany first" would be the policy. Such was American neutrality in 1941, and such was   
Roosevelt's candor with his countrymen.    All that time he kept flooding them with assurances   
that they would not have to fight, if only England received enough help. 
 
Churchill abetted this deception with the famous speech ending, "Give us the tools, and we will   
finish the job," a completely empty and fatuous boast, as he well knew. 
 505 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The American President's worst interference at this time, however, was in the Balkans.    The   
Balkan campaign of 1941 need never have occurred. Winston Churchill and Franklin   
Roosevelt fanned a manageable political problem into a cruel armed conflict. 
 
Yugoslavia's Treachery: The Donovan Mission 
 
it is well known that Roosevelt often used informal emissaries to bypass established diplomatic   
channels and regular government structures.      In this way he could perform machinations   
without responsibility if they miscarried, and without leaving a trail of records.    He could also   
make probes and inquiries wthout committing himself.      The most celebrated of these   
emissaries was, of course, Harry Hopkins, who helped to form the fateful policy of all-out aid   
to the Bolsheviks. 
 
Lesser known was Colonel William Donovan, who later in the war created the notorious OSS   
spy ring. In March 1941, Donovan paid a visit to Yugoslavia that brought disaster to that   
country. For an American President to meddle in Balkan politics when war was flaming in   
Greece, in order to pull other countries into the conflict against Germany, was nothing but a   
war crime.    Yet that was Donovan's mission, and it was successful. 
 
The war in Greece was not of our doing; it was a miscarried adventure of our cardboard ally,   
Benito Mussolini. During the summer of 1940, Mussolini had ordered his Libyan troops to   
invade Egypt, for England was fighting for her life at empire cheaply. 
 
home, and he thought ltoly could grab off her Mediterranean In October he had also laid on an   
invasion of Greece, and with typical theatricolity he scheduled it for a day when he met with   
Adolf Hitler in Florence.    He told Hitler nothing about this in advance.    Mussolini itched to   
show the Fuhrer that he was not just a hanger-on, but another daring military conqueror. 
 
Unfortunately for him, within a few weeks the small Greek army routed the Italians, chased   
them into Albania, and captured their army base at Port Edda. With this politico-military   
disaster, Hitler's    fellow    dictator    stood exposed as    an incompetent    loudmouthed    fool. The   
English in Egypt took heart and also fought back, and at the first hint of British pluck,   
Mussolini's "indomitable legions" either ran away with unbelievable speed, or surrendered in   
the finest of holiday spirits. It was a disgraceful display seldom seen in modern warfare. 
 
The Italian army plainly had no heart for the war and counted for nothing.    Most of the Italian   
navy had already been knocked out at anchor in Taranto,    back in November.    (This    fine   
surprise attack by torpedo planes from British aircraft carriers was successfully imitated later   
by the Japanese at Pearl Harbor.) Our southern flank therefore stood exposed. 
 
Hitler was deeply loyal to Mussolini, his one real ally, and for political reasons he felt the   
Italian    had    to    be    shored    up. Also, with    our    invasion    of the    Soviet    Union    imminent,   
the   
neutralizing of the Balkans on our southern flank was important. The Fuhrer embarked on   
skillful political moves to keep the conflagration in Greece localized, planning to snuff it out   
with a few good German divisions.    He wisely seized the Rumanian oil fields and lo,ceti an   
accommodation with Hungary.    He also dictated friendly pacts with Bulgaria and Yugoslavia,   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and despite Russian complaints, he moved troops into Bulgaria for the Greek action. 
 
All was in readiness for the pacification of the Balkans, when Roosevelt's emissary came to   
Belgrade. 
 
The Simovic Cabal 
 
Winston Churchill had a farfetched vision of drawing neutral Yugoslavia and Turkey into the   
Greek mess, thus creating a major Balkan front against us, where as usual other people would   
fight and die for England. Donovan had tried in January to interest the Yuo ,oslav government   
in Churchill's scheme, but the Prince Regent Paul had shrugged off the American meddler.   
Donovan had managed, however, to make contact with a conspiracy of Serbian military men,   
led by an air force general, one Simovic.    A patchwork creation of the Versailles settlement,   
Yugoslavia was torn by antagonism between the groats, who were friendly to the Reich, and   
the Serbians, our fierce enemies. 
 
These Serbion of ricers were quite receptive to the harebrained Churchill plan; it was Serbion   
hotheads, it will be recalled, who touched off the First World War at Sarajevo. 
 
On his visit in March, Donovan found the British scheme in collapse; for, under severe   
pressure from the Fuhrer, vugoslovia was joining the Axis.    Roosevelt now sent a stiff message   
to the Yugoslav government, which history records: "The United States is looking not merely   
to the present but to the future, and any nation which tamely submits on the grounds of being   
quickly overrun would receive less sympathy from the world than a nation which resists, even   
if this resistance continues for on/y a few weeks." 
 
Here,    in effect, was    a command to    Yugoslavia from    the American President,    almost    five   
thousand miles away, to embroil itself in war with Germany, on pain of being punished at   
some future peace treaty if it did not!    There are few instances of more callous effrontery in the   
chronicles    of mankind. The government returned a noble negative reply to the American   
ambassador, through Prince Paul: "You big notions are hard.    You talk of our honor, but You   
are far away." 
 
Now came the turn of the Simovic cabal, provoked and encouraged by American promises.    It   
ramified throughout the Yugoslav armed forces like a cancer, and in an overnight bloodless   
revolution the conspirators deposed the government, seized control of the state, and repudiated   
the pact with the Axis.    Joyous street demonstrations of Serbians followed, and there was much   
satisfaction and praise for the "heroic Yugoslavs" in the Western newspapers. 
 
"Operation Punishment 
 
But all this was short-lived.      Adolf Hitler ordered the swift and merciless destruction of   
Yugoslavia.    He could do no less.    Successful defiance of the Reich by a Balkan cabal would   
have led to bloody revolts throughout our tranquil New Order in Europe.      A ri,erce   
bombardment, "Operation Punishment," levelled Belgrade on April 6. The Wehrmacht   
conquered Yugoslavia in eleven days, at the same time commencing operations in Greece.   
Hitler partitioned Yugoslavia up among Germany, Italy, and the Balkan allies, and the country   
 507 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
as such ceased to exist (though a Bolshevik partisan movement in the mountains remained a   
nuisance).    The unfortunate Yugoslov people thus paid with wholesale deaths, a surrendered   
army, and notional destruction, for the scheming of Churchill and Roosevelt. 
 
From a technical viewpoint, the Yugoslavia campaign was admirable. 
 
Quick victories always look easy; but the terrain is mountainous, and the Yugoslavs had an   
army of over a million tough men.    The Wehrmacht triumphed through the decisiveness of the   
Fuhrer and the swiftness of the blow. The campaign had to be worked up in Wehrmacht   
Supreme Headquarters in a single sleepless night, for, unlike our previous land operations, no   
planned attack on Yugoslavia lay ready in our files. 
 
Still, it was executed to perfection; and incredibly, our casualties were less than six hundred   
soldiers. 
 
Possibly the most banal cliche about the Second World War is that Hitler lost it by giving vent   
to personal rage against Yugoslavia, thus delaying the attack against the Soviet Union for three   
to five precious weeks, in order to wreak vengeance on a small harmless neighbor.    In point of   
fact, Hitler's decision was absolutely forced.    In planning an attack on Russia, a hostile front in   
the Balkans on the southern flank, so close to the Rumanian oil fields, could not be tolerated. 
 
As for his anger, it was the fuhrer's way of making his generals exert themselves. 
 
Though it was uncomfortable to be a target of such displays, the technique worked. The   
argument about lost time is nugatory, since weather and ground conditions governed our   
timetable against Russia. 
 
Germany would have been better off, it must be conceded, had Italy never entered the war.   
There are advantages in keeping one's flanks secured by belts of neutral countries.      All   
Mussolini did was add the two huge Italian and Balkan peninsulas to our negative front.    In the   
end, the decision was fought out on the classical battleground of Europe, the great northern   
plain between the Volga and the English Channel, where we fatally missed all the vast strength   
we dissipated southward. 
 
The Mediterranean Strategy 
 
Still, since the flame of war had despite us jumped south, some of our highest leaders,   
including Hermann Goering and Admiral Roeder, urged the Fuhrer early in 1941 to strike at   
England in the Mediterranean by seizing Gibraltar, North Africa, and the Suez Canal. 
 
The British were helpless to stop such an attack in force; they were stretched too thin. 
 
In this way we could have sealed the southern flank with the impenetrable Sahara Desert.    The   
British sea lines to Africa and Asia would have been cut.    The shock to the British morale and   
supply system might well have brought on the fall of C hurchill, and the peace that both we and   
the British needpd. 
 
Hitler was tempted.    But when the Spanish dictator Franco treacherously refused to join us in   
 508 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
attacking the British-after Germany had won his civil war for him-the Fuhrer lost interest.    His   
heart was in the invasion of Russia. He acted however, with energy and dispatch as events   
confronted him in North Africa" Yugoslavia, and Greece, while the crucial    assault on the   
Soviet Union was being marshalled.    Our armed forces triumphed in short order wherever they   
went, and the history of the time records nothing but glorious German victories, one after the   
other. 
 
Churchill's Disastrous Folly 
 
Winston Churchill helped our cause with a display of strategic ineptness equal to Mussolini's.   
When we entered Greece, the British in Africa were sweeping through Libya,    Er;tea,    and   
Abyssinia, with the Itcilians everywhere fleeing or giving up.    Here was England's chance to   
wrap up North Africa and secure her Mediterranean lifeline before we could mount an attack.   
Churchill, however, writes that, though he knew that the British lacked the strength to oppose   
Germany for long on the Greek peninsula, he felt "honor bound" to help the Greeks. 
 
He pulled vital troops out of his triumphant African forces, killing the momentum of their   
drive, and threw them into Crete and Greece, whence he soon had to withdraw them, crushed   
and bloodied, in a "little Dunkirk," for here they were not fighting Italians.    The survivors who   
got back to Africa found themselves once more confronting Germans, since meantime Rommel   
had consolidated a landing in Tripoli with his famous Afrika Korps.    That spelled the end of   
the merry British romping in Africa. The Americans had to bail them out there, as everywhere   
else "Honor" had nothing to do with Churchill's maladroit move.    He had an obsession about   
the Balkans, deriving from his foscoat Gollipoli ;n World War I. 
 
Later in the war this    obsession was to estrange him from Roosevelt and reduce him to a   
pathetic hanger-on at the war conferences, fussing vainly at the Russians and Americans about   
the Balkans, while they coldly went ahead with plans to finish the war on sound strategic lines   
in the plains of the north. 
 
Had    Churchill    left    the Balkans    alone    and allowed    his    generals    to    finish off    their 
African   
campaign early in 1941, the destruction of Yugoslavia, and the subsequent Allied landings in   
Morocco, Sicily, and Italy, might all have been unnecessary.      The war might have been   
shortened by two years, sparing both sides much horror and bloodshed. 
 
But it was not to be. 
 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTE- Roon puts an unlikely construction on Colonel Donovan's visits to   
Yugoslavia.    The Simovic revolution was a popular one.    Most Yugoslovs were willing to risk   
Hitler's anger, they paid the price, and they earned the respect of the United States and all the   
world.    Communist Yugoslavia's unique friendly relationship with America today stems from   
that gallant stand in 1941. 
 
But even if Roon's assertions about Donovan were factual, it seems unusually obtuse to blame   
the destruction of Yugoslavia on Roosevelt and Churchill, while overlooking the little fact that   
it    was    the Germans    who fire-bombed    Belgrade    to    ashes, invaded    the    land, and    killed   
the   
 
 
 
 
 
 
people. 
 
it is true that President Roosevelt made occasional use of informal emissaries, but their   
importance is overrated in melodramatic films and books, as well as in some military history.   
These men usually performed minor donkeywork, which for reasons of speed or security could   
not be done as well through regular channels. 
 
To class Harry Hopkins or even Colonel Donovan with these anonymous smallbore persons is   
inaccurate.-V.H. 
 
Lend-Lease passed the Senate by sixty votes to thirty-one.    Few Americans followed the debate   
more keenly than Pug Henry. In the visitors' gallery of the Senate, hand cupped to his ear   
because of the bad acoustics, he absorbed a new knowledge of how his own government   
worked. More and more he admired Franklin Roosevelt's ability to drive this balky team.   
After weeks of wild controversy, the vote itself went smooth as oil.    The last excitement lay in   
the crushing of trick amendments- Two to one, the Senate voted in Lend-Lease, while the   
country and the press hardly paid attention.    The debate had bored them into indifference.  
 
Yet this vote struck Pug Henry as the key world event since Hitler's smash into Poland.    Here   
in the yeas of sixty elderly voices the tide might be starting to Turn.    The President at last had   
the means to put the United States on a war footing, long before the people were ready to fight.   
The new factories that must now rise to make Lend-Lease planes and guns, would in time arm   
the American forces that so far existed only on paper. 
 
That same day he was ordered to fly down to the Norfolk Navy Yard and report to Admiral   
Ernest King-a dragon he had not met before. 
 
King had his flag in the Texas. 
 
Texas was the first battleship to which Pug had ever reported, shortly after the World War, on   
just such a raw and blowy March day as this, in this same Navy Yard, and possibly atthis same   
pier.    With one stack gone, and tripod instead of basket mast, Texas looked much different than   
in the old coal-burning days.    Pug noted in the paint and bright work topside an and sepulchral   
cleanliness. The gangway watch, and the sailors working around the old gun turrets, were   
starched and scrubbed as surgeons. Outside the four-starred door to flag quarters a glittery- 
eyed marine presented arms like a clock striking. 
 
King sat behind a desk, showing blue sleeves stiff to the elbow with gold.    The bare office was   
warmed only by a framed picture of Admiral Mayo on the bulkhead.    King had a long, thin,   
deeply scored red face with high cheekbones, a narrow shiny pate, and a sharp nose. 
 
Behind him hung a chart of the Atlantic, with bold black letters in one corner,   
COMMANDIER-rNrEF, ATL"MC FLEET.    He motioned Victor Henry to a seat, tilted back   
his chin, and eyed him. 
 
'I received a telephone call from the chief of Naval Operations yesterday," he commenced in a   
sandy voice, "that one Captain Victor Henry of War Plans would report to me directly from the   
 510 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
President of the United States."    Henry bobbed his head as though he were an ensign. 
 
Silence, and the hum of ventilators.    "Well?    State your business." 
 
The captain told Admiral King what Franklin Roosevelt desired. 
 
The admiral calmly smoked a cigarette in a holder, eyes boring at Henry. Then Pug described   
his plan for executing the President's desires.    He talked for six or seven minutes.    King's long,   
weathered face remained immobile and faintly incredulous. 
 
"So!    You're prepared to get the United States of America into this war all by yourself, are you,   
Captain?" said Ernest King at last, with gid sarcasm. "Well, that's one way for an obscure   
person to go down in history."    'Admiral, it's the President's judgment that this exercise will go   
off without incident."    'So you said.    Well, suppose his judgment's wrong?    Suppose a U-boat   
fires a fish at you?    What then?" 
 
"If we're fired on, sir, why, I propose to fire back.    That won't start a war unless Hitler wants   
war." 
 
Ernest King nodded peevishly.    'Hell, we're in this war, anyway. 
 
It doesn't matter too much when or how the whistle blows.    The Japanese are going to kick off   
against us when it suits them and the Germans. 
 
Probably when it least suits us.    I agree with Mr.    Roosevelt that it very likely won't happen   
now.    But how about the battle cruisers? 
 
Hey? 
 
Thought about them?    The Scharnhorst and the Gneisenau?    They've picked off more than a   
hundred thousand tons in the past month." "Yes, sir. I hope the Catalinas will warn us if   
they're around, so we can evade." 
 
Admiral King said, "That's a big ocean out there.    The air patrol can easily miss them." 
 
"Well, then, the cruisers can miss us too, Admiral." 
 
After another pause, looking Victor Henry over like a dog he was considering buying, King   
picked up the telephone.    "Get me Admiral Bristol.-Henry, you have nothing in writing?"    "No,   
sir." 
 
"Very well.    You will discontinue all references to the President." 
 
"Aye aye, sir." 
 
"Hello?      Admiral, I'm sending to your office"-King glanced at a scrap of paper on his   
desk-"Captain Victor Henry, a special observer from War Plans. Captain Henry will visit   
Desron Eight and conduct surprise drills, inspections, and maneuvers, to test combat readiness. 
 
He is to be regarded as my assistant chief of staff, with appropriate authority. 
 511 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Affirmative.    He will be in your office within the hour.    Thank you." 
 
Hanging up, King folded bony han,is over his flat stomach and, staring at Victor Henry, he   
spoke in a formal drone.      "Captain, I desire that you now form out of Desron Eight an   
antisubmarine screen, and proceed to sea to conduct realistic tests and drills. This includes   
forming up screens on cooperative merchant vessels which you may encounter.    You will of   
course avoid provoking belligerent vessels that may sight you. I desire you to keep security at a   
maximum and paperwork at a minimum. 
 
For that reason my instructions are verbal.    You'll conduct yourself similarly." 
 
"Understood, Admiral." 
 
A chilly smile moved one side of Ernest King's mouth, and he reverted to his natural voice.   
"Perfect horseshit, but that's the story.    In the event of an incident, it will be a hanging party for   
all hands. That will be all." 
 
Even in t'he North Atlantic in March, even in a destroyer, even on such risky and peculiar   
business, going back to sea was a tonic.    Pug paced the bridge of U.S.S. Plunkett all day, a   
happy man, and slept in the sea cabin by the chart house. 
 
On clear nights, no matter how Cold the wind and how rough the sea, he spent hours after   
dinner alone on the flying bridge.    The broad dark ocean, the streaming pure air, the crowded   
stars arching overhead, always made him feel what the Bible called the spirit of God hovering   
on the face of the waters.    Down the years even more than his childhood Bible training, this   
religious awe inspired by nights at sea had kept Captain Henry a believer.    He spoke of this to   
nobody, not to ministers who were his old friends; he would have felt embarrassed and   
mawkish, for he wa, not sure how seriously even they took the Lord. On this voyage, the   
Alrwghty was there for Victor Henry as always in the black starry universe, a presence actual   
and lovable, if disturbingly unpredictable. 
 
Officially Pug was an observer of the "exercise," and he kept to that role, leaving operations to   
the commander of the destroyer screen. 
 
He interfered once.    On the second day after the join-up off Newfoundland, the long ragged   
columns of merchant ships, stretching across the horizon, plowed into a snowstorm.    Lookouts   
were coming down off their posts almost too stiff to move, and covered with icicles. 
 
Plunging up and dowil over huge black waves, ships a mile apart were losing sight of each   
other. 
 
After several reports of minor collisions and near-misses in the zigzags, Pug called into his sea   
cabin Commander Baldwin, who headed the screen, and the British liaison officer. 
 
"I've been figuring," he said, pointing to a chart, and banging on to his gyrating chair.    "We can   
gain an advance of half a day by proceeding on a straight course.    Now maybe there are U- 
boats out there in all that stuff, and then again maybe there aren't.    If they're going to try to   
 512 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
penetrate a screen of fifteen American destroyers, well, with seventy-one juicy crawling   
targets, zigzagging won't help much.    Let's head straight for Point Baker, Turn over this hot   
potato, and skedaddle." Mopping snow from red eyebrows    under an iced-up parka hood,   
Commander Baldwin grinned.    'Concur, Captain." 
 
Pug said to the British signal officer, a little quiet man who ha:d come in from the stormy   
bridge smoking a pipe upside down, "Give your commodore a flag hoist: DISCO E   
zigzagging." 
 
"Aye aye, sir," said the Englishman, managing to look delighted with a small tightening of his   
mouth around the pipe. 
 
Day after day, Victor Henry and Commander Baldwin ate breakfast from trays in the sea cabin,   
reviewing courses of action in case of a German attack.    Each morning the screen conducted   
combat drills, in a ragged style that enraged Pug.    He was tempted to take over and work these   
units hard; but to maintain the dull calm of the operation was paramount, so he did nothing.   
Unmolested, the first Lend-Lease convoy steamed straight eastward.    About half the time bad   
weather shrouded the ships. 
 
On the crystalline days and bright moonlit nights Victor Henry remained clothed and awake,   
drank gallons of coffee, and smoked his throat raw, now and then dozing in the captain's chair.   
Whether U-boats saw the convoy and laid low because of the American destroyers fanned   
ahead of it, or whether it got through undetected, Victor Henry never knew.    They arrived at   
Point Baker, a dot of latitude and longitude on the wide empty sea, mdthout a single episode of   
alarm. 
 
A feeble yellow sun was just rising.    The convoy began steaming in a pattern ten miles square,   
in a ring of desolate ice-flecked black water and pearly sky, waiting for the British. Victor   
Henry stood on the flying bridge peering eastward, hoping that the Plunkett's navigator knew   
his job.      Since the return from Berlin, he had never felt so well. He had read a lot of   
Shakespeare in his mildewed seagoing volume, and had caught up on a footlocker full of   
paperwork, and slept and slept, his body responding in the old way to the rocking of a   
destroyer. After three hours, the first hulls began to show above the horizon, due east: old   
American four-pipers.    As the motley British screen of destroyers, frigates, and corvettes came   
on, the leading ship began to blink a Yellow light.    A signalman rushed up to the flying bridge,   
bringing a pencilled scrawl: KS YANKS X CUPBOMM IS B. 
 
Pug granted.      "Send him EAT HEARTY-X-RAy-MOPX COMING-X-RAYand sign it   
MOTHER HUBBARD." 
 
The grinning sailor said, "Aye aye, Sir," and trampled down the ladder. 
 
"As an observer," Pug called to Commander Baldwin on the bridge below, "I would now be   
pleased to observe how fast your signal gang can hoist REVERSE COURSE, MAKe 2   
KNOTS."    When the Plunkett tied up in the Norfolk Navy Yard, Victor Henry went straight to   
Rag quarters on the Texas. Admiral King listened to his report with the face of a scrawny   
 513 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
sandstone pharaoh, showing a human reaction only when Pug mentioned the poor performance   
of the destroyers. 
 
The pharaoh face then became slightly more unpleasant. "I am aware of the low level of   
preparedness in the fleet, and have instituted corrective programs.    Now, then.    On what basis,   
Captain, did the President choose YOU for this mission?" 
 
"When I was naval attache in Germany, sir, he happened to use me on jobs involving high   
security.    I suppose this fell in that category." 'Will you report back to him?" 
 
g'yes, sir."    Victor Henry jumped to his feet as the admiral walked to a map of the world, newly   
hung on the bulkhead opposite his desk in place of the photograph of Admiral Mayo. 
 
"I suppose while out at sea you've gotten the news? You know that the Germans blitzed   
Yugoslavia in one week?    That Greece has surrendered"-the admiral ran a bony finger along   
Adriatic and Mediterranean coastlines hatched in angry fresh red ink-"that this fellow Rommel   
has knocked the British cjear back into Egypt, and is massing to drive on the Suez Canal?    That   
the big British force trapped in Greece will be lucky to Pull off another Dunkirk? That the   
Arabs are rising to throw the British Out of the Nfiddle East?    That Iraq's already ordered them   
out and asked the Germans in?" 
 
"Yes, sir.    We got most of that.    It's been a bad few weeks. 
 
"Depends on the viewpoint.    For the Germans it's been a fine few weeks. 
 
In a month or so, they've tipped the world balance.    My considered judgment is that this war's   
almost over.    There seems to be very little awareness of that here.    When the Germans take the   
canal, master the middle East, and close the Mediterranean, the British Empire lines will be   
severed. 
 
That's the ball game.    There will be no viable military force left in all of Asia between Hitler   
and the japs.    India and China will fall to them." 
 
Admiral King swept bony fingers across the Eurasian landmass. 
 
"Solid dictator-ruled, from Antwerp to Tokyo, and from the Arctic Circle to the equator.    Did   
you hear about that neutrality deal between the Soviets and the japs?" 
 
"No, sir.    I missed that one." 
 
"Well, they signed a pact-oh, a couple of weeks ago, this was-agreeing to lay off each other for   
the time being. The press here almost ignored it, but that's terrific news. It secures the jap   
rear"-he waved toward Siberia-"and turns them loose to pick up all these big marbles."    The   
gnarled hand jumped south and ran over Indo-China, the East Indies, Malaya, and the   
Philippines; it paused, and one stiff finger glided to the Hawaiian Islands. 
 
Admiral King stared sourly from the map to Victor Henry and strode back to his desk.    "Now,   
of course the President has to make the political judgments.    He's an outstanding politician and   
 514 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
a great Navy President. 
 
Possibly his judgment is coamt, that politically he can't do any more now than extend our   
patrol area.    Maybe politically he has to chop hairs about patrolling' versus 'convoying."    But   
it's just as belligerent for us to patrol, and broadcast the positions of German U-boats and   
raiders, as it is to convoy.    just as belligerent, but weak and futile.    The British haven't enough   
ships as it is to keep the Mediterranean open and cut this fellow Rommel's supply lines.    If we   
took over convoying, they might have a chance to stay in the game.    My opinion hasn't been   
asked by the President.    You seem to be in his entourage.    You might find a moment to make   
these points."    Ernest King sat, hands folded on the desk, and looked at the captain for a silent   
minute.    "That might be, by sheer accident, the best contribution you ever make to the security   
of the United States." 
 
Henry!    Hey, Henry!"    Byron groaned, went rigid as a stretching cat, and opened one eye. 
 
Lieutenant Caruso and the other officers on the S-45 were used to this waking pattern of   
Ensign Henry. Until he went rigid there was no rousing him. It sometimes    took violent   
shaking of the limp form. 
 
"Huh?" 
 
"Your father is here." 
 
"What?"    Byron fluttered his eyes and reared up on an elbow.    He now occupied the middle   
bunk of three.    "You're kidding, skipper.    My father?" 
 
'He's in the wardroom.    Care to join us?" 
 
In his underwear, unshaven, mussed, and blinking, Byron stumbled to the doorway of the tiny   
wardroom.    "Holy cow.    You really are here." 
 
"You heard your commanding officer say I was." immaculate in dress blues, Victor Henry   
frowned at his son over a coffee cup. 
 
"they'll tell me anything on this boat to get me out of my bunk. 
 
They're all fiends." 
 
"What the devil are you doing in the sack at noon?" 
 
"I had the midwatch.    Excuse me, sir, for coming out like this. 
 
Be right back."    Byron quickly reappeared in a freshly starched khaki uniform, groomed and   
shaved.    Victor Henry was alone.    "Cosh, Dad, it's good to see you." 
 
'Briny, a dwatch isn't major surgery.    You're not supposed to take to your bed to recover."    "Sir,   
I had it two nights in a row.- He poured coffee for his father and himse]L 'Say, this is a real   
surprise. 
 515 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mom said you were somewhere at sea.    Have you been detached from War Plans, Dad?" 
 
"No, this was a temporary thing.    I'm heading back now.    I was visiting the TexasI saw the S- 
45 on the yard roster and thought I'd look in." 
 
Victor Henry scanned his son's thin face.    "Well?    How goes it?" 
 
"Oh, first-rate.    Swell bunch of guys on this boat.    The skipper is 4-0, and the exec, I'd really   
like you to meet him.    Lieutenant Aster. He was a witness at my wedding."    Byron grinned the   
old half-melancholy, halfamused grin that never failed to charm Pug Henry, and most other   
people.    "I'm glad to see you.    I'm lonesome." 
 
"What's your wife's situation?    Is she on her way home yet?" 
 
Byron gave his father a veild glance that hinted at his standing grudge about Natalie.    But he   
was in a good mood and responded amiably. 
 
"I don't know.    We got in this morning from maneuvers.    The yeoman just went for the mail." 
 
Pug Put down his cup.    "Incidentally, will your boat be in port on the twenty-sixth?" 4( 
 
I can find out.    Why?" 
 
"Nothing much.    just if you are, and if you can get overnight leave, You're invited to dinner at   
the White House." 
 
Byron's deep-set eyes opened wide.    "Cut it out, Dad." 
 
"Your mother and Madeline, too.    I don't guess Warren can fly in from Pearl Harbor.    But if   
you're around, you might as well come. 
 
Something to tell your children about." 
 
"Dad, how do we rate?" 
 
Victor Henry shrugged.    "Oh, a carrot for the donkey.    Your mother doesn't know about it yet." 
 
"No?    Dinner at the White House!    Mom will go clear through the overhead." 
 
Lieutenant Aster, carrying a basket of mail, poked his head into the wardroom.      "Briny,   
Carson's got a fistful of letters for you at the gangway.    ) "Hey.    Good enough.    This is my   
exec, Dad, Lieutenant Carter Aster. 
 
Be right back."    Byron vanished. 
 
Seating himself at the narrow wardroom table and slitting envelopes with an Indian paper   
cutter, Aster said, "Excuse me, sir. 
 
Priority mail." 
 
"Go ahead." Victor Henry studied the blond officer as he attacked the letters. One could   
 516 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
sometimes guess, by the way a young man went at papers or a book, the kind of officer he was.   
Aster traversed the pile fast, scribbling a note here and a checkmark there.    He looked good.  
 
He pushed the basket aside and poured coffee for himself when Henry held up a hand to   
decline. 
 
'Lieutenant, you were a witness at Briny's wedding?"    "Yes, sir. 
 
She's a wonderful girl." 
 
"How's Briny doing?"    Aster's jolly reminiscent smile disappeared. 
 
The wide mouth became a slash of tight lips.    'In his work?" 
 
"Yes, let me have it straight." 
 
"Well, we all like him.    There's something about Briny,    I guess you    know that. But for   
submarines... don't get the idea that he can't measure up.    He can, but he won't bother.    Briny   
just slides along the bottom edge of tolerable performance." 
 
Victor Henry was not surprised; still, the words hurt.    "People run true to form, I guess." 
 
"He's way behind on his officer qualification book.    Now he knows his way around the boat,   
sir, he knows the engines, the compressed air system, the batteries, all that.    He stands a good   
diving watch.    He has a knack for trimming the boat and keeping her at the depth the captain   
wants.    But when it comes to writing reports on time, or even logs, keeping track of records   
and dispatches and the crew's training books-an officer's main work-forget it."    Aster looked   
Byron's father in the eye. 
 
"The skipper sometimes talks of beaching him." 
 
Victor Henry said sadly, "That bad?" 
 
"In a way he's kind of nuts, too." 
 
"How, nuts?" 
 
"Well, like last week, we had this surprise inspector aboard.    We fired this dummy torpedo and   
surfaced to recover it.    We hadn't tried a recox,ery for a long time.    It was a rough sea, raining,   
cold as hell. 
 
The torpedo detail was out there trying to retrieve the thing. It was bobbing up and down,   
banging and crashing against the hull, and we were rolling like mad, and the sailors were   
slipping around with lifelines tied to them.    It was awful. 
 
They messed about for an hour and couldn't hook that fish.    I was sure somebody would get   
drovrned or crushed. The inspector got tired and went below. The skipper was exploding.   
The deck gang was soaked and frozen and falling all over itself.    Well, as you know, a dummy   
warhead's hollow, and the fish floats straight up and down.    Briny was the officer on that detail.   
 517 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Suddenly he took the hook, stuck it in his lifeline, and by Christ if he didn't go and jump on   
that torpedo!    He timed it so right, it looked easy.    He hung on, with these icy waves breaking   
over him, riding that yellow steel dummy head like a goddamn bronco.    He secured the hook   
and then got knocked off. Well, we hauled him in half-dead and then we hoisted the fish   
aboard. The skipper filled him full of medicinal brandy. He slept eighteen hours and was   
fine." 
 
Victor Henry said, clearing his throat, "He took a stupid chance." 
 
"Sir, I'd like to have him on any boat I ever command.    But I'd expect to wear out two pairs of   
heavy shoes, kicking his ass for him." 
 
"If the occasion arises, let me buy you the brogans, Lieutenant," said Pug. 
 
"She's pregnant!"    Byron catapulted into the little wardroom, arresting himself by grabbing the   
doorway.    "Natalie's pregnant, Dad." 
 
He brandished torn-open letters.    "How about that?    Hey, Lady, how about that? 
 
Boy, I feel strange." 
 
"Fast work," said Aster.    "You better get that gal home for sure, now. 
 
Pleasure to meet you, Captain.    Excuse me." 
 
The executive officer slid out from behind the table with his mail basket. 
 
"Any news on her coming home?"    Victor Henry asked. 
 
"She says Leslie Slote really built a fire under the consuls this time. 
 
She and Jastrow should be on their way by-well, maybe by now! 
 
She'd better be, or I'll desert and go fetch her, Dad.    My kid's going to be born in the United   
States." 
 
"That's great news, Briny.    Great."    Victor Henry stood, putting a hand on his son's shoulder.   
"I've got a plane to catch. You'll find out about the twenty-sixth, won't you? And let me   
know." 
 
"The what?    Oh, yes."    Byron was sitting with his chin on both fists, reading a closely written   
airmail sheet, his face lit up with happiness. 
 
"That dinner, Yes, sir, I'll telephone you or soriiething." 
 
"I'm sure you have a load of paperwork, after your maneuvers.    Get at it, boy." 
 
"Oh, sure," said Byron.    "So long, Dad." 
 
"I'm happy about your wife, Byron." 
 518 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Again the veiled glance, again the amiable tone.    "Thanks." 
 
Rhoda was in bad turmoil.    Palmer Kirby had returned from England in April, while Pug was at   
sea.    The cherry blossoms were early that year; and in Virginia and North Carolina, where they   
went on a four-day drive like a honeymoon, the countryside was Hooded with fragrant   
blossoms. Rhoda came back to Wasbirigton committed in the strongest terms to leave her   
husband and to marry Kirby. 
 
The decision seemed clear, simple, and natural to Rhoda in the bedrooms of wayside hotels,   
and on long walks amid the peach and plum blossoms of the southland.    But when Kirby went   
happily off to Denver to put the big old house in order for a new life, leaving her in a home full   
of Henry photographs and mementos, the simplicity of the vision, and some of its charm,   
started to fade. 
 
Rhoda's inexperience was misleading her.    An investment of more than twenty-five years of   
love and intimacy-even if it has gone slightly sour-usually should not be liquidated.      Its   
equivalent in romance, in thrills, or even money, can seldom be recovered. So hard-beaded   
bad women tend to decide.    Rhoda's trouble was that, in her own mind, she was still a good   
woman, caught up in a grand passion which consumed all moral law.    One misstep during her   
husband's long absence in Germanyat an age when many men and women make missteps-had   
led to another and another.    Her desire to keep her good opinion of herself had completed her   
confusion. 
 
She still liked-perhaps loved-and also feared Pug, but his career was a growing disappointment.   
For a while she had hoped that his "in" with President Roosevelt might lead to big things, but   
that was not happening.      Some of her friends were preening over their husbands' new   
commands: battleships, destroyer flotillas, cruisers.      The rivalry of Digger Brown, Paul   
Munson, and Harry Warendorf was exactly paralleled among their ladies.    Rhoda Henry was   
becoming the wife of a man bogged in twilit shore jobs after more than twenty years of racing   
along with the front-runners Evidently Pug didn't have it.    This was bitter medicine for Rhoda.   
She had always    hoped that he would some day become at least a Deputy Chief of Naval   
Operations.    After all, she had preferred him to fellows who had since gone on to careers like   
bank president, steel executive, army general.    (These men had not necessarily proposed; if she   
had dated and kissed them, she considered them possibilities sacrificed for Pug.) Now it   
seemed he might not even make rear admiral!    Certainly that limited goal was receding with   
every month he spent in a Navy Department cubicle while his competitors accumulated   
command time at sea. 
 
With such thoughts Rhoda Henry was working herself up to tell Pug that she had fallen in love   
with another man.    But she did not look forward with dewy pleasure to this, and she teetered,   
ready to be pushed either way. 
 
She missed his return from the convoy trip.    He had not telephoned from Norfolk, for he knew   
that she liked to sleep late.    Arriving by airplane in Washington, he found the house empty,   
cook off, Rhoda out, mail overflowing his desk, no coffee.    He couldn't blame anybody, but it   
was a cold homecoming. 
 519 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
At the War Plans office, by chance, he encountered Pamela Tudsbury. She had not gone back   
to England with Burne-Wilke. 
 
Secretaries cleared for Very Secret were rare, so the British Purchasing Council had   
requisitioned her for a while. Spry, springy, refreshingly unmilitary in a yellow and green   
cotton frock, Pamela greeted him with the warmth he had not found at home.    He asked her to   
lunch with him in the Navy cafeteria.    During the quarter hour it took to bolt a sandmich, pie,   
and coffee, Pamela spoke of her unhappiness at being left behind by BurneWilke.    "I want to   
be there now," she said, eyes somewhat moist. "Not that I really think the end is at hand, as   
some do.    But in the wee hours, one does begin to picture how one accommodates to German   
military police and street signs.    It's a nightmare that now and then gets terribly real." 
 
She shook her head and smiled.    "Of course it's darkest before the dawn. 
 
You poor man.    You've got a splendid color.    The sea so obviously agrees with you.    You look   
ten years younger.    I hope it lasts, or that you get back to sea.py "Well, I've tried to walk a lot   
and play tennis. 
 
It isn't the same." 
 
"Of course not." 
 
He asked her for further news of Ted Gallard, but there was none. 
 
They parted with a casual good-bye.    All the rest of the day, plowing through the mound of   
accumulated paper, Victor Henry felt much better. 
 
Rhoda was waiting for him at home in a bright red dress, with ice and drink mixes ready, and   
cheese and crackers out. Her manner and conversation struck him as strange. She gabbled   
about houses.    She was so eager to talk, so voluble, that he had no chance at first to tell her of   
the White House invitation.    Early that afternoon, finding Pug's note on her dressing table, she   
had rushed out with an agent and visited three.    All her suppressed guilt feelings focussed on   
the house business. If only she could convince Pug that gbe had been diligently looking at   
houses, she felt her tracks would be covered.    This made no sense.    She was planning to break   
the news to him.      She acted on nervous instinct, triggered by the short scrawl in Pug's   
handwriting: He's back. Man the bar. 
 
Pug was uninterested in a verbose account of faiats in houses he had never seen.    But be put up   
with it.    Next, Rhoda chattered on that sore topic, recent promotions: that utter fool, chaser, and   
drunk, Chipper Pennington, had gotten the Heicna; and did Pug know that even Bill Foley was   
now commanding a destroyer squadron at Pearl Harbor? 
 
Pug broke in on Rhoda's flow of words-this was at dinner, over the meat -to tell her of the   
President's invitation.    Her mouth fell open. 
 
"Pug! 
 
Really?"    She asked many questions, worried out loud over what she would wear, and gloated   
 520 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
about how Annette Pennington and Tammy Foley would feel when they heard thisi It was a   
bad performance.    He was seeing her at her very worstworse than her worst, for she had never   
been quite so demoralized, though she looked extremely pretty and her wond erful skin glowed   
smooth as ever.    Pug found himself looking at his wife detachedly, as he judged professional   
matters.    Few wives in their forties can weather such a scrutiny. 
 
That night Victor Henry    recognized familiar signals that he was not, for the time being,   
welcome in her bedroom.    He did not know why; but he had long ago decided that Rhoda was   
entitled to these.spells, physical or mental, though it seemed too bad after his six weeks at sea.   
It took him a long time to fall asleep.    He kept thinking of the callous happy-golucky mood he   
had found in the capital, the sense that by passing the Lend-Lease Bill, America had done its   
bit to stamp out Nazism.      Nobody appeared to care how much stuff was actually being   
produced and shipped. 
 
The figures at War Plans had appalled him. Conflicting boards and agencies, contradictory   
directives, overlapping demands by the Air Corps, the Navy, the Army, and the British had   
overwhelmed the program. 
 
Under an amazing welter of meetings, talk, and mimeographed releases, LendLease was   
paralyzed. 
 
He kept thinking, too, of the contrasts between his wife and the English girl.    At last he got up   
and swallowed a stiff drink of bourbon like a pili. 
 
Pig cheered up later in the week, as most people did, when Hitler's deputy Fuhrer, the black- 
brewed fanatic Rudolf Hess, made a solo flight to Scotland, landed by parachute, and   
demanded to see Winston Churchill. 
 
For a day or two it seemed that Germany might be cracking.    But the Nazis at once announced   
that Hess, through heroic overwork, had gone off his head. The British said little publicly.   
Pug heard from Pamela, who had it from the embassy, that in fact Hess, mad as a hatter, was   
shut up in a sanatorium, drivelling peace plans. 
 
Certainly in the war news there was no sign of German weakness. 
 
They were bagging hordes of British prisoners and mountains of arms in Greece, sinking ships   
in the Atlantic at a great rate, showering London and Liverpool with fire-bombings worse than   
any    during the 1940    blitz, laying siege to    Tobruk, and launching a    breathtaking airborne   
invasion of Crete, over the heads of the British Mediterranean fleet. This outpouring of military   
energy to all points of the compass, this lava flow of violence, was awesome.    In the face of it,   
Vichy France was folding up and negotiating a deal with the Nazis that would hand over North   
Africa to them, and perhaps the strong French fleet too. This was a brutal bloody nose for   
American diplomats trying to hold France neutral, and keep the Germans out of the African   
bulge at French Dakar, which dominated the whole south Atlantic. 
 
The Nazis appeared unstoppable.    The entrenched, heavily armed British on Crete claimed to   
be butchering the sky invaders.    But floating to earth dead or alive in their parachute harnesses,   
 521 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
crashing in gliders, on the airborne multitudes came.    The confident British communiques grew   
vaguer.    Somehow, they conceded, the Germans at incredible cost had managed to capture one   
airfield; then one more.    It soon became clear that Hitler was doing a new thing in Crete, taking   
a strong island from the air without sea power, in fact in the teeth of sea power. This was   
threatening news for England.    Aside from the heavy defeat itself, Crete began to look like a   
dress rehearsal for the end. 
 
And still the United States did nothing.    In the inner War Plans circles, a split was widening   
between the Army and the Navy.    Victor Henry's section wanted strong fast moves in the North   
Atlantic to save England: convoys, the occupation of keland, shipment of all possible arms. 
 
But the Army, which now gave England only three months before collapse, preferred a move   
into Brazil and the Azores, to face the expected Nazi thrust in the south Atlantic from Dakar.   
Between these two plans, the President was stalling and hesitating. 
 
Then came the scarifying news that the Bismarck, a new German battleship, had blown up   
England's mighty war vessel, the Hood, off Greenland, with a single salvo at thirteen miles,   
and vanished into the north Atlantic mists!    This jolted the country out of its Maytime languor. 
 
The President announced a major radio address.    Speculations about the speech filled the press   
and radio.    Would he proclaim the start of convoying?    Would he ask Congress to declare war?   
The brawny feat of the Bismarck seemed to show Hitler achieving mastery of the oceans as   
well as the land and the air.    The shift of the power balance in the Atlantic was suddenly self- 
evident and frightful. 
 
Rhoda's reaction to all this heavy news was loud frantic fretting that the White House would   
call off the dinner invitation, after she had told all her friends about it. FDR was probably   
getting ready to go to war. 
 
How could he bother with a social dinner, especially with unimportant people like themselves?   
Victor Henry, to secure some peace, checked with the President's naval aide.    The invitation to   
the White House stood. 
 
"What do you think, Dad?    Will the Limeys get the Bismarck?" 
 
Perched on the edge of the bathtub, Byron observed that Victor Henry still liked to rest one leg   
on the tub as he shaved.    Nor had Pug's shaving motions ever changed, the successive scrape of   
cheeks, chin, and neck, then the scowl to stretch his upper lip.    Byron had sat exactly so as a   
child countless times, talking to his dad. 
 
"Well, Briny,    they claim the Prince of Wales    winged her off Greenland there. But those   
Germans have fine damage control. I've been aboard the Bismarck. She's a floating steel   
honeycomb.    If they were hit, they probably just buttoned up the flooded compartments and lit   
out for home. 
 
The British are throwing everything into their search.    To hell with conVOYS, to hell with the   
Mediterranean!    They know where she's headingthe French coast, as fast as she can skedaddle- 
 522 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
and they know the speed she can make.    Aircraft ought to find her.    Unless"-he rinsed his razor   
and shook it-'unless the Bismarck is undamaged.    In which case heaven help any convoys she   
runs across.    With that fire control she displayed, she'll pick off forty ships in half an hour." 
 
"I wish I were out there," said Byron, 'in that search."    "Do you?" 
 
Pug gave his son a pleased look.    Where Byron saw much the same father, Victor Henry saw a   
pallid, melancholy, thin-faced little boy transformed into a spruce six-foot ensign in blue and   
gold.    Pug wiped his face with a wet towel.    "What time is it?    Let's make tracks." 
 
Byron followed him into his dressing room.    "Say, Dad, you're pretty close to the President,   
aren't you?" 
 
Buttoning his dress shirt, Pug said, "Close?    Nobody's really close to Mr.    Roosevelt, that I can   
see.    Except maybe this Harry Hopkins." 
 
Byron crouched on a stool, watching his father dress. "I got two more letters from Natalie   
yesterday.    She's stuck, after all." 
 
Pug frowned at the mirror over his bureau.    "Now what?" 
 
"Same thing, Dad, this balled-up foolishness about when her uncle's father was naturalized.    He   
just cantt get that passport renewed.    One official makes promises, and the next one fudges on   
them. 
 
The thing goes round and round." 
 
"Tell You wife to come home, and let him sweat it out." 
 
"Let me finish, Dad."    Byron waved both hands.    'It was all set, they'd even bought steamship   
tickets.    Some formality of approval from Washington just never came through.    Natalie had to   
Turn back the boat tickets. 
 
Dad, they're ringed by Germans now.    Germans in France, Yugoslavia, Greece, North Africa,   
and for that matter all through Italy.    They're a couple of Jews." 
 
'I'm aware of that," said Victor Henry. 
 
Rhoda's voice called from the bedroom, "Pug, will you come here I'm going out of my mind." 
 
He found her glaring at the full-length closet mirror, in a tight blue silk dress, the back of   
which hung Open, displaying underwear and an expanse of rosy skin.    "Hook me up.    Look   
how my stomach is bulging," she said.    "Now why is that?    The stupid dress didn't look the   
least bit like this in the store.    It looked fine." 
 
"You're not bulging," said Victor Henry, trying to fix the snaps despite the poor light on her   
back.    "You look very pretty."    "Oh, Pug, for God's sake.    I'm bulging POOr.    I look six months   
pregnant.    I'm horrible.    And I'm wearing my tightest girdle.    Oh, what'll I do?" 
 523 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Her husband finished closing the snaps and left her.    Rhoda looked much the same as always,   
and was making much the usual evening-dress noises. Her laments and queries were rhetorical,   
and best ignored. 
 
Byron still crouched on the stool.      "Dad, I thought you might mention this thing to the   
President." 
 
Victor Henry's response was quick and curt.    "That's an unreasonable notion." 
 
Heavy silence.    Byron slumped down, elbows on knees, hands clasped. 
 
Pug was jarred by the hostility, almost the hatred, on his son's face. 
 
"Byron, I don't think your wife's uncle's citizenship mess is a suitable problem to submit to the   
President of the United States. 
 
That's all." 
 
"Oh, I knew you wouldn't do it.    You're sore at me for marrying a Jew, you always have becti,   
and you don't care what happens to her." 
 
Rhoda marched in, pulling on gloves. "For heaven's sake, what are you two jawing about?   
Pug, will you put on your jacket and come along?" 
 
On the Pennsylvania Avenue side of the White House, the Henrys passed several dozen   
pickets, marching with antiwar signs in    a ragged oval, and chanting, 'The    Yanks are not   
coming!"      Near them a handful of men sauntered in sandwich boards that read: THE   
AMERICAN PEACE MOBILIZATION IS A COMMUNIST FRONT.      Two yawning   
policemen kept watch on this tranquil agitation. 
 
"Good evening." 
 
A tall Negro in a colorful uniform opened the door, sounding-at least to Rhoda-like the basso   
in The Magic Flute.    The Henrys stepped from a warm May night, sweet with the scent of the   
White House lawns and flowers, into a broad dazzling marble-floored foyer.    A middle-aged   
man in a dinner jacket stood by the presidential seal inlaid in brass in the floor.    He introduced   
himself as the chief usher.    "Mrs.    Henry, you will be sitting on the President's left," he said,   
glancing at a large card.    "You see, Crown Princess Marta of Norway is a houseguest. 
 
She will sit on his right." 
 
"Oh, yes, yes, oh my. Princess Marta? Well, she ranks me all right," said Rhoda with a   
nervous giggle. 
 
"I guess we're early," Victor Henry said. 
 
"Not at all. Please come this way." He left them in the large public room called the Red   
Room, saying they would go upstairs soon. 
 524 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Oh, dear, think of Warren missing all this!"    Rhoda peered at the paintings of Presidents hung   
near the high ceilings, and the elegant redupholstered furniture.      "Him, with his love of   
American history." 
 
"That's just it," Madeline said, looking around with bright snapping eyes.    She wore a long- 
sleeved black silk dress buttoned to the throat, quite a contrast to her mother's bared arms and   
bosom. 
 
"It's like walking into a history book." 
 
"I wonder if it's okay to smoke," Byron said. 
 
"No, no, don't," his mother said. 
 
Pug said, "Why not?    There are ashtrays all around.    This is a house. 
 
You know what the White House is really like?"    He too was nervous, and talking to cover it.   
"Commandant's quarters on a base. 
 
The big fancy house with stewards that the boss man gets to live in. 
 
This one is the biggest and fanciest.    just the cumshaw of becoming Number One." 
 
"But the thought of actually keeping house here!"    said Rhoda. 
 
Despite themselves they were all speaking in uxinatural voices, hushed or too loud. "Even   
with an army of servants, I'd go mad. I can't imagine how she does it, especially traipsing   
around the country the way she does.    Byron, watch those ashes, for heaven's sake." 
 
"May I present Mr.    Sumner Welles?"    The chief usher led in a bald lean gloomy man.    ",And I   
believe we can go upstairs now," he added, as the Undersecretary of State shook hands with the   
Henrys. 
 
An elevator took them up.    Behind his desk at one end of an enormous yellow room hung with   
sea paintings sat the President, rattling a cocktail shaker. 
 
"Hello there, just in time for the first round!"    he called, a big grin lighting up the jowly pink   
face.    His voice had a clear virile ring.    He wore a black tie and dinner jacket with a soft white   
shirt; and when Pug leaned across the desk to take drinks, he noticed the brown trousers of a   
business suit.    "I hope Mrs.    Henry likes Orange Blossoms, Pug. That's what I'm mixing.    Good   
evening, Sumner." 
 
The President gave all the Henrys firm moist handshakes, cold from the shaker.    "How about   
you, Sumner?    Would you prefer something else? 
 
I make a fair martini, you know." 
 
"Thank you, sir.    That looks just right." 
 
In the center of the room at the mantel, Eleanor Roosevelt stood drinking cocktails with a tall   
 525 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
black-haired woman and a sharp-faced, aged little man.    On either side of them warm breezes   
stirred the lace curtains of open windows, bringing in a heavy sweet smell of flowers. 
 
The usher introduced the Henrys to Mrs.    Roosevelt, to Princess Marta, and to Mr. 
 
Somerset Maugham.    When Rhoda heard the author's name, her stiff manner broke.    "Oh my!   
Mr.    Maugham!    What a surprise.    This may be very bad form, but i've read all your books and   
I love them." 
 
The author exhaled cigarette smoke and stammered, "That-that's charming of you," moxing   
only his thin scowling lips, his aged gloomy eyes remaining cold and steady. 
 
"Well, we're all here.    Why don't we sit?"    The President's wife moTed a chair near the desk,   
and the men at once did the same, all except for Somerset Maugham, who sat in a chair Byron   
put down. 
 
"Anything very new on the Bismarck, Sumner?"    said the President. 
 
"Not since about five o'clock, sir." "Oh, I've talked to Averell in London since then. The   
connection was abominable, but I gathered there was no real news.    What do you say, Pug?   
Will they get her?" 
 
"It's a tough exercise, Mr.    President.    Mighty big ocean, mighty bad weather." 
 
"You should know," said Franklin Roosevelt slyly. 
 
'But if they winged her, as they claim," Pug went on, "they ought to catch her." 
 
"Oh, they hit the Bismarck. Their cruisers followed a trail of oil far into the fog. That's   
straight from Churchill.    Harriman's his houseguest." 
 
Rhoda was trying not to stare at Crown Princess Marta, who, she thought, held a c il glass like   
a sceptre. Unconsciously imitating her posture, Rhoda decided that her skin was almost as   
good as Marta's, though the princess was younger and had such rich black hair, done up in a   
funny way.    Contemplating royalty, she lost track of the war talk, and was a little startled when   
everybody rose.    They left the President and followed Mrs. 
 
Roosevelt to the elevator.    When they arrived in the dining room, there sat Franklin Roosevelt,   
already whisked to his place at the head of the table. Here too, strong flower scent drifted   
through the open windows, mingling with the smell of a big silver bowl of carnations, the table   
centerpiece. 
 
"Well, I had a good day!"    the President exclaimed as they sat down, with the obvious intent of   
putting everybody at ease.      "The Ford Company finally promised Bill Knudsen to make   
liberators in their huge new plant. 
 
We've been sweating over that one. The business people seem to be waking up at last" He   
started on his soup, and everyone else began to eat.    "We want to put out five hundred heavy   
bombers a month by next fall, and this will do it.    Mr.    Maugbam, there's good news to pass on! 
 526 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
By next fall, we'll be making five hundred heavy bombers a month. 
 
That's hard intelligence." 
 
'Mr.    President, the-hard intelligence is"-Maugham's stammer caught everybody's attention, so   
they hung on his words-"that you s-say you'll be making them." 
 
The President was smiling before the author got the words out; then be roared with laughter.   
This houseguest was privileged to make jokes, Pug saw. 
 
'Mr.    Maugham was a British spy in the last war, Pug," Roosevelt said across the table.    'y, he   
even wrote a spy novel.    Ashenden. 
 
Watch out what you say here.    It'll get right back to Churchill." 
 
"Mr.    President, you know a houseguest would never do that.    I am not a ferret now, I assure   
you, but a lower form of life.    A-a-a sponge." Mrs. Roosevelt said cheerily, amid the laughter,   
'What else happened, Franklin, to make it a good day?" 
 
"My, the fellows finally finished the umteenth draft of my big speech. It looks pretty good,   
pretty good.    So I let them have coffee and sandwiches, and now they're locked up downstairs   
doing draft umteenplus-one.    What's the betting now, Sumner?    Am I going to ask for war, or   
proclaim convoying, or what?    Why, the suspense is even getting me." 
 
The President laughed and added, "Mr.    Maugham, as a great writer have you no ideas for my   
speech?    War?    Convoy?    Or some real new inspiration?" 
 
"Mr.    President, you r-remember your Oliver Twist?    'Please, sir, I w-want some more'?" 
 
"Of course," said the President, his close-set, clever eyes twinkling in anticipation of a joke. 
 
"Well, p-please, sir," said the author with a dead serious face, "I w-vant some w-war." 
 
The whole table broke into laughter.    "Ha ha ha!    Spoken like a true British agent!"    said the   
President, gaining another general laugh. 
 
Uniformed waiters cleared the table for the next course. Franklin Roosevelt took obvious   
pleasure in slicing the saddle of lamb.    Rhoda Henry ventured to remark, "My goodness, I wish   
Pug could carve like that!" 
 
"Oh, I'm sure he can."    Arching his thick grizzled eyebrows with selfsatisfaction, the President   
swept the knife artistically through the meat. 
 
"I do like a slice of lamb, though, don't you, Rhoda?    Not a steak, and not a shaving, either.   
The secret is a sharp knife and a firm hand." 
 
Victor Henry was answering Mrs. Roosevelt's questions about Nazi Germany,    raising his   
voice because she had said she was rather deaf. 
 
"What's that, Pug?" the President said, cocking an ear as he sliced meat. "Am I missing   
 527 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
something good?" 
 
"I was saying, sir, that when I left Germany, their industrial effort was just getting into high   
gear." 
 
"You don't say.    They scored pretty well in low gear, then." 
 
"Well, Mr.    President, as it turned out, the others had been doing even less." 
 
Roosevelt faced Maugham, on the other side of the crown princess. 
 
"Captain Henry was in the intelligence business too, Willie.    He was naval attache in Berlin.   
He predicted that pact between Hitler and Stalin before it happened.    All the clever diplomats,   
generals, and columnists were caught flat-footed, but not Pug. What's your prediction now,   
Pug?    How about all that massing of troops in the east? 
 
Will Hitler attack Russia?" 
 
The President's quick wily glance told Pug that he was thinking of the document they had   
discussed on the train. 
 
"Mr.    President, after that piece of luck, I hocked my crystal ball and threw away the ticket." 
 
Maugham wagged a knobby tobacco-stained finger.    "Ccaptain, don't ever admit to luck, in our   
r-racket." 
 
"What do you think, Sumner?"    the President said. 
 
"If one studies Mein Kampf," said Welles in undertaker tones, "the attack is inevitable, sooner   
or later." 
 
'How Yong ago did he write that book? Twenty years ago?" said Franklin Roosevelt, his   
powerful voice reminding Rhoda very strongly of his radio manner.    "I'd hate to be bound by   
anything I said or wrote way back then." 
 
Mrs.    Roosevelt said, "Mr.    Maugham-if Germany attacks the Soviet Union, will England help   
Russia, or leave Stalin to stew in his own juice?" 
 
The author looked at the President's wife for several seconds.    A heavy silence enveloped the   
table.    "I-I can't really say." 
 
"You know, Willie," said the President, "a lot of folks here don't believe the story that Rudolf   
Hess is crazy.    They say that he was sent over to advise your people of the coming attack on   
Russia, and to get a handsoff agreement, in return for a promise to help you keep the Empire." 
 
"That very plan is in Mein Kampf."    Mrs.    Roosevelt spoke out like a schoolteacher. 
 
Somerset Maugham, caught in the cross-fire of crisp words from the President and his wife,   
spread his hands, crouching in his chair, looking small, old, and tired. 
 528 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Sumner, do you suppose we could explain it to the American people," said Roosevelt, "if the   
British did not help Russia?" 
 
"I think that would finish off aid to England, Mr.    President," said Sumner Welles.    "If Hitler is   
a menace to mankind,    that's one thing. If he's just a menace to the British Empire, that's   
something very different." 
 
With a brief look at the British author, the President said in a much lighter tone, "Well!    Shall I   
slice some more lamb?" 
 
"I will thank you for some, Mr.    President," spoke up the crown princess.    "Of course, Hitler   
may be massing his troops in the east precisely because he intends to invade England."    The   
princess talked precise English with a Scandinavian lilt.    She was making a tactful cover, Pug   
thought, for the awkward moment with Maugham. She had not previously said anything.   
"You know, every time Hitler starts a new campaign, Stalin pinches off something here and   
something there.    This may be a show of force to keep him out of the Rumanian oil fields." 
 
"That, too, is possible," said Sumner Welles. 
 
"European politics can be such a miserable tangle," said Mrs. 
 
Roosevelt. 
 
"But it all boils down to Hitler's impulses nowadays," said the President.    "Pity we must live in   
the same century with that strange creature. 
 
Say, we have here two men who talked at length face to face with the kL fellow.    Let's take a   
Gallup poll.    Sumner, do you think Hitler is a madman?" 
 
"I looked hard for such evidence, Mr.    President.    But as I reported, I found him a cool, very   
knowledgeable, very skilled advocate, with great dignity and-I'm afraidonsiderable charm." 
 
"How about you, Pug?" 
 
"Mr.    President, don't misunderstand me.    But to me, so far, all heads of state are more alike   
than they are different." 
 
Roosevelt looked taken aback, then he threw his head back and guffawed, and so the others   
laughed. "Well! That's something! At my own table, I've been compared to Hitler! Pug,   
you'd better talk your way out of that one fast." 
 
"But it's the truth.    He has a very powerful presence, sir, face to face -though I hate to admit it- 
with an incredible memory, and a remarkable ability to marshal a lot of facts as he tami.    In his   
public speeches he often raves like a complete nut.    But I think when he does that, he's just   
giving the Germans what they want.    That impressed me, too.    His ability to act such different   
parts." 
 
Roosevelt was slightly smiling now.    "Yes, Pug, that would be part of the job.    The fellow is   
able, of course.    Or he wouldn't be giving us all this trouble." 
 529 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rhoda blurted, "Pug, when on earth did you have a talk with Hitler? That's news to me."    The   
artless injured-wife tone made the President laugh, and laughter swept the table.    She turned on   
Roosevelt. 
 
"Honestly, he's always been closemouthed, but to keep something like that from me!"    "You   
didn't need to know," Pug said across the table. 
 
"C-captain Henry," said Somerset Maugham, leaning forward, "I bow to a p-p-professional." 
 
The conversation broke into little amused colloquies. Roosevelt said to Rhoda Henry, "My   
dear, you couldn't have paid your husband a handsomer compliment in public."    "I didn't intend   
to.    Imagine!    He's just a sphinx, that man."    She darted a tender look at Pug, She was feeling   
very kindly toward him, and indeed to all the world, having enjoyed a moment of spontaneous   
success at the presidential table. 
 
of Pug is a fine officer," said the President, "and I expect great things of him." 
 
Rhoda felt warm excitement.    "I always have, Mr.    President." 
 
"Not    everybody deserves such    a    beautiful wife,"    Roosevelt said,    with    a    decidedly human   
glance at her that took in her decolletage, "but he does, Rhoda." 
 
Withe oldest instinct in the world, blushing, Rhoda Henry looked toward Mrs.    Roosevelt, who   
was deep in conversation with Sumner Welles.    It flashed through Rhoda's mind that there was   
a tall woman who had married a very tall man.    But Pug at least could walk.    Life balanced out   
in strange ways, Rhoda thought; the heady situation was making her philosophical. 
 
Madeline and Byron sat on opposite sides of the table, she between Maugham and Welles,   
Byron between the crown princess and a deaf, very old lady in purple named Delano. This   
lady had said nothing all evening; a relative, obviously, living at the White House and   
interested mainly in the food.    Madeline was speaking first to the Undersecretary of State and   
then to the famous    author, her face alive, flushed, and gay,    her gestures quick, Maugham   
offered to come on Cleveland's interview program, when she told him what she did.    He said   
candidly that his mission was British propaganda, so why not?    She was entranced. 
 
Byron throughout the dinner sat silent, collected, withdrawn. 
 
Victor Henry saw Roosevelt looking quizzically at him.      The President loved to charm   
everybody and to have only cheerful faces around him. 
 
Pug kept glancing at his son, hoping to catch his eye and signal him to perk up. 
 
Over the ice cream, the President said in a moment's lull, "We haven't heard from our   
submariner here.    Byron, you're a natural for the silent service.    Ha ha." The young officer   
gave him a melancholy smile. 
 
"How's the morale in your outfit?" 
 
"Good, Mr.    President." 
 530 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Are you ready to go to war, as Mr.    Maugham seems to desire?" 
 
"Personally, sir, I'm more than ready-" 
 
"Well, that's the spirit." 
 
Victor Henry interposed, "Byron was visiting a friend in Poland when the war began.    He was   
strafed by a Luftwaffe plane and wounded." 
 
"I see," said the President, giving Byron an attentive stare. 
 
"Well, you have a motive then for wanting to fight Germans." 
 
"That's not it so much, Mr.    President.    The thing is that my wife is trapped in Italy. " 
 
Franklin Roosevelt appeared startled.    "Trapped?    How, trapped?" 
 
The rich voice went flat. 
 
Everybody at the table looked at Byron.    The atmosphere was thick with curiosity. 
 
"Her uncle is Dr.    Aaron Jastrow, Mr.    President, the author of A jew's Jesus.    He's had some   
trouble about his passport.    He can't come home. He's old and not well, and she won't abandon   
him."    Byron spoke as flatly as the President, getting out each word very distinctly.  
 
Mrs.    Roosevelt put in with a smile, "Why, Franklin, we both read A Jew's Jesus.    Don't you   
remember?    You liked it i,ery much indeed." 
 
"Dr.    Jastrow taught at Yale for years, Mrs.    Roosevelt," Byron said. 
 
"He's lived here almost all his life.    It's just some crazy red tape. Meantime there they are."    "A   
jew's Jesus is a good book," said the President, bored and stern. 
 
"Sumner, couldn't you have somebody look into this?" 
 
"Certainly, Mr.    President." 
 
"And let me know what you find out." 
 
"I will, sir." 
 
Franklin Roosevelt resumed eating his ice cream.    Nobody spoke. 
 
Perhaps eight or ten seconds ticked by, but at that table, in that company, it was a long time.   
Everybody appeared bent on eating dessert, and the spoons clinked and scraped. 
 
"Speaking of that book," the President's wife said with a bright smile, looking up, "I have just   
been reading the most extraordinary little volume-" The door to the hallway opened, and a pale   
moustached Navy commander entered, carrying a brown envelope.    "I beg your pardon, Mr.   
President." 
 531 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Yes, yes.    Let me have it."    The commander went out.    The tearing envelope made a noisy   
rasp.    Yellow strips like telegram tape were pasted on the white sheet the President unfolded. 
 
"Well!" Franklin Roosevelt looked around, his face all at once charged with teasing relish.   
"May I relay a bit of news?"    He took a dramatic pause.    "It seems they've got the Bismarck!"   
"Ah!"    The crown princess bounced in her chair, clapping like a girl, amid an excited babble. 
 
The President raised his hand.    "Wait, wait.    I don't want to be overoptimistic or premature.   
What it says is, airplanes from the Ark Royal have caught up with her and pat several   
torpedoes in her. They must have hit her steering gear, because when night fell she was   
trailing thick oil and steaming slowly west-the wrong way.    The entire fleet is closing in and   
some units now have her in sight." 
 
"Does it give a position, Mr.    President?"    said Victor Henry. 
 
The President read off a latitude and longitude. 
 
"Okay.    That's    a thousand    miles from    Brest,"    said Pug.    "Well    outside    the Luftwaffe    air   
umbrella.    They've got her." 
 
President Roosevelt turned to a servant.    "Fill the glasses, please." 
 
Several waiters sprang to obey him.    Silence enveloped the table. 
 
The President lifted his glass.    "The British Navy," he said. 
 
'the British Navy," the company said in chorus, and all drank. 
 
Somerset Maugham blinked his lizard eyes many times. 
 
Next morning, long after Victor Henry had gone to work, when the maid came to remove the   
breakfast things, Rhoda asked her for pen and paper. She wrote a short note in bed: Palmer,   
dearYou have a kindly heart that understands without explanations.    I can't do it.    I realize we   
can't see each other for a long while, but I hope we will be friends forever. My love and   
everlasting thanks for offering me more than I deserve and can accept.    I'll never forget. 
 
Forgive me. 
 
Rhoda She sealed it up at once, dressed quickly, and went out in the rain and mailed it herself. 
 
That same dark and muggy morning, shortly before noon, a buzzer sounded on the desk of   
Victor Henry's office.    He sat in his shirt-sleeves working by electric light. 
 
"Yes?"    he growled into the intercom.    He had left word that he would take no calls.    The head   
of War Plans wanted, by the end of the week, a study of merchant shipping requirements for   
the next four years. 
 
"Excuse me, sir.    The office of Mr.    Sumner Welles is calling, sir." 
 
"Sumner Welles, hey?    Okay, I'll talk to Sumner Welles." 
 532 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Welles's secretary had a sweet sexy Southern voice.      "Oh, Captain Henry. Oh, suh, the   
Undersecretary is most anxious to see you today, if you happen to be free." 
 
Glancing at his desk clock and deciding to skip lunch, Pug said, "I can come over right now." 
 
"Oh, that will be fahn, suh, just fahn.    In about fifteen minutes?" 
 
When he arrived at Welles's office, the warm sexy voice turned out to belong to a fat old fright,   
sixty or so, in a seersucker dress. 
 
'Mali, you got here fast, Captain.    Now, the Undersecretary is with Secretary Hull just now.    He   
says do you mind talking to Mr. 
 
Whitman? 
 
Mr.    Whitman has all the details." 
 
"Yes, I'll talk to Mr.    Whitman." 
 
She led him from the spacious and splendid offices of Sumner Welles to a much smaller and   
more ordinary office without a window. 
 
The projecting sign over the doorway indicated a minor official in European Affairs.    Aloysius   
R. Whitman was a thick-haired man in his late forties, indistinguishable from ten thousand   
other denizens of Washington offices, except for his somewhat horsy clothes, an unusually   
florid face, and an unusually bright smile. Several prints of horses livened the walls of the   
small office. "The Undersecretary sends his thanks to you, Captain, for interrupting a busy   
schedule to come over." 
 
He gestured at a chair.    "Cigarette?" 
 
"'nanks." 
 
The two men smoked and regarded each other. 
 
"Wretched weather," said Whitman. 
 
"The worst," said Pug. 
 
"Well, now.    The business of Dr.    Aaron Jastrow's passport," Whitman said genially.    it's no   
problem whatever, as it turns out.    The authorization was sent out a while ago.    It may have   
been delayed enroute, the way things often are nowadays.    At any rate it's all set. 
 
We doublechecked by cable with Rome. Dr. Jastrow can have his passport any time he'll   
come down from Siena to pick it up, and has been so informed.    It's all locked up." 
 
"Good.    That was fast work." 
 
"As I say, there was no work to do.    It had already been taken care of." "Well, my son will be   
mighty glad to hear about this." 
 533 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Oh yes. About your son." Whitman uttered a little laugh. He rose, hands jammed in the   
patch pockets of his green and brown jacket, and leaned casually on the edge of his desk near   
Pug, as though to make the chat less official.    "I hope you'll take this in the right spirit. 
 
The Undersecretary was disconcerted to have this thing raised at the President's dinner table."   
'Naturally.    I was mighty jarred myself. So was my wife.    I chewed Byron out afterward, gave   
him holy hell, but the thing was done." 
 
'I'm awfully glad you feel that way.    Suppose you just drop a little note to the President, sort of   
apologizing for your son's rather touching gate, and mentioning that you've learned the matter   
was all taken care of long ago?"    'An unsolicited letter from me to the President?" 
 
"You're on very good terms with the President.    You just dined with him." 
 
"But he asked for a report from Mr. Welles." The captain and the State Department man   
looked each other in the eye.    Whitman gave him the brightest of smiles and paced the little   
office. 'We went to a rather dramatic effort this morning, Captain, just to make sure young   
Mrs. Henry could get home.    Literally thousands of these cases of Jewish reugees come to us,   
all the time.    The pressure is enormous. 
 
It's absolutely nbelievable. Now the problem in your family is settled. We hoped you'd be   
more appreciative." 
 
Rightly or wrongly, Henry sensed an unpleasant nuance in the way the man said "your family,"   
and he broke in, "Natalie and her uncle aren't Jewish refugees, they're a couple of Americans."   
"There was some question, Captain-apparently a very serious question-as to whether Aaron   
Jastrow was technically an American.    Now we've cleared it up. 
 
In return I really think you should write that letter." 
 
"I'd like to oblige you, but as I say, I wasn't asked to address the President on this subject."   
Pug got to his feet.    "Is there something else?" 
 
Whiunan confronted him, hands in jacket pockets.    "Let me be frank. 
 
The Undersecretary wants a report from me, for him to forward to the President.    But just a   
word from you would conclude the matter. 
 
So-" 
 
"I'll tell you, Mr.    tman, I might even write it, if I could find out why a distinguished man like   
Jastrow got stopped by a technicality when he wanted to come home.    That's certainly what the   
President wants to know.    But I can't give him the answer.    Can you?" 
 
Whitman looked at Victor Henry with a blank face.    "Okay.    Maybe somebody in your section   
can.    Whoever was responsible had better try to explain." 
 
'Captain Henry, the Undersecretary of State may find your refusal hard to understand." 
 534 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Why should he?    He's not asking me to write this letter.    You are." 
 
Pulling hairy hands from his pockets, Whitman chopped both of them in the air with a gesture   
that was both a plea and a threat.    He suddenly looked weary and disagreeable.    "It's a direct   
suggestion of the State Department.    $ "I work for the Navy Department," said Pug. 
 
"And I have to get back on the job.    Many thanks." 
 
He walked out, telephoned the Norfolk Navy Yard from a booth in the lobby,    and sent a   
message to Byron on the S-45.    His son called him at his office late in the afternoon. 
 
"Eeyowl" shouted Byron, hurting his father's ear.    "No kidding, Dad! 
 
Do you believe it this time?" 
 
"Yes." 
 
"God, how Marvelous.    Now if she can only get on a plane or a boat! 
 
But she'll do it.    She can do anything.    Dad, I'm so happy!    Hey! 
 
Be honest now.    Was I right to talk to the President, or was I wrong? 
 
She's coming home, Dad!" 
 
"You had one hell of a nerve.    Now I'm goddamned btwy and I hope you are.    Get back to   
work." 
 
Therefore I have tonight issued a proclamation that an UNLIMITED national emergency   
exists, and requires the strengthening of our defenses to the extreme limit of our national power   
and authority. 
 
"Okay!"    exclaimed Pug Henry, sitting up, striking a fist into a palm, and staring at the radio.   
"There he goes!" 
 
Roosevelt's rich voice, which in broadcasting always took on a theatrical ring and swing, rose   
now to a note of passion. 
 
"I repeat the words of the signers of the Declaration    of Independence -that    little    band of   
patriots,    fighting long ago against overwhelming    odds, but certain,    as we are, of ultimate   
victory: With a firm reliance on the protection of Divine Providence, we mutually pledge to   
each other our lives, our fortunes, and our sacred honor."' After a moment of crackling static,   
the announcer sounded awed: "You have been listening to an address by the President of the   
United States, speaking from the East Room of the White House in Washington." 
 
"That's terrific!    It's far more than I expected."    Pug snapped the radio off.    "He finally did it!" 
 
Rhoda said, 'He did?    Funny.    I thought he just pussyfooted around." 
 
"Pussyfooted!    Weren't you listrung?    'We are placing our armed forces in position... we will   
 535 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
use them to repel attack.    an unlimited national emergency exists. 
 
"What does all that mean?" Rhoda yawned and stretched on the chaise tongue, kicking her   
legs.    One pink-feathered mule dropped off her naked foot.    "Is it the same as war?"    "Next   
thing to it.    We convoy right away.    And that's just for starters." 
 
"Makes    me    wonder,"    said Rhoda, flipping    the    negligee    over her    legs, whether we should   
pursue those houses any further." 
 
"Why not?" 
 
"They'll surely give you a sea command if we go to war, Pug." 
 
"Who knows?    In any case, we need a place to hang our hats." 
 
"I suppose so.    Have you thought any more about which house you'd want?" 
 
Pug grimaced.    Here was an old dilemma.    Twice before they had bought a bigger house in   
Washington than he could afford, with Rhoda's money. 
 
"I like the N Street house." 
 
"But, dear, that means no guest room, and precious little entertaining." "Look, if your heart is   
set on Foxhall Road, okay." 
 
"We'll see, honey.    I'll look again at both of them."    Rhoda rose, stretching and smiling.    "It's   
that time.    Coming to bed?" 
 
"Be right up."    Pug opened a briefcase. 
 
Rhoda swished out, purring, "Bring me a bourbon-and-water when you come." 
 
Pug did not know why he was back in her good graces, or why he had fallen out in the first   
place. He was too preoccupied to dwell on that. His arithmetic on merchant shipping was   
obsolete if the United States was about to convoy.      Transfers of ownership and other   
roundabout tricks could be dropped.    It was a whole new situation now, and Pug thought the   
decision to convoy would galvanize the country.    He made two bourbon-and-waters, nice and   
rich, and went upstairs humming. 
 
The yeoman's voice on the intercom was apologetic.    "Sir, beg your pardon.    Will you talk to   
Mr.    Alistair Tudsbury?"    Victor Henry, sweating in shirt-sleeves over papers laid out on every   
inch of his desk, was tryingat the urgent demand of the office of the Chief of Naval   
Operations-to bring up to date before nightfall the operation plan filed months    earlier, for   
combined American and British convoying. 
 
"What?    Yes, put him on.... Hello?    Henry speaking." 
 
"Am I disturbing you, dear boy?    That's quite a bark."    'No, not at all. What's up?" 
 
"What do you make of the President's press conference?" 
 536 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"I didn't know he'd had one."    "You are busy.    Ask your office to get you the afternoon papers."   
"Wait a minute.    They should be here." Pug's yeoman brought in two newspapers smelling of   
fresh ink.    The headlines were huge: 
 
NO CONVOYS - FDR 
 
and PRESIDENT TO PRESS: SPEECH DIDN'T MEAN CONVOYS "Unlimited Emergency"   
Merely a Warning; No Policy Changes Skinuning the stories, Pug saw that Franklin Roosevelt   
had blandly taken back his whole radio speech, claiming the reporters had misunderstood it.   
There would be no stepped-up United States action in the Atlantic, north or south. He had   
never suggested that.    Patrolling, not convoying, would go on as before. No Army troops or   
marines would be sent to Iceland or anywhere else. All he had been trying to do was warn the   
nation that great danger existed. 
 
Tudsbury, who could hear the pages turning, said, "Well?    Tell me something encouraging." 
 
"I thought I understood Franklin Roosevelt," Pug Henry muttered. 
 
Tudsbury said, 'What's that?    Victor, our people have been ringing church bells an'd dancing in   
the streets over last night's speech.      Now I have to broadcast and tell about this press   
conference." 
 
"I don't envy you." 
 
"Can you come over for a drink?" 
 
"I'm afraid not." 
 
"Please try.    Pam's leaving." 
 
"What?" 
 
"She's going home, leaving on a boat tonight.    She's been pestering them for weeks to let her   
return to Blighty." 
 
"Let me call you back." 
 
He told his yeoman to telephone an old shipmate of his, Captain Feller, at the office of the   
Chief of Naval Operations. 
 
"Hello, Soapy?    Pug.    Say, have you seen the papers about that press conference?... Yes, I quite   
agree.    Well, now, next question. This Convoy Annex Four.    Do you still want it by tonight?.  
 
.. Now, Soapy, that's a rude suggestion, and it's an awfully bulky annex.    Moreover I hope we'll   
use it one day.... Okay. 
 
Thanks." 
 
Pug hit the buzzer.    "Call Tudsbury.    I'm coming over." 
 537 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"The funny part is," Pug said to Tudsbury, "Rhoda said he pussyfooted around.    I was taken   
in." 
 
"Maybe it needs a woman to follow that devious mind," said the correspondent.    "Pam, where   
are your manners?    Pug's here to say good-bye to you.    Come in and have your drink." 
 
"In a minute. My things are all in a slop." They could see Pamela moving in the codor,   
carrying clothes, books, and valises here and there. 
 
They sat in the small living room of Tudsbury's apartment off Connecticut Avenue, hot and   
airless despite open windows through which afternoon traffic noise and sunlight came   
streaming. 
 
Tudsbury, sprawling on a sofa in a massively wrinkled Palm Beach suit, with one thick leg up,   
heaved a sigh.    "I shall be alone again. 
 
There's a girl who is all self, self, self." 
 
"Family trait," called the dulcet voice from out of sight. 
 
"Shut up.    Please, Pug, give me something comforting to say in this bloody broadcast." 
 
"I can't think of a thing." 
 
Tudsbury took a large drink of neat whiskey and heavily shook his head. "What's happened to   
Franklin Roosevelt?    The Atlantic convoy route is the jugular vein of civilization.    The Huns   
are sawing at it with a razor. 
 
He knows the tonnage figures of the past three months. He knows that with Crete and the   
Balkans    mopped up, the Luftwaffe will come back at us, double its size of last year    and   
howling with victory.    What the devil?" 
 
"I'll have my drink now," said Pamela, striding in. "Don't you think you should be going,   
governor?" 
 
He held his tumbler out to her. "One more. I have never been more reluctant to face a   
microphone.    I have stage fright.    My tongue will cleave to the roof of my mouth." 
 
"Oh yes.    just as it's doing now."    Pamela took his glass and Pug's to the small wheeled bar. 
 
"Put in more ice.    I've caught that decadent American habit.    Pug, the Empire's finished.    We're   
nothing but an outpost of yours against the Germans. But we're a fighting outpost of forty   
millions, with a strong navy and a plucky air force. Why, man, we're your Hawaii in the   
Atlantic, many times as big and powerful and crucial.    Oh, I could make one hell of a broadcast   
about how preposterous your policy is!" 
 
"Thanks, Pam," Pug said.    "I agree with you, Tudsbury.    So does the Secretary of the Army.   
So does Harry Hopkins.    They've both made ST)eeches urizing convoy now.    I have no defense   
of the President's policy. 
 538 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
It's a disaster.    Cheers." 
 
"Cheers.    Yes, and it's your disaster.    This is a contest now between Germany and the United   
States.    If you lose, God help you and all mankind.    We were too slow, too stupid, and too late.   
But in the end we did our best.    You're doing nothing, in the last running."    He swallowed his   
drink and pulled himself to his feet.      "We expected more from the United States Navy,   
anyhow.    I'll tell you that." 
 
"The United States Navy is ready," Pug shot back.    "I've been working like a bastard all day on   
a general operation order for convoy. 
 
When I saw those headlines, it was like my desk blowing up in my face." 
 
"Good God, man, can I say that?    Can I say that the Navy, before this press conference, was   
preparing to start convoying?" 
 
"Are you crazy?    I'll shoot you if you do." 
 
"I don't have to quote you.    Please." 
 
Pug shook his head. 
 
"Can I say your Navy is ready to go over to convoy on a twenty-four hours' notice?    Is that   
true?" 
 
'y, of course it's true.    We're out there now.    We've got the depth charges on ready.    All we have   
to do is uncover and train out the guns." 
 
Tudsbury's bulging eyes were alive now and agleam.    "Pug, I want to say that." 
 
"Say what?" 
 
"That the United States Navy is ready to go over to convoy and expects to do it soon." 
 
Pug hesitated only a second or two.    "Oh, what the hell.    Sure, say it! 
 
You can hear that from anybody in the service from C.N.O down. 
 
Who doesn't know that?" 
 
"The British, that's who.    You've saved me."    Tudsbury rounded on his daughter.    "And you   
told me not to telephone him, you stupid baggage! Blazes, I'm late."    The fat man lumbered   
out. 
 
Pug said to Pamela, "That isn't news."    "Oh, he has to work himself up. He'll make it sound like   
something. 
 
He's rather clutching at straws." 
 
She sat with her back to the window.    The sun in her brown hair made an aureole around her   
 539 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
pallid sad face. 
 
"Why did you tell him not to phone me?" 
 
She looked embarrassed.    "I know how hard you're working." 
 
"Not that hard." 
 
"I meant to ring you before I left."    She glanced down at her intertwined fingers, and reached   
him a mimeographed document from the coffee table.    "Have you seen this?" 
 
It was the British War Office's instructions to civilians for dealing with German invaders.    Pug   
said, leafing through it, 'I read a lot of this stuff last fall.    It's pretty nightmarish, when you start   
picturing    the Germans    driving    through Kent    and marching    up Trafalgar    Square.    It won't   
happen, though." 
 
"Are you sure?    After that press conference?" 
 
Pug turned up both hands. 
 
Pamela said, "They've updated that manual since last year.    It's calmer, and a lot more realistic.   
And therefore somehow more depressing.    I can just see it all happening.    After Crete, I really   
do think it may." 
 
"You're brave to go back, then." 
 
"Not in the least.    I can't stand it here.    I choke on your steaks and your ice cream.    I feel so   
bloody guilty."    Pamela wrung her fingers in her lap.    "I just can't wait to go.    There's this girl   
in the office-would you like another drink?    no?-well, the fool's gone dotty over a married man.   
An American.    And she has a fiance in the R.A.F. She has nobody to talk to. 
 
She pours it all out to me.    I have to live with all this maudlin agonizing, day in, day out.    It's   
wearing me down." 
 
"What does this American do?" 
 
"That would be telling."    With a little twist of her mouth she added, "He's a civilian.    I can't   
imagine what she sees in him.    I once met him.    A big thin flabby chap with glasses, a paunch,   
and a high giggle." 
 
They sat in silence.    Pug rattled the ice in his glas,-, round and round. 
 
"Funny, there's this fellow I know," he spoke up.    "Navy fellow. 
 
Take him, now.    He's been married for a quarter of a century, fine grown family, all that.    Well,   
over in Europe he ran into this girl. 
 
On the boat actually, and a few times after that.    He can't get her out of his mind.    He never   
does anything about it.    His wife is all right, there's nothing wrong with her.    Still, he keeps   
dreaming about this girl.    All he does is dream.    He wouldn't hurt His wife for the world. 
 540 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
He loves his grown kids.    Look at him, and you'd call him the soberest of sober citizens.    He   
has never had anything to do with another woman since he got married.    He wouldn p t know   
how to go about it, and isn't about to try.    And that's the story of this fellow.    Just as silly as this   
girlfriend of yours, except that he doesn't talk about it.    There are millions of such people." 
 
Pamela Tudsbury said, "A naval officer, you say?" 
 
"Yes, he's a naval officer." 
 
"Sounds like somebody I might like."    The girl's voice was grainy and kind. 
 
Through the automobile noises outside, a vague sweeter sound drew nearer, and defined itself   
as a hand or an.    "Oh listen!"    Pam jumped up and went to the window.    "When did you last   
hear one of those?" 
 
"A few of them wander around Washington all the time."    He was at her side, looking down   
five stories to the organ grinder, who was almost hidden in a crowding circle of children.    She   
slipped her hand in his and leaned her head against his shoulder.    "Let's go down and watch the   
monkey.    There must be one." 
 
"Sure." 
 
"First let me kiss you good-bye.    On the street, I can't." 
 
She put her thin arms around him and kissed his mouth.    Far below, the music of the hurdy- 
gurdy thumped and jangled.    "What is that song?" 
 
she said, the breath of her mouth warm on his lips.    "I don't recognize it. 
 
It's a little like Handel's Messiah."    "It's called 'Yes, We Have No Bananas."' "How moving." 
 
"I love you," said Victor Henry, considerably surprising himself. 
 
She caressed his face, her eyes looking deep into his.    "I love you. 
 
Come." 
 
On the street, in the hot late sunshine, the children were squealing and shouting as a monkey on   
the end of a light chain, with a red hat stuck fast on its head, turned somersaults.    The hurdy- 
gurdy was still grinding the same song.    The animal ran to Victor Henry, and balancing itself   
with its long curled tail, took off the hat and held it out.    He dropped in a quarter.    Taking the   
coin and biting it, the monkey tipped the hat, somersaulted back to his master, and dropped the   
coin in a box. It sat on the organ, grinning, chattering, and rapidly tipping the hat. 
 
"If that critter could be taught to salute," said Victor Henry, "he might have a hell of a naval   
career." 
 
Pamela looked up in his face and seized his hand.    "You're doing as much as anybody I know- 
anybody, anybody-about this accursed war." 
 541 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Well, Pam, have a safe trip home."    He kissed her hand and walked rapidly off, leaving her   
among the laughing children.    Belu'nd him the barrel organ wheezily started again on "Yes, We   
Have No Bananas." 
 
Acouple of days later, Victor Henry received an order to escort to the Memorial Day parade the   
oldest naval survivor of the Civil War. 
 
This struck him as strange, but he pushed aside a mound of work to obey. 
 
He picked the man up at a veterans' home, and drove with him to the reviewing stand on   
Pennsylvania Avenue.    The man wore a threadbare uniform like an old play costume, and the   
dim eyes in his bony, withered, caved-in face were cunningly alert. 
 
President Roosevelt's white linen suit and white straw hat glared in the bright sun, as he sat in   
his open car beside the stand.    He gave the tottering ancient a strong handshake and bellowed   
at the box of his hearing aid, "Well, well!    You look better than I do, old top.    I bet you feel   
better." 
 
"I don't have your worries," quavered the veteran. The President threw his head back and   
laughed. 
 
"How would you like to watch the parade with me?" 
 
"Better than-bee bee-marching in it." 
 
"Come along.    Come on, Pug, you sit with me too." 
 
The veteran soon fell asleep in the sunshine, and not even the booming and crashing of the   
brass bands could wake him.    Roosevelt saluted, waved, put his straw hat over his heart when a   
flag went by, and smiled obligingly for the newsreel men and photographers crowding around   
the slumbering veteran beside the President. 
 
"The Navy's my favorite," he said to Victor Henry, as blue Annapolis ranks swung by with set   
young faces under the tall hats. 
 
"They march better than those West Point cadets. Don't ever tell any Army men I said so!   
Say, Pug, incidentally, whom can I send over to London to head up our convoy command?"   
Pug sat dumbstruck.    Ever since the press conference, the President had been sticking firmly to   
his no-convoy stance. 
 
"Well?    Don't you know of anybody?    We'll call him a 'special naval observer," of course, or   
something, until we get things started." 
 
The President's voice did not carry over the blaring brasses to the chauffeur, nor to his naval   
aide in front, nor to the Secret Service men flanking the automobile. 
 
"Sir, are we going to convoy?" 
 
"You know perfectly well we will.    We've got to." 
 542 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'When, Mr.    President?" The President smiled wearily at Pug's bitter emphasis.    He fumbled in   
his pocket. "I had an interesting chat with General Marshall this morning. This was the   
upshot."    He showed Victor Henry a chit of paper scrawled with his own handwriting: Victor   
Henry read these frustrating figures while American flags streamed past him and the marine   
band blared out "The Stars and Stripes Forever." Meanwhile Roosevelt was searching through   
more chits, He handed another to Pug, while taking the salute of the marine formation as it   
stalked splendidly past.    This was in another handwriting, in green ink, with the last line ringed   
in red: 
 
tv, 19-41 
 
0 L7 170 "I'll take that," Roosevelt said, retrieving the chit. 
 
"Those are the figures, Pug, for the day after my speech." 
 
"Convoying would be a Navy job, sir.    We're all ready." 
 
"If we get into war," said the President through a broad smile and a wave at schoolchildren   
cheering him "-and convoying might just do it -Hitler will at once walk into French West   
Africa.    He'll have the Luftware at Dakar,"where they can jump over to Brazil.    He'll put new   
sub marine pens there, too.    The Azores will be in his palm.    The people who are screaming for   
convoy now just ignore these things. 
 
Also the brute fact that eighty-two percent, eighty-two percent of our people don't want to go   
to war.    Eighty-two percent." 
 
The Navy veteran was sitting up now, blinking, and working In", bony jaws and loose sunken   
mouth.    "My, this is a fine parade.    I still remember marching past President Lincoln," he said   
reedily. "There he stood, the President himself, all in black." The old man peered at the   
President.    "And you're all in white.    And you're sitting, bee bee." 
 
Victor Henry shrank with embarrassment. Roosevelt laughed gaily,    "Well,    there you    are.   
Every President does things a little differently." He lit a cigarette in his long holder, and   
puffed. Boy Scouts in a brown mass Went stepping by, with heads and bright eyes turned   
toward the President. 
 
He    waved his hat    at    them.      "So far    this year, Pug, we've produced    twenty percent    more   
automobiles than we made last year.    And Congress wouldn't dream of giving me the power to   
stop it.    Well?    What about London?    You didn't suggest anybody." 
 
Victor Henry diffidently named three well-known rear admirals. 
 
" 
 
"I know them," the President nodded.    "The fact is, I was thinking of you. 
 
"It wouldn't work, Mr.    President.    Our man's opposite number in the Royal Navy will have   
flag rank." 
 543 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Oh, that could be fixed up.    We could make you an admiral temporarily." 
 
From the surprise, and perhaps a little from the beating sun overhead, Pug felt dizzy. "Mr.   
President, as you know, I just go where I'm ordered." 
 
'Now, Pug, none of that.    Frankly, I like you right where you are. 
 
Deciding who gets what weapons and supplies is a big job. I'm glad you're working on it,   
because you have sense.    But think about London." 
 
"Aye aye, sir." 
 
Pug returned the veteran to his nursing home, and went back to a piled-up desk. He got   
through a high heap of work and walked home, to give himself a chance to think.    The city lay   
in holiday quiet. 
 
Connecticut Avenue was almost empty, the evening air was sweet and clear. 
 
Think about Londont Young couples on the benches in Dupont Circle turned and laughed,   
looking after the stocky man in Navy whites, striding along and humming a tune that had been   
popular before some of them were born. 
 
"Hey, what the Sam Hill?"    Pug exclaimed, as he entered the living room. "Champagne?    And   
why are you gussied up like that?    Whose birthday is it?" 
 
"Whose birthday, you old fool?"    Rhoda stood, splendid in a pink silk frock, her eyes glittering   
with tears.    "Don't you know?    Can't you guess?" 
 
"I suppose I'm fouled up on my dates." 
 
"It's Victor Henry's birthday, that's whose birthday it is." 
 
"Are you potted?    Mine's in March."    "Oh, God, how dense the man is. Pug, at four o'clock this   
afternoon, Janice had a boy! You're a grandfather, you poor man, and his name is Victor   
Henry.    And I'm a doddering old grandmother.    And I love it.    I love it!    Oh, Pug!" 
 
Rhoda threw herself in his arms. 
 
They talked about the great event over the champagne, downing a whole bottle much too fast.   
Janice and her baby were in fine shape. 
 
The little elephant weighed nine and a half whole pounds!    Rhoda had raced up to the naval   
hospital for a look at him in the glass cage. 
 
"He's the image of you, Pug," she said.    "A small pink copy." 
 
"Poor kid," said Pug.    "He'll have no luck with the women." 
 
"I like that!"    exclaimed Rhoda, archly giggling.    "Didn't you have Marvelous luck?    Anyway,   
Janice and the baby are coming to stay with us. She doesn't want to take him back to Hawaii   
 544 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
for a while.    SO that makes the house decision urgent.    Now, Pug, just today I got that old latin,   
in Foxhall Road to come down another five thousand!    I say let's grab it'. 
 
That glorious lawn, those fine old elms!    Sweetie, let's enjoy these coming years, let's wither in   
style, side by side, Grandma and Grandpa Henry. 
 
And let's always have lots of spare room for the grandchildren. 
 
Don't you think so?" 
 
Victor Henry stared at his wife for such a long time that she began to feel odd.    He heaved a   
deep sigh and made a curious upward gesture with both palms. 
 
"Well, I'll tell you, Grandma.    I couldn't agree with you moreThe time has come.    Let's go to   
Foxhall Road by all means.    And there we'll wither, side by side.    Well said." 
 
"Oh, how Marvelous!    I love you.    I'll call the Charleroi Agency in the morning.    Now let me   
see what's happened to the dinner."    She hurried out, slim silky hips swaying. 
 
Pug Henry upended the champagne bottle over his glass, but only a drop or two ran out, as he   
sang softly: But yes, we have no bananas, We have no bananas today. 
 
Three weeks later the Germans invaded the Soviet Union. 
 
PART THREE 
 
The Winds Rise 
 
Barbarossa (from WORLD EMPIRE LOST) TRANSLATOR'S NOTE!      The world still   
wonders, a quarter of a century later, why Adolf Hitler turned east in June 1941, when he had   
England hanging on the ropes from disastrous defects in Africa and the Balkans, and from   
losses to U-boats, and when the United States was impotent to stop the knockout. 
 
It appeared then that Hitler had the Second World War all but won. 
 
With England mopped up, he could have proceeded to take on the Soviet Union in a one-front   
war, after digesting his amazing gains. 
 
Instead, sparing England, he turned east, unloosed the biggest and longest bloodbath in history,   
left his rear open to the Normandy landing, and destroyed himself and Germany. 
 
Why? 
 
On this question, it seems to me that General von Roon, from the other side of the hill, sheds a   
lot of light. Since the American reader is more interested in operations in the west, I have   
greatly abridged this material.    But i have tried to preserve the main thread of Roon's analysis.- 
V.H. 
 
The Turn East 
 545 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hitler's    invasion of the Soviet Union is widely regarded as his great blunder, perhaps the   
greatest blunder in world history.    For this view, there are two reasons.    The first is, that people   
are as yet unable to think clearly about Adolf Hitler, an enigmatic and fearsome personality.   
The second and more important reason is that, in judging a military situation, laymen (and too   
many military men as well) seldom bother to get at the facts.    Such judgment always begins by   
looking at a map. People are bored and confused by maps.    Yet the key to Hitler's turn east in   
June 1941 lies in cartography. 
 
One has to look at a mop of Europe, preferably a terrain map that clearly shows rivers and the   
raised areas of mountains. 
 
And one has to bear in mind certain simple unchanging facts about war. 
 
War is a violent clash of energies.    The energies are of three kinds: animal, mechanical, and   
chemical, as in the destructive process of fire. Until the seventeenth century, the animal   
energies of horses and men were decisive, although machines like catapults and crossbows   
were of some use.    With the chemical energy of exploding gunpowder, a new factor was added.   
The American Civil War first reflected the industrial revolution, chiefly in the massive gain of   
troop mobility through railroads exploiting the chemical energies of a fossil fuel, coal; and also   
in guns with new ranges and accuracy, thanks to advanced metallurgy and design. 
 
Industrial war came fully into its own in 1914-18.    The German people, operating on interior   
lines, on a grid of railroads brilliantly designed by Moltke for the swift shuttling of armies,   
with an industrial plant planned and built for war, all but beat a coalition that included nearly   
the whole world. In 1918, the revolutionary possibilities of a new use of fossil energy, the   
petroleum engine, were disclosed by the British tanks at Amiens, and by air combat among   
flimsy scout planes. A few military men grasped these possibilities; but only one postwar   
politician really understood them, and that man was an obscure ex-foot soldier, Adolf Hitler. 
 
Hitler saw that the British and French, the supposed victors, were so exhausted that world   
empire lay open to their successor; and that even a small nation, with massive bold use of the   
petroleum engine, especially in combined operations on the ground and in the air, could gain   
the prize. 
 
The Situation on the Map 
 
The drawback of horses in war is that they must have hay; Napoleon faltered at Borodino   
partly from a shortage of fodder.    Similarly, a petroleum engine must have petroleum to burn.   
Adolf Hitler could never forget this simple fact, no matter how many armchair strategists and   
shallow-clever journalists did. 
 
There was only one filling station available for the German war effort on the European   
continent, and that was the oil under Rumania. 
 
We could get no oil by sea. All of Hitler's Balkan maneuvers and campaigns of 1940-41   
therefore revolved around the Ploesti oil field. 
 546 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The war could not be won in the Balkans, but Germany might have lost it there. 
 
A glance at the map shows that Ploesti, in the great plain drained by the Danube, lies   
dangerously near the Soviet border.    Ploesti is a clear flat march from the Prut River of less   
than a hundred miles.      But it is six hundred miles from Germany, and the Carpathian   
Mountains bar the way. 
 
For this reason, when war between Hungary and Rumania threatened in July of 1940, Hitler   
acted fast to force a settlement.    The Soviet Union did not like this.    Russia, whether Czarist or   
Communist, has always stretched its becir claws toward the Balkan peninsula, and at the time   
Russia was sending vague threatening notes to Rumania.    Hitler could not worry about Russian   
sensibilities, however, where his supply of petroleum was concerned.    Without oil, the entire   
German war machine was but a mountain of dead iron. 
 
But Russia's conduct gave him pause.    His pact with Stalin was just a truce. 
 
He so regarded it, and he had to assume that a ruthless butcher like Stalin so regarded it.    The   
question was, when would Russia move? 
 
This, Hitler could only guess from Russia's actions.    In the Balkans, in the summer of 1940,   
while we were completing our brilliant campaign in France, the Soviet Union moved into   
Besscrabla, bringing the Red Army to the banks of the Prut, an advance averaging one hundred   
miles along a broad front toward our oil.    Bulgaria, with a border only fifty miles from Ploesti,   
began at the same time to make territorial demands and military threats.    In these gestures of   
Bulgaria against Rumania, we possessed hard intelligence that Russian intrigue was at work. 
 
These ominous moves took place during the so-called "Battle of Britain." 
 
Western newspapers and broadcasters virtually ignored them. 
 
Western historians still ignore them.      Balkan politics have always confused and bored   
Westerners, especially Americans.    Yet this tense    obscure maneuvering around    Rumanian   
petroleum was much more crucial than all the romantically headlined dogfights in the English   
skies. 
 
Authors who chew over and over the Battle of Britain invariably wonder at Adolf Hitler's   
marked lack of interest in it. None of them seem to know enough military chronology and   
cartography to appreciate that the Fuhrer had his eye, all during that inconclusive air skirmish,   
on the vital lowlands of the Danube. 
 
Late in July, with the "Battle of Britain" barely started, Hitler ordered General Jodl to begin   
staff work on an invasion of the Soviet Union, to be set for late 1940 or the spring of 1941.   
Western writers often cite this move as conclusive proof of the German leader's "perfidy."    But   
this comes of not looking at maps or studying chronology.    Had Hitler not taken this precauflon   
after Russia's tightening squeeze play on Ploesti, he would have been guilty of criminal neglect   
of his nation's interests. 
 547 
 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Grand Strategy Picture 
 
Hitler's world view was Hegelian.    Nations, empires, cultures, all have their season in history,   
the great Hegel taught us.    They come, and they go.    Not one is permanent, but in each age one   
dominates    and gives the theme. In this succession of world dominions, we recognize the   
evolving will of the God of history, the World Spirit. God therefore expresses and reveals   
himself in the will of those world-historical individuals, like Caesar, Alexander, and Napoleon,   
who lead their states to world empire.    Conventional morality cannot apply to the deeds of such   
men, for it is they who create the new modes and themes of morality in each age. 
 
This Hegelian world view is, of course, at the other pole from the petit bourgeois morality   
which expects great nations to behave like well-brought-up young ladies in a finishing school,   
and would hold a mighty armed people no different, in the rules applicable to its conduct, than   
some pale shoe clerk.    The big bourgeois powers like France, England, and America built their   
strength and expanded their territory by actions indistinguishable from armed robbery.    Having   
achieved their "manifest destiny," they found it easy, of course, to scold a young vigorous   
Germany seeking to play its world role in turn. 
 
Adolf Hitler was not, however, a personality much impressed by such preachments. 
 
In his program, the attack on Russia was the doorway through which Germany would enter   
world dominion.      Russia was our India, to be conquered and exploited in British style.   
Germany had the will, the strength, the sense of destiny. 
 
She lacked only the food, the living space, and the petroleum. 
 
These things she had to take.    Hitler's view was that once rule of the European continent was   
firmly in Germany's grasp, the Anglo-Saxon sea powers would perforce change their   
governments, choosing politicians who could get along with the new German world imperium. 
 
The Center of Gravity 
 
Clausewitz says, "We may... establish it as a principle that if we conquer all our enemies by   
conquering one of them, the defeat of that one must be the aim of the war, because in that one   
we hit the common center of gravity of the whole war." 
 
The attack on Russia, which aimed for control of the central land moss of the earth with its   
limitless manpower and natural resources, was the true strike at the center of gravity. 
 
Much specious argument is offered that England was "really" the center of gravity, because she   
could raise another coalition to combat Germany.    This is the writing of men obsessed by   
Napoleonic analogies. 
 
England was neutralized, and virtually out of the war, in the spring of 1941, except for the   
minor    nuisance of her air raids. She no longer ruled the seas. Japan and America    both   
surpassed her.    They presented no immediate problem to Germany, though a reckoning with   
the United States always lay in the future. 
 548 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
If militarily England was through, why was she not surrendering? 
 
Obviously, because she hoped for deliverance from the Soviet Union, or the United States, or   
both.    America was far off and almost unarmed. 
 
Russia, on the other hand, was rapidly rearming, at our very borders, and openly threatening   
the lifeblood of Germany at Ploesti. 
 
True, she was attempting to mollify us, in the usual crude fashion of Russian diplomacy, by   
sending wheat and oil; but in return she was receiving machinery for arming herself against us.   
To be dependent for long in this fashion on a Stalin was intolerable. 
 
Our bid for world empire was always a race against time.    Germany was much smaller than  its   
two great rivals, the Soviet Union and the United States of America.    Its advantage lay only in   
its unity of purpose, its discipline, and the forceful leadership of Hitler.    By 1941 it was clear   
that Franklin Roosevelt intended to get into the battle as soon as he could convert his industries   
to war, and delude his unwilling countrymen into following him; and it was equally clear that   
Stalin was only seeking a safe cowardly way to cut Germany's throat at Ploesti. 
 
Hitler put the case plainly in a frank and eloquent letter to Mussolini, on the eve of June 22:   
"Soviet Russia and England are equally interested in a Europe... 
 
rendered prostrate by a long war.... Behind these two countries stands the North American   
Union, goading them on.... I have therefore, after constantly racking my brains, finally reached   
the conclusion to cut the noose before it can be drawn tight." 
 
Was Barbarossa Sound? 
 
The argument that Hitler should have finished off England first has no realistic basis. 
 
Hitler resembled Caesar in his determination to take, wherever it could be found, the lands and   
the resources his nation wanted.    He was like Alexander in his broad vision of a new peaceful   
world order.    But in his strategy he was Napoleonic, for like Napoleon his central problem was   
that    he    was    surrounded    by    enemies.    The Napoleonic solution    was to    use    speed,   
energy,   
surprise, and extreme concentration of his forces at the attack point, in order to knock off his   
foes one at a time.      This was what Hitler did.      He always had a brilliant if somewhat   
adventurous sense of grand strategy; only his dilettantish interference in tactical operations,   
and his inability to be soldierly in the clutch, were ruinous. 
 
In May of 1940 he had allotted a mere two dozen divisions in the east to confront the more   
than two hundred divisions of the Red Army, while he finished France and drove the disarmed   
British remnant off the continent.    it was a fantastic gamble, but a perspicacious one. 
 
Stalin, who might have taken Berlin, proved only to happy to let Germany destroy France,   
while he grabbed lond in the Baltic and the Balkans. 
 
In 1941 the Soviet Union had grown much stronger.    It had moved within a hundred miles of   
Ploesti. It had gained control of the Baltic Sea. It had massed on its borders, confronting   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Germany and its conquered Polish territory, more than three million soldiers. And it was   
demanding a free hand in the Dardanelles, Bulgaria, and Finland. 
 
These demands, brought by Molotov in November 1940, were the last straw. 
 
Hitler felt he really had only three choices.    He could shoot himself, leaving the German people   
to negotiate a surrender; he could attempt the inconclusive task of subjugating England with   
the carnage of a Channel crossing, opening himself meantime to a treacherous assault from the   
east; or he could ignore neutralized, prostrate England, and attempt to realize his entire historic   
aim, in the hour of his greatest strength, in one devastating blow.    Barbarossa was the solution:   
a one-front Napoleonic thrust, not the opening of a true two-front war. 
 
Unprejudiced military historians of the future will never be able/ to fault Hitler for turning east.   
From the start he was playing against odds.      He lost his well-calculated risk through a   
combination of operational errors and misfortunes, and the historic accident that at this hour he   
was opposed by a ruthless, spidery genius of the same metal-Franklin Roosevelt. 
 
The Role of Roosevelt 
 
Roosevelt's essential problem in 1941 was timing.    He was playing from temporary weakness   
against an opponent playing from top strength. 
 
The weakness of the American President was both internal and external. 
 
Where the German people were united behind their leader, the American people, confused and   
nonplussed by Roosevelt's supercilious and untrustworthy personality, were divided. Where   
Hitler disposed of the greatest armed forces on earth, at their peak of strength and fighting trim,   
Roosevelt had no Army, no Air Force, and a dispersed, ill-trained Navy.    How then could the   
American President bring any weight to bear? 
 
Yet he did it.    He was well trained in the devices of impotence, having won the presidency in a   
wheelchair. 
 
The first thing he had to do was strengthen Churchill's hand. 
 
Only Churchill, the amateur military adventurer with his obsessive hatred of Hitler, could keep   
England in the war.    Churchill was having a wonderful time playing general and admiral, as his   
memoirs relate. 
 
However, under his leadership the Empire was going down the drain. 
 
England's one chance to save it lay in getting rid of its grand-talking Prime Minister, and   
electing a responsible politician to make peace with Germany.    Had this occurred, the present   
world map would look unguessably different, but the pink areas of the British Empire would   
still stretch around the globe.    Roosevelt's masterstroke of Lend-Lease kept Churchill in power.   
The Americans sent the British precious little in 1941.    But Lend-Lease gave this brave, beaten   
people hope, and wars are fought with hope. 
 550 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hope was also the main commodity Franklin Roosevelt sent the Soviet Union in 1941, though   
supplies started to trickle through in November and December. 
 
Stalin knew the gargantuan industrial potential of America.    That knowledge, and Roosevelt's   
pledges of help, stiffened him to fight. 
 
He sensed that while Roosev would never sacrifice much American blood to save the Soviet   
Union, he    would    probably send the    Russians    all    kinds    of arms,    so that    Slav bravery and   
selfsacrifice could fight the American battle for world hegemony. 
 
The Convoy Decision 
 
Roosevelt's instinct for subtle and breathtaking chicanery on a world scale was never better   
displayed than in his conduct on the question of the Atlantic convoys. 
 
Most Americans were indifferent to the European war in May 1941. 
 
The soundest people were against intervening.    Roosevelt Managed to find an unpleasant name   
for them: "isolationists."    However, in the circles around him, his sycophants kept urging him   
to initiate convoying of American ships to England. 
 
Indeed, it made very little sense to keep loading up English ships, only to have America's food   
and arms go to the ocean bottom. 
 
Roosevelt obstinately refused to convoy.    He had already received intelligence of the coming   
attack on Russia.    In fact the whole world seemed to know it was coming, except Stalin.    The   
last thing he wanted to do was interfere.    He saw in it the inevitable slaughter of vast numbers   
of Germans.    This prospect wormed his heart. 
 
But an outbreak of war in the Atlantic could have halted Barbarosso. Hitler could have   
countermanded the orders until dawn on June 22. An order to stand down from Barbarossa   
would have been obeyed with great relief by the German General Staff. 
 
Franklin Roosevelt understood what not too many other politicians of the time could grasthat   
even Hitler in the last analysis depended on public opinion.    The German people were united   
behind him and ready for any sacrifice, but they were not ready to commit plain suicide. 
 
News of war with the United States would have taken all the spiritual steam out of the drive on   
Russia. The German public had no understanding of America's military weakness. Despite   
Goebbels's propaganda, they remembered only that America's entry into the last war had   
spelled defeat. 
 
Roosevelt was ready for war with Germany,    he ardently desired it, but not until we were   
embroiled with the tough gigantic hordes of Stalin. So he kept his own counsel, put off his   
advisers, and kept twisting and turning under the probes of the press about convoying. 
 
His one course to ensure war between Germany and Russia was to hold off the convoying   
decision.    That was what he did.    He baffled and dismayed everybody around him, including   
 551 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
his own wife.    But he gained his grisly aim on June 22, when Hitler turned east. 
 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTE: Roon's defense of Barbarossa is unusual; most other German   
military writers do condemn it as the fatal opening of a two-front war.    it seems Roon either   
played a part in designing the operation, or that the plan submitted by the Army Staff agreed   
with his own study made at Supreme Headquarters. 
 
Every man cherishes his own ideas, particularly military men. 
 
The argument about the key role of the Ploesti oil fields is not emphasized in many other   
military histories. Hitler began planning to attack    Russia as far back as July 1940. The   
nonaggression pact was then less than a year old, and Stalin was punctiliously delivering vast   
quantities of war materials, including oil, to Germany. Hitler's act does look a bit like bad   
faith, if faith can be said to exist between two master criminals. The usual extenuation in   
German writings is that the Soviet troop buildups showed Stalin's intent to attack, and that   
Hitter merely forestalled him. But most German historians now concede that the Russian   
buildup was defensive.    Hitler always regarded the attack on Russia to gain Lebensroum as his   
chief policy.    it was natural for him to start planning it in July 1940, when his huge land armies   
were at maximum strength, with no other place to go.    This was the big picture, and the oil   
supply problem may have been a detail. 
 
Nevertheless, Roon's discussion illuminates Hitter's problems.-V.H. 
 
NE 22, 1941JU The players in our drama were now scattered around the earth.    Their stage had   
become the planet, turning in the solar spotlight that illumined half the scene at a time, and that   
moved always from east to west. 
 
At the first paling of dawn, six hundred miles to the west of Moscow, at exactly 3:15A.m. by   
myriads    of    German wristwatches,    German cannon    began    to    flash and    roar    along    a   
line    a   
thousand miles long, from the icy Baltic to the warm Black Sea.    At the same moment fleets of   
German Planes, which had taken off some time earlier, crossed the borders and started   
bombing Soviet airfields, smashing up aircraft on the ground by the hundreds.    The morning   
stars still twinkled over the roads, the rail lines, and the fragrant fields, when the armored   
columns and infantry divwons-multitudes upon multitudes of young healthy helmeted Teutons   
in gray battle rigme rolling or walking toward the orangestreaked dark east, on the flat Polish   
plains that stretched toward Moscow, Leningrad, and Kiev. 
 
A sad and shaken German ambassador told Foreign Minister Molotov in Moscow, shortly after   
sunrise, that since Russia    was    obviously about    to attack    Germany,    the Leader    had wisely   
ordered the Wehrmacht to strike first in self-defense.    The oval gray slab of Molotov's face, we   
are told, showed a very rare emotion-surprise.    History also records that Molotov said, "Did we   
deserve this?"    The GERMAN ambassador, his message delivered, slunk out of the room.    He   
had worked all his life to restore the spirit of Rapallo, the firm alliance of Russia and Germany.   
Eventually Hitler had him shot. 
 
Molotov's surprise at the invasion was not unique. Stalin was surprised. Since his was the   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
only word or attitude in Russia that mattered, the Red Army and the entire nation were   
surprised. The attack was an unprecedented tactical success, on a scale never approached   
before or since.    Three and a half million armed men surprised four and a half million armed   
men.    The Pearl Harbor surprise attack six months    later involved, by contrast, only some   
thousands of combatants on each side. 
 
Communist historians use events to prove their dogmas.    Ts makes for good propaganda but   
bad record-keeping.    Facts that are hard to fit into the Party theories tend to slide into oblivion.   
Many facts of this most gigantic of land wars, which the Russians call Velikaya   
Otechestvennaya Voina, 'The Great Patriotic War"-'Second World War" is not a phrase they   
favor-may never be known. The Communist historians assert that Stalin was to blame for   
neglecting intelligence warnings, and that is why the German surprise attack was successful.    It   
is a very simple way to look at the amazing occurrence.    So far as it goes, it is true. 
 
Sunlight touched the red Krembn towers, visible from the windows of Leslie Slote's flat, and   
fell on an opened letter from Natalie Henry in Rome, lying on his desk by the window.  
 
Slote had gone to bed very late and he was still asleep.    Natalie had sent him a joyous screed,   
for suddenly Aaron Jastrow had received his passport! He actually had it in hand and they   
were getting ready to leave on a Finnish freighter sailing early in July; and going by ship would   
even enable Aaron to retrieve much of his library.    Knowing nothing of Byron's action at the   
White House, Natalie had written to thank Slote in effervescent pages.    The news astonished   
the Foreign Service man, for in Italy he had felt he was encountering the cotton-padded stone   
wau that was a State Department specialty. In his answer, which lay unfinished beside her   
letter, he took modest credit for the success, and then explained at length why he thought the   
rumored impending invasion of Russia was a false alarm, and why he was sure the Red Army   
would crush a German attack if by chance one came. 
 
Trying to find gracious words about Natalie's pregnancy, he had given up and gone to bed.    By   
the time his alarm clock woke him, his letter was out of date; but he did not yet know it. 
 
Peering out of the window, he -,aw the usual morning sights of Moscow: a hazy blue sky, men   
in caps and young women in shawls walking to work, a crowded rusty bus wobbling up a hill,   
old women standing in line at the milk store, more old women queueing at a bread store.    The   
Kremlin loomed across the river, huge, massive, still, the walls dark red in the morning sun, the   
multiple gold domes gleaming on the cathedrals. 
 
There were no air raid alarms.    There were as yet no loudspeaker or radio reports.    It was a   
scene of tranquil peace.      Stalin and Molotov were waiting a while before sharing their   
astonishment with the people they had led into this catastrophe. But at the front, several   
million Red Army men were already sharing it and trying to recover from it before the   
Germans could kill them all. 
 
Knowing nothing of this, Slote went to the embassy with a light heart, hoping to dispose of   
some overdue work on this quiet Sunday. He found the building in a most un-sabbathlike   
turmoil; and there he learned, with a qualm in his gut, that once again the Germans were   
 553 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
coming. 
 
The sunrise slid westward to Minsk.    Its first rays along a broad silent street fell on a clean- 
shaven workingman in a cloth cap and a loose worn suit dusted all over with flour Had Natalie   
Henry been walking this street, she could not possibly have recognized her relative, Berel   
Jastrow.    Shorn of a beard, the broad flat Slavic face with its knobby peasant nose gave him a   
nondescript East European look, as did the shoddy clothing. He might have been a Pole, a   
Hungarian, or a Russian, and he knew the three languages well enough to pass as any of these.   
Though over fifty, Berel always walked fast, and this morning he walked faster.    At the bakery,   
on a German shortwave radio he kept behind flour sacks, he had heard Dr. Goebbels from   
Berlin announce the attack, and in the distance, just after leaving work, he had heard a familiar   
noise: the thump of bombs.    He was concerned, but not frightened. 
 
Natalie Henry had encountered Berel as a devout prosperous merchant, the happy father of a   
bridegroom.    Berel had another side. 
 
He had served on the eastern front in the Austrian army in the last war. 
 
He had been captured by the Russians, had escaped from a prison camp, and had made his way   
back through the forests to Austrian lines. 
 
In the turmoils of 1916 he had landed in a mixed German and Austrian unit. 
 
Early in his army service he had learned to bake and to cook, so as to avoid eating forbidden   
foods.    He    had lived for    months on    bread, or roasted potatoes, or boiled cabbage, while   
cooking savory soups and stews which he would not touch. He knew army life, he could   
survive in a forest, and he knwe how to get along with Germans, Russians, and a dozen minor   
Danubian nationalities, Anti-Semitism was the normal state of things to Berel Jastrow. It   
frightened him no more than war and he was just as practiced in dealing with it. 
 
He turned off the main paved avenue, and walked a crooked way through dirt streets and   
alleys, past one-story wooden houses, to a courtyard where chickens strutted clucking in the   
mire, amid smells of breakfast, woodsmoke, and barnyard. 
 
'You've finished work early," said his daughter-in-law, stirring a pot on a wood-burning oven   
while holding a crying baby on one arm.    She was visibly pregnant again; and with a kerchief   
on her cropped hair, and her face pinched and irritable, the bride of a year and a half looked   
fifteen years older.    In a corner, her husband in a cap and sheepskin jacket murmured over a   
battered Talmud volume.    His beard too was gone, and his hair cut short.    Three beds, a table,   
three chairs, and a crib filled the tiny hot room. All four dwelled there. Berel's wife and   
daughter had    died in the winter of 1939    Of the spotted fever that had swept bombedout   
Warsaw.    At that time the Germans had not gotten around to walling up the Jews; and using   
much    of his stored money for bribes, Berel Jastrow    had bought himself,    his son, and his   
daughter-in-law out of the city, and had joined the trickle of refugees heading eastward to the   
Soviet Union through back roads and forests. 
 
The Russians were taking in these people and treating them better than the Germans had,   
 554 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
though most had to go to lonely camps beyond the Urals. With this remnant of his family Berel   
had made his way to Minsk, where some relatives lived.    Nearly all of the city's bakers were   
off in the army, so the Minsk bureau for aliens had let him stay. 
 
"I'm home early because the Germans are coming again." Accepting a cup of tea from the   
daughter-in-law, Berel sank into a chair and smiled sadly at her stricken expression.    "Didn't   
you hear the bombs?" 
 
"Bombs?    What bombs?"    His son closed the book and looked up with fright on his pale bony   
face.    "We heard nothing.    You mean they're fighting the Russians now?" 
 
"It just started.    I heard it on the radio.    The bombs must have come from airplanes.    I suppose   
the Germans were bombing the railroad. 
 
The front is very far away." 
 
The woman said wearily, shushing the wailing baby as it pounded her with a little fist, "They   
won't beat the Red Army so fast." 
 
The son stood.    "Let's leave in the clothes we're wearing." 
 
'And go where?"    his father said. 
 
"East.    f Berel said, "Once we do, we may not be able to stop till we're in Siberia." 
 
"Then let it be Siberia." 
 
"Sibe God mighty, Mendel, I don't want to go to Siberia," said the wife, patting the peevish   
baby. 
 
"Do you remember how the Germans acted in Warsaw?"    Mendel said. 
 
"They're wild animals." 
 
"That was the first few weeks.    They calmed down.    We kept out of the way and we were all   
right, weren't we?"    the father said calmly. 
 
"Give me more tea, please.    Everybody expected to be murdered. 
 
So? 
 
The typhus and the cold were worse than the Germans." 
 
"They killed a lot of people." 
 
"People who didn't follow the rules.    With the Germans, you have to follow the rules.    And   
keep out of their sight." 
 
"Let's leave today." 
 
"Let's wait a week," said the father.    "They're three hundred kilometers away.    Maybe the Red   
 555 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Army will give them a good slap in the face. 
 
I know the manager in the railroad ticket office.    If we want to, we can get out in a few hours.   
Siberia is far off, and it's no place for a Jew." 
 
"You don't think we should leave today?"    said the son. 
 
"No." 
 
"All right."    Mendel sat down and opened his book. 
 
"I'm putting food on the table," said his wife. 
 
"Give me a cup of tea," said her husband.    "I'm not hungry.    And make that baby stop crying,   
please." 
 
Clever though he was, Berel Jastrow was making a serious mistake. 
 
The Germans were jumping off nearer Minsk than any other Soviet city,    bringing another   
surprise, compared with which even their invasion of Russia has since paled in the judgment of   
men. 
 
Bright morning sunshine bathed the columns of soldiers that crawled like long gray worms on   
the broad green earth of Soviet-occupied Poland. 
 
Behind the advancing soldiers, out of range of the fire Hashes and smoke of the cannonading,   
certain small squads travelled, in different uniforms and under different orders. They were   
called    Einsatzgruppen,    Special    Action Units, and they were something    unparalleled    in the   
experience of the human race.    To place and understand these Special Action Units, one needs   
a brief clear picture of the invasion. 
 
Much of the European continent in that area is a low-lying, soggy saucer almost like   
everglades, spreading over thousands of square miles. 
 
This big swamp, the Pripet Marshes, has always confronted western invaders of Russia.    They   
have had to go south or north of it.    Adolf Hitler's generals, intending to break the Soviet state   
with one sharp blow in a few summer weeks, were hitting north and south of the great swamp   
at the same time. 
 
But the Special Action Units had no military purpose. Their mission concerned the Jews.   
From the time of Catherine the Great, Russia had compelled its millions of Jews to live in the   
"Pale," a borderland to the west, made up of districts taken in war from Poland and Turkey.   
The revolution had ended the Pale, but most of the Jews, impoverished and used to their towns   
and villages, had stayed where they were. 
 
The border defense belt held by the Red Army, from the Baltic to the Black Sea, was therefore   
precisely where most of the Soviet Union's Jews lived.      The Special Action Units were   
travelling executioners, and their orders were to kill Russia's Jews without warnin and m,ithout   
regard to age or sex.    These orders were unwritten; they came down from Adolf Hitler through   
 556 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Goering and Heydrich to the "Security Service," Germany's federal police, which organized the   
units.    These squads had collateral orders to shoot summarily all commissars-political officers- 
of the Red Army.    But these latter orders were on paper. 
 
There were four Special Action Units in all, placed to follow close on the three giant prongs of   
the German assault. 
 
Army Group South, composed of Germans and Rumanians, was striking into the Ukraine,   
south of the marshes and along the Black Sea into the Crimea.    With them came two Special   
Action Units, for here the Jewish settlement was dense. 
 
Army Group Center was setting forth on the straight short road Napoleon took-Minsk,   
Smolensk, Vyazma, Borodino, Moscow. This road points north of the great swamp like an   
arrow for the capital.    It passes between the headwaters of two rivers, one flowing north and   
the other south, the Dvina and the Dnieper.    Military men call it the dry route and greatly favor   
it.    With this main central thrust travelled another Special Action Unit. 
 
Army Group North was driving up along the Baltic toward Leningrad, and a Special Action   
Unit followed close behind. 
 
Counting officers and men, there were about three thousand of these travelling executio ners all   
told in the four units. They were setting out to kill between three and four million people,   
which figured out to more than ten thousand murders for each man. It was clearly beyond   
them. 
 
The plan was to start the process, and then recruit native anti-Semites and German soldiers to   
complete the gruesome, unheard-of, but entirely real job they were setting out to do. 
 
The Germans in the ranks of the Special Action Units were recruited mainly from the civil   
services:    policemen,    detectives,    clerks,    and the    like.    There were    no lunatics    or criminals   
among them. 
 
The officers    were mostly lawyers, doctors, or businessmen, who through age or disability   
could not fight in the army.      Many    had high university degrees; one officer had been a   
theologian.    Officers and men alike were good Germans, the sort of men who did not drive past   
red traffic lights, who liked opera and concerts, who read books, who wore ties and jackets,   
who had wives and children, who for the most part went to church and sang hymns, and who   
worked in little weekend gardens.    Obedience was a German virtue.    They had been recruited   
and ordered to kill these people.    They had been told that the Jews were Germany's enemies,   
and that the only way to deal with them was to kill every last one of them, down to the babes in   
arms and their mothers. 
 
This word came from above.    A prime German virtue was to accept such words from above   
and carry them out. 
 
Strangely, the Jews already in German hands, in the territories stretching west from the   
invasion line to the Atlantic Ocean, were not yet being killed en masse.    Nor was a program   
 557 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
even under way to kill them. 
 
A mistaken idea exists that the Germans began killing Jews as soon as Hitler took power in   
1933- That is untrue.      They robbed the Jews, as they later robbed all the peoples they   
conquered, but the extortion was usually done under legal expropriation rules.    Jews were often   
insulted, sometimes beaten, sometimes tortured, sometimes done to death or worked to death. 
 
But as late as June 22, 1941, only a few concentration camps existed, and Most Of the inmates   
were German opponents of Hitler.    The existence of the camps filled the Jews with terror, but   
the Germans themselves were terrorized, too. 
 
By June 1941 the European Jews were living a vile life and were yielding the last scraps of   
their property to the squeeze of German law.    But they were living.    "One can live under any   
law," a German Jewish newspaper put it. 
 
So it happened that a Jew was safer behind the German lines, just then, than ahead of them.   
The Warsaw Jews, for instance, had reorganized themselves under the draconic Nazi rules.   
Though overwork, starvation, and cusease were taking a toll, they were in the main managing   
to survive.    At this point the Jastrows would have been somewhat better off not to have left   
Warsaw. 
 
But Berel Jastrow, astute as he was and schooled in living with anti Semitism, had not   
anticipated the Special Action Units.    They were something new. 
 
Adolf Hitler had given the order for the Einsatzgruppen back in March, so they may not have   
been much in his mind on June 22.    He was following the progress of the invasion in a map   
room,    where the light remained    cool and gray long after sunrise. Disliking sunshine, the   
Fuhrer had ordered his eastern campaign headquarters, which he dubbed Wolfsscre, to be built   
facing north.    A rail spur in a forest of east Prussia, not far from the jump-off line of Army   
Group North, led to this 'Wolf's Lair," a compound of concrete bunkers and wooden huts   
surrounded by barbed wire, watchtowers, and minefields. Wolfsschanze, in fact, singularly   
resembled a concentration camp. 
 
At the elbow of General Jodl stood one of the youngest and newest of German generals, Armin   
von Roon.    Hitler did not like Roon and showed his dislike by abruptness.    Roon came from a   
titled family, and spoke a polished Berlin German that contrasted sharply with Hitler's folksy,   
coarse Bavarian speech.    His uniform, faultlessly tailored, contrasted too with Hitler's oversize,   
baggy soldier's coat.    Above all, Roon had a beaked nose that looked a bit Jewish.    But as a   
colonel in Operations, he had taken part in three elaborate Barbarossa war games. His memory   
was unusual; he knew to the hour the projected advances and had the picture of the thousand- 
mile-wide battlefield by heart. The Soviet Union was for Roon rather like a table model,   
spectacularly larger than the ones used in the games.    The troops were men, instead of pinned   
and numbered flags, but the principles and the scenario were the same, at least to start with.   
(At the Nuremberg trials, Roon denied knowledge of the Special Action Units, until confronted   
with the order to kill the commissars, countersigned by him for the Operations Section.    Then   
he recalled it, but pleaded ignorance of the Einsatzgruppe-n's other purpose. The tribunal   
 558 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
judged this farfetched, like some other points in Roon's defense.) Until three hours after sunup   
of the invasion day, Roon dodged the Leader's harsh nagging questions about the trend of   
ground operations. 
 
Then he gave his judgment that things were going better than planned in the north; much better   
in the center; worse in the south. 
 
It proved an accurate estimate, and for a long period thereafter Hitler warmed to the beak- 
nosed general. 
 
Here then was the laying down of the first cards in the giant poker hand.    Hitler and his staff   
had guessed that the Russians would mass most strongly in the center, north of the Pripet River   
bogs, to shield their capi. But whoever had disposed of the Russian forces-Stalin, or the   
generals to whom he Jistened-had bet that the Germans would make their main drive south, to   
seize the Ukrainian farmlands and the Caucasus oil fields. 
 
Perhaps this judgment had come from reading Mein Kampf, in which Hitler openly called this   
seizure his life's aim. At any rate, the largest mass of Russian defenders lay south of the   
marsh. Thus the battle line was unbalanced. The Germans found themselves slowed in the   
south, but punching through with surprising ease toward Moscow.    The first big Russian clity   
in their path was Minsk. 
 
When the sun rose in Rome, Aaron Jastrow was already working at his desk, in his suite in the   
Hotel Excelsior.    By now Dr.    Jastrow's book on Constantine needed only four or five more   
chapters, and he was very happy with it.    At precisely eight as usual, the unchanging waiter   
brought the unchanging breakfast.    Jastrow finished it and was settling back at his desk when a   
bedroom door opened noisily, and Natalie waddled in, wearing a pink bathrobe.    Pregnancy,   
beside making her shapeless, had hollowed her cheeks and her eyes, and exaggerated her full   
mouth. "My God, have you heard the latest?" 
 
"Has something good happened?" 
 
"That depends.    The Germans have invaded Russia." 
 
"What!    Are you sure?" 
 
"It was just on the eight o'clock news." 
 
"Bless me."    Jastrow took off his glasses and rubbed them with a handkerchief.    "Why, when   
did it start?" 
 
"At davrn today." 
 
"Well, I declare!    The villain with the mustache is really throwing himself into his part, isn't   
he? A two-front war again," Natalie walked to the serving table on wheels that bore the   
breakfast remnants. "Would this coffee still be hot?" 
 
"Yes, help yourself." 
 559 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"The doctor told me not to eat or drink before he examined me, but I can't help it. I'm   
ravenous."    Natalie began to wolf a sweet roll with coffee.    "You'd better call the ambassador."   
'I suppose so.    But Russia's very far off, and what difference can it make to us?    It's pleasant,   
really, to think of Hitler dwindling off into Russia.    Shades of Napoleon, let us hope." 
 
"If Finland gets dragged in, the Vaasa won't sail." 
 
"Dear me, yes.    You're completely right.    Any news about Finland'r" 
 
"Not that I heard."    Dropping heavily into a chair, Natalie glanced around at the broad room,   
furnished with maroon plush chairs and sofas, gilt mirrors, and marble statues.    "God, this suite   
is oppressive. just to get out of it will be so Marvelous!" 
 
"My dear, it's spacious, and we've got it for the price of two small rooms." 
 
"I know, I know, but why not? The hotel's empty, except for Germans. It's giving me the   
creeps." 
 
"I imagine they're in every hotel." 
 
Natalie said with a gloomy look, "No doubt.    Yesterday I recognized a Gestapo man on the   
elevator.    Byron and I saw him in Lisbon.    I know he's the same one.    He has an odd scar like   
this"-she made an L in the air with one finger-"on his forehead." 
 
'Surely that's a coincidence.    Did he recognize you?" 
 
"He gave me quite a stare."    "I wouldn't worry about it.    Those men stare for a living.    What did   
the doctor say yesterday, by the way? 
 
Everything normal?" 
 
"Oh, yes."    She sounded uncertain.    "He just wanted to see me once more. I'm going to bed   
now for a while." 
 
"To bed again?" 
 
"He wants me to rest a lot.    My appointment's not till noon." 
 
"Well, all right.    I do have this chapter just about ready for smooth copy."    "Aaron"-Natalie   
paused, chewing her underlip-"he doesn't want me to type for a while.    It tires my back.    Just   
until this fatigue clears up." 
 
'I see."    Jastrow sighed, and glanced around the room.    agree, this place is not very cheerful.   
When I think of my lovely house standing empty... Natalie, do you suppose this Russian war   
changes things at all?    I mean-" 
 
"Jesus Christ, Aaron," Natalie snapped most disagreeably, "are you going to suggest you might   
still remain on the same continent with the Germans?" 
 
"My dear"-Jastrow made a very Jewish gesture, a hunching of shoulders and an upward wave   
 560 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
of both hands-"don't be impatient with me. 
 
You were a baby in the last war, but to me so little time has elapsed between them!    It's just a   
continuation after a truce.    Well, the talk we had then of the Huns spearing Belgian babies on   
bayonets and cutting off the breasts of nuns!    And then I spent a year in Munich with some   
truly wonderful people. There are Germans, and Germans-oh, gracious, did I tell you that   
there's a letter from Byron?" 
 
What?    Where?"    'the waiter left it in the hall, I think." 
 
She ran heavily out of the room, snatched the white envelope, took it to her bedroom, and read   
it panting.    It was a dully written letter, with no news except that he had been detached from   
the S-45, to go to a new fleet submarine, the Tuna, in the Pacific, and that Lieutenant Aster had   
been ordered to an older boat, the Devilfish. But the words of love and loneliness    were   
plentiful, if banal.    She undressed, got into bed, and greedily read and reread the pages until the   
sentences lost meaning. 
 
The Italian doctor had told her that the blood stains, only two or three small ones, might mean   
nothing, but that she had to rest, to be sure of keeping the baby.    Natalie intended to spend the   
next two weeks in bed. 
 
The line between night and day glided across the Atlantic Ocean, for the most part passing over   
fluffy cloud and empty wrinkling blue water; very rarely, over specks in orderly rows, and   
other s randomly scattered. The orderly specks were convoys; the random specks, German   
submarines trying to hunt them down or American ships trying to spot the submarines and   
warn the convoys.    Bringing light and warmth indifferently to the hunters and the hunted in this   
far-flung three-way game, which the participants called the Battle of the Atlantic, the sunrise   
slid onto the next landmass, the New World. 
 
Soon the windows of the CBS building in New York flamed with morning sun, but in the   
tomblike broadcasting floors there was only the same timeless electric light.    The corridors and   
cubicles of the CBS news section, despite the early hour, were swarming and bustling.    Hugh   
Cleveland, badly in need of a shave, sat at his old desk, scrawling on a yellow pad and puffing   
at a long cigar. He had not quit the Who's in Town program, despite the popularity of the   
amateur hour.    The news feature show would still be his bread and butter, he liked to say, when   
the amateur fad was forgotten.    Out of the portable radio on his desk came the sonorous accents   
of Winston Churchill: No one has been a more consistent opponent of Communism than I   
ave... I will unsay no word that I have spoken about it. But all this fades allay before the   
spectacle which is now unfolding.... I see the ten thousand villages of Russia, -wlwe maidens   
laugh and children play. 
 
I see advancing upon all this in hideous onslaught... the dull, drilled, docile, brutish mises of   
the Hun soldiery, plodding on like a swarm of crawling lo. 
 
His telephone began to ring.    He tried to ignore it, then snatched it and snarled, 'Goddamn it,   
I'm listening to Churchill.... Oh! 
 561 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sorry, Chet.    listen, if you're near a radio, Turn the guy on.    He is sensational!" 
 
Leaning back in his swivel chair, he cocked one ear toward the radio, holding the phone to the   
other. 
 
'Behind all this glare, behind all this storm, I see that small group of villainous men who plan,   
organize, and launch this cataract of horrors upon mankind. 
 
"Chet, of course I thought of it. The minute the news broke, I sent a wire to the Russian   
consulate here.    Naturally, I cowdn't get through on the telephone.    About an hour ago, they   
finally called me. 
 
Madeline Henry's gone over there, and they've promised they'll send somebody back with her.   
No, I don't know who, not yet.    Hell, this morning their scrubwoman would be news!" 
 
"Can you doubt what our policy will be? We have but one aim and one single, irrevocable   
purpose.    We ari -resolved to destroy Hitler and every vestige of the Nazi regime.    From this   
nothing will turn us-nothing. 
 
... Any man or state who fights against Nazidom will have our aid. Any man or state who ches   
with Hitler is our foe... 
 
'The Russian danger is our danger, and the danger of the United States..." 
 
Madeline scampered into the office, red-faced and shiny-eyed, and wildly pantomimed at her   
boss. 
 
"Hang on, Chet, she's here."    Hand over the receiver, Cleveland said, "What luck?" 
 
"I got the ambassador.    He's here in New York, and I got him." 
 
"Holy Jesus!      Are you kidding?      The ambassador?      What's his name, Ouskinsky?"   
"Oumansky."    She nodded excitedly.    "He's coming here at ten to nine. 
 
The consul's bringing him." 
 
"Hey, Chet, listen, will you?    That girl has got Ambassador Oumansky. 
 
I swear to Christ!    Oumansky!    Listen, I've got to get ready for him. Sure, sure.    Thanks."    He   
slammed down the receiver.    "How'd you do that, Madeline?    Why isn't he in Washington?"   
Churchill's voice was rising in peroration.    Cleveland snapped off the radio. 
 
"Hugh, I asked to see the consul and told this beefy girl at the desk that I was from the Who's   
in Town program.    That's all.    Next thing I knew I was in this big office, with a huge picture of   
Lenin staring down at me, and there was Ambassador Oumansky, and he said he'd come on the   
show. 
 
He's a nice man, with wonderful manners." 
 
'Fantastic!    Terrific!    Marry me!"    Cleveland looked at his watch and passed a hand over his   
 562 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
bristly face.    "Christ!    The Bolshie ambassador himself!    What luck!"    He jumped up, pulled   
the small girl into his arms, and gave her a kiss. 
 
Madeline broke free, blushing darkly, glancing over her shoulder at the open door, and   
straightening her dress. 
 
"You're a doll, Madeline.    Now listen.    While I clean up, how about drafting an intro and some   
questions and bringing them to me in the dressing room?" 
 
The ambassador arrived promptly.    Hugh Cleveland had not met a Russian Communist in his   
life, and he was amazed at Oumansky's excellent clothes, natural bearing, and smooth English.   
The consul was even smoother.    The two Russians settled themselves, perfectly at ease, at the   
microphones. 
 
"Mr. Ambassador, it is a privilege for me, and for Who's in Town, to welcome you at this   
historic moment-" Cleveland began, and got no further. 
 
"Thank you very much.    Since our two countries are now in a common struggle," Oumansky   
said, "I welcome the opportunity to give the American people the assurance of my country's   
fighting spirit on your popular program, "Who's in Town.      Allow me to read from Mr.   
Molotov's broadcast." 
 
The consul handed Oumansky a typewritten document, to the horror of Cleveland, whose iron   
rule it was to cut off prepared statements. 
 
"Well, Mr.    Ambassador, if I may simply say-" 
 
"thank you.    For brevity I have abridged the speech, but here are significant portions of Foreign   
Minister    Molotov's exact    words:    'Without any Claim    having    been    presented    to    the   
Soviet   
Union, without a declaration of war, German troops attacked our country, and bombed from   
their airplanes our cities. 
 
Cleveland held up a hand and tried to speak, but the ambassador rolled right on: "This unheard- 
of attack on our country is perfidy unparald in the history of civilized nations.      It was   
perpetrated despite a treaty on nonaggression between the USSR and Germany,    which the   
Soviet government has just faithfully abided by. 
 
"Mr.    Ambassador, about that treaty, if I may ask just one-" 
 
"Excuse me, I shall continue, and perhaps if time permits    we can have a discussion too,"   
Oumansky said with unruffled charm, and he went on reading sentences and paragraphs neatly   
underlined in purple ink. 
 
Cleveland made two more vain efforts to interrupt, which the ambassador Pleasantly ignored,   
proceeding to the last lines on the last page: 'The entire responsibility for this predatory attack   
on the Soviet Union falls on the German Fascist rulers... 
 
"'The Soviet government    ordered our troops to drive the German troops from the territory of   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
our country... 
 
"'Ours is a righteous cause.    The enemy shall be defeated. 
 
Victory will be ours."    "To these eloquent words," said Oumansky, "I have little to add.    I must   
return to my many official duties, and I thank you for this opportunity. 
 
He passed the paper to the consul, smiled at Cleveland, and moved as though to rise.   
Desperately, Cleveland struck in, "Mr.    Ambassador, I know how pressed you are in this tragic   
hour.    I won't detain you. 
 
just tell me this.    How will the American Communists react to the news? 
 
They've been violently advocating neutrality, you know.      They campaig"d tooth and nail   
against Lend-Lease.    Are they going to make a fast aboutface now?" 
 
Oumansky sat back placidly.    "Most certainly not.    As you know, the working class all over the   
world is in its nature peace-loving.    It has nothing to gain from war, and everything to lose.   
The war began as a struggle between imperialistic powers, so the workers-as, for instance, the   
American Communist Party, as you just mentioned-opposed the war. But the Soviet Union has   
no empire and no colonies.    It is simply a country of peasants and workers who want peace.    In   
attacking us, the German Fascists threw off their mask and revealed themselves as the brutish   
common enemy of mankind. Therefore all peoples will now unite in solidarity to crush the   
German Fascist beasts.    The American people too are a peaceloving people.    The Soviet people   
will count on their support of our righteous battle."    "Mr.    Ambassador-" 
 
"In this connection," said Oumansky, "the historic British pledge of full support, which Mr.   
Churchill has just given, will be of decisive influence, since Winston Churchill is so justly   
admired in the United States for his heroic stand against Hitlerism.    Good morning, and thank   
you very much." 
 
As Madeline escorted the Russians out of the studio, Cleveland was saying, looking after them   
with exasperation, 'Who's in Town has just brought you the exclusive first broadcast of the   
Russian ambassador to the United States, Mr.    Constantine Oumansky, on the German invasion   
of the Soviet Union." His voice shifted from dramatic resonance to oleaginous good cheer.   
"Well, folks, it's sort of a big jump from invasions to the amazing new improved Fome-Brite,   
isn't it?    But life does go on.    If dirt invades your kitchen, the new improved Fome-Brite is the   
modern way to fight back-" The sunrise, coming to Chicago, was invisible; a thunderstorm was   
blanketing the city.    Through dark pelting rain, Palmer Kirby was riding in a taxicab to a secret   
meeting of the President's Uranium Committee, which was the interviewing envineers from all   
over the country.    The purpose of the committee was to find out, from the practical men who   
had to do it, whether enough U-z35 could be produced within the predictable time span of the   
war-which was set at four or five more years-to make atomic bombs or power plants. Dr.   
Lawrence's letter had asked him to bring a feasibility report on manufacturing certain giant   
electromagnets. 
 
The men were old friends; over the years Kirby had supplied the Nobel Prize winner with   
 564 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
much specially built equipment for his cyclotron work. 
 
Palmer Kirby worked on the borderline where connnerce exploited science; he always referred   
to himself as a money-maker, but he had some scientific standing, because of his early work at   
the California Institute of Technology. Kirby knew what the giant electromagnets were for.   
His opinion on producing uranium for military purposes was definite. Not only could it be   
done; Kirby thought the Germans were well along to doing it.    The invasion of Russia struck   
him as a scary corroboration of this. 
 
Ordinary uranium looks like nickel.    Chemically it is lively, but nothing can make it blow up.   
its    strange radioactivity    will fog photographic    plates;    it may    feel    warmish;    and very long   
exposure to    it may give    a human    being    slight    burns. For better    or worse" in the    matter   
scattered through the universe, there is also a tiny trace of the stuff, chemically the same, but   
different in atomic structure: the explosive isotope U-235.    We know all about this now, but in   
1941 
 
scientists only guessed that a U-235 bomb might work.    It was all theory.    The problem was   
first, to find out whether a controlled chain reaction of uranium fission was possible, or   
whether some unknown fact of nature would stop it; second-if the firft answer was yes-to get   
enough pure uranium 235 to try exploding it; and third, if that worked, to produce enough of   
the stuff to cow the world.    When he heard the news of Hitler's attack on Russia, Kirby decided   
that the Germans must have succeeded at leastWith the first step. 
 
From his narrow vantage point, he saw the entire war as a race between Germans and   
Americans to make uranium 235 explode.      Everything else-submarine sinkings, land   
campaigns, air battles-more and more looked to him like vain blood-spillings, inconclusive   
obsolete gestures before this one big showdown, Hitler's plunge into Russia, opening a second   
front and releasing England from near doom, struck him as a madman's mistake-unless the   
Germans had successfully created a controlled chain reaction.    If Hitler had uranium bombs or   
could count on having them within a year or two, the war was decided, and the Germans were   
simply making a gigantic slave raid in Russia, preparatory to assuming the rule of the earth. 
 
From the information Kirby had, this appeared likely.    It was the Germans who had discovered   
uranium fission. In 1939 they had set aside the whole Kaiser Wilhelm Institut to work on   
military use of the discovery. 
 
In conquered Norway, intelligence reported, they were making large amounts of heavy water.   
There was only one possible military use for heavy water, the queer substance with the doubled   
hydrogen nucleus-as a neutron slower in uranium fission. 
 
The United States had no nuclear reactors, no technique for building one, no scientist who was   
sure a chain reaction could be created.    In the whole country there were not forty pounds of   
uranium suitable for experiments; there was no setup for producing ordinary uranium in   
quantity, let alone the very rare isotope 235 that might blow up; and for all the meetings of the   
Uranium Committee and the whisperings among scientists, the government had not yet spent   
on this project one hundred thousand dollars in cash.      Kirby estimated that by now the   
 565 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Germans, in their massive try for world empire, might have already spent, in the same effort,   
something like a billion dollars. 
 
The Uranium    Committee sat in    a    drab seminar    room, warm    and    smoky    despite    the open   
windows and the continuing thunderstorm outside. 
 
Elementary equations from an undergraduate course were chalked on the small dusty   
blackboard.      Kirby knew everybody who sat around the table except for two uniformed   
military visitors: an Army coloneland a Navy captain. The scientists were in shirt-sleeves,   
some with ties off and sleeves rolled up. Lyman Briggs, director of the National Bureau of   
Standards, was still chairman, and this further depressed Kirby. 
 
Briggs was a pleasant gray-haired bureau head to whom a thousand dollars was a spectacular   
Federal expenditure.    He wore his coat and tie. 
 
Dr.    Lawrence gave Kirby a friendly wave and turned to the military men sitting beside him.   
"This is Dr.      Kirby, president of Denver Electric Works-Colonel Thomas and Captain   
Kelleher." 
 
Kirby passed out copies of a mimeographed document and read the paper aloud, sometimes   
pausing for thunder crashes.      The committee listened with narrow-eyed attention-all but   
Captain Kelleher, a bald chain smoker with a big double chin, who stared straight ahead in a   
slump, now and then scratching through his blue and gold uniform at one place on his chest.   
The Army colonel, a studious-looking small man with a bad cough, kept eating lozenges from   
a paper box, while he made shorthand notes on the margins of Kirby's paper. 
 
Kirby was replying to questions posed to him by Lawrence in the letter: could he manufacture   
these giant electric magnets, and if so, what would be the probable costs and production time?   
Lawrence's    idea-which he was pusmng    with the peculiar    force and single-mindedness    that   
made him loved or hated by other scientists-was to produce uranium 235 by separating a   
stream of ionized molecules of uranium in a magnetic field; a method Kirby had once   
described to Victor Henry. 
 
There already existed a laboratory tool, the mass spectrograph, that worked this way. 
 
Lawrence wanted to make giant mass spectrographs to get uranium in sufficient quantities for   
war use.    Nothing like it had ever been done. 
 
The whole notion required-among other things-monster electromagnets which would keep an   
unwavering field.    The slightest voltage change would wash out the infinitesimal difference in   
the molecule paths Of U-238 
 
and U-235, on which the whole idea hung. 
 
When Kirby named a feasible date for delivering the first magnets, and the range of prices he   
would charge, the committeemen started glancing at each other.    He finished with a warning   
about supply problems requiring high priorities, and sat down.    Lawrence was beaming at him   
 566 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
through his round glasses. 
 
"Well, that's encouraging," Lyman Briggs said mildly, fingering his tie. "Of course, the price   
figures are still in the realm of pure fantasy." The Navy captain put in, "Dr.    Kirby, we've had   
fellows from General Electric and Westinghouse report on this.    They project twice as much   
time, more than twice as much money, and they shade those performance characteristics   
considerably." 
 
Palmer Kirby shrugged.    "Could well be." 
 
"Why should we take your word on feasibility against theirs?" 
 
Colonel Thomas said hoarsely, shaking a lozenge out of his box. 
 
Kirby said, "Colonel, I once worked at Westinghouse. They make everything that uses an   
electric current.    I make custom-designed equipment, and I specialize in electromagnets.    It's a   
narrow special , but it'sty mine. 
 
The Germans were way ahead of us at one POint.    I went to Germany. 
 
I studied their components and imported their nickel alloy cores. 
 
Westinghouse and General Electric don't know that area of technology as I do. They don't   
have to.    For special jobs in electromagnetics I can outperform them.    At least I'm claiming that   
I can, and I'm prepared to bid in these terms." 
 
When Palmer Kirby mentioned Germany, the glances went again around the table.    The Navy   
captain spoke up in a peevish voice.    "Are the Germans still ahead of us?" 
 
"On what, sir?" 
 
'(On anything.    On making these bombs, to get down to the short hairs." 
 
Kirby puffed at his pipe.    "Well, the self-confidence they've just showed isn't encouraging."    "I   
agree. Well, why don't we get going, then? All this committee seems to do is palaver."   
Kelleher sat up straight, glowering.    "I'm not a scientist, and I can't say I've taken much stock in   
these futuristic weapons, but by Christ if there's anything in them let's get cracking.    Let's go   
straight to the President and howl for money and action.    I can assure you the Navy will back   
the committee." Holding up a thin hand in dismay, Briggs said, "The President has more   
immediate things, Captain, requiring money and action." 
 
'I don't agree," Thomas said.    "More immediate than these bombs?" 
 
Briggs retorted, 'It's all pure theory, Colonel, years away from any Possible practical result." 
 
Captain Kelleher slapped his hand on the table. "Look, let me ask a real dumb question.   
What's Kirby talking about here? Is it the diffusion business, or the spectrograph business?   
Maybe I ought to know, but I don't." 
 567 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"The spectrograph business , Lawrence said in a fatherly tone. 
 
"All right.    Then, why don't you just shoot the works on that? 
 
You've got a Nobel Prize.    Why don't you send the President a red-hot plainlanguage memo   
that he can grasp?    Why do you keep fudging around on these other approaches?" 
 
"Because if we guess wrong on the basic approach," another scientist mildly observed, 'we may   
lose several years." 
 
Kirby could not resist saying, "Or lose the whole race to the Germans." 
 
The discussion halted. The heavy drumming of the rain for a moment or two was the only   
sound.    Briggs said, "Well!    These things are still very iffy, as the President likes to say.    We   
can't be going off half-cocked in this business, that much is certain.    In any case"-he turned to   
Kirby with an agreeable smile-"I don't think we need detain you.    Your report has been very   
useful.    Many thanks." 
 
Gathering up his papers, Kirby said, "Will you need me again, or do I go back to Denver?" 
 
"Don't rush off, Fred," Lawrence said. 
 
"Right.    I'll be at the Stevens." 
 
Kirby passed the morning in his hotel suite, listening to the radio bulletins and special reports   
on the invasion of Russia, and growing gloomier and gloomier.    The incessant rain, with the   
sporadic lightning and thunder, reinforced his dark mood.    He had not drunk before lunch in a   
long time, but he sent for a bottle of Scotch, and had it almost a third emptied when Lawrence   
called in high spirits. 
 
"Fred, you shone this morning.    I thought we might manage lunch, but the committee's sending   
out for coffee and sandwiches, and working straight on through. Meantime something has   
come up.    Do you have a minute?" 
 
"I'm just sitting here, listening to CBS broadcast the end of the world." 
 
Lawrence laughed.    "It won't end.    We'll beat the Germans to U-235, and that's the key to this   
war.    Their industrial base is far inferior to ours. 
 
But the committee will certainly have to change its ways.      The procedure is incredibly   
cumbersome.    This business right now, for instance. Intolerable!    One interview at a time, for   
secrecy, tying all of us up for days on end! We need one knowledgeable man in constant   
liaison with business andindustry, and we need him right away."Lawrence paused, and added,   
"We've just been talking about you." 
 
"Me?    No thanks."    "Fred, you're an engineer, you know business, and your gra.p of theory is   
adequate.    That's the desired combination, and it's rare.    Unfortunately, no job in the world is   
more important right now, and you know that." 
 568 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"But ye gods, who would I work for?    And report to?    Not the National Bureau of Standards,   
for God's sake!"    "That point is wide o For secrecy, you might just get a consulpe tant post in   
the Navy. 
 
Captain Kelleher is full of fire to get going, which rather amuses me. 
 
Years ago, Fermi came to the Navy with this entire project outlined. 
 
They turned him away as a crackpot.    The Navy turned away Enrico Fermi!  
 
Well, Fred?    Will you serve?" 
 
After a pause Kirby said, "Where would I be posted?" 
 
'It would have to be in Washington."      Kirby was silent so long that Lawrence added,   
"Something wrong With going to Washington?" 
 
"I didn't    say that, but    if you    want those    electromagnets    built-I, "that's    a year    away,    even   
assuming the approach is approved and the money appropriated. This must be done now.   
What do you say?" 
 
This was Lawrence in his urgent and imperious vein, which Kirby knew well.    He considered   
Lawrence possibly the most brilliant man alive. 
 
Kirby was several years older    than the Nobel Prize    winner.      He    had    given    up    a straight   
scientific career and gone into industry after getting his PhD largely because of his encounters   
with Lawrence and a few other men much younger than himself and unreachably more   
brilliant. 
 
They had made him feel outclassed and deflated.    To be urged now by this man to take on a   
task of this importance was irresistible. 
 
"I hope to hell I'm not offered the job," he said.    "If I am, I'll accept." 
 
By the time the sun rose over San Francisco, the line between night and day had travelled   
halfway around the earth, and the invasion of the Soviet Union was half a day old.    Masses of   
men had been killed, most of them Russians, and the Soviet air force had lost hundreds of   
airplanes-or Perhaps more than a thousand; the disaster was already beyond precise   
documenting. 
 
In the officers' club at the Mare Island Navy Yard, at a window tab], in the sunshine, several   
submarine skippers were chatting about the invasion Over ham and eggs. There was little   
dispute over the outcome. All agreed that the Soviet Union would be crushed; some gave the   
Red Army as long as six weeks, others foresaw the end in three weeks or ten day,.    s These   
young professional officers were not a narrow-minded or prejudiced handful; their view was   
held in the armed forces of the United States right to the top.    The wretched showing of the   
Red Army against Finland had confirmed the judgment that Communism, and Stalin's bloody   
purges, had reduced Russia to a nation of no military account. Arne can war plans, in June   
 569 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
1941, ignored the Soviet Union in estimating the world strategic picture.    The submariners at   
Mare Island, peacefwly gossiping at breakfast about the spread of the holocaust on the other   
side of the world, were expressing only what the service as a whole believed. 
 
The main topic of discussion was whether or not the Japanese would now strike; and if so,   
where.    These few lieutenant commanders inclined to agree that so long as the President kept   
up his suicidal policy of letting them buy more and more oil and scrap iron, the japs would   
probably hold off.      But the consensus lasted only until Branch Hoban of the Devilfish   
challenged it. 
 
No skipper in the squadron had more prestige.    Hoban's high standing in his class, his chilling   
air of competence, his sharp bridge game, his golf shooting in the seventies, his ability to hold   
liquor, his beautiful wife, his own magazine-cover good looks, all added up to an almost   
suspiciously glamorous facade.      But the facade was backed by performance.      Under his   
command the Devilfish had earned three E's in engineering and gunnery, and in fleet   
maneuvers in May he had sneaked the Devilfish inside a destroyer screen and hypothetically   
sunk a battleship.    He was clearly a corner beaded for flag rank.    When Lieutenant Commander   
Hoban talked, others listened. 
 
Hoban argued that the world situation was like a football game, an d that in Asia, the Russian   
Siberian army was the player facing japan. 
 
With this latest move, Hitler had sucked the Russian man back toward the other wing, to be   
held as Stalin's last reserve.    This was japan's big chance.    The Nips now had a clear field to   
run the ball from China south to Singapore, the Celebes, and Java, cleaning up all the rich   
European possessions.    If only they moved fast enough, they could go over the line before the   
United States could pull itself together and interfere. He broke off elaborating this favorite   
metaphor of servicemen and left the breakfast table when he saw his new executive officer   
motioning to him from the doorway. 
 
lieutenant Aster handed him a dispatch from Commander, Submarines Pacific: DEVILFISH   
OVERHAUL CANCELLED EXCEPTION P&PAMS VITAL OPERATIONAL READINESS   
X REPORT EARLIEST POSSIBLE DATE UNDIERWAY MANILA. 
 
"Well, well, back to base!"    Hoban grinned, with a trace of high-strung eagerness.    "Very well!   
So ComSubPac expects the kickoff too.    Let's see, today's the twenty-second, eh?    There's that   
compressor and number four torpedo tube that have to be buttoned up. 
 
Obviously we don't get the new motor generator, and all the job orders will have to wait till we   
get alongpenci side in Manila.      But that's okay."      Holding the dispatch   
againndsthtahnedwedall,t htoe lied in neat print, Underway twenty-fourth 0700, Aster.    "Send   
that off operational priority." 
 
"Can we do it, sir?" 
 
"Make the Captain of the Yard an information addressee.    He'll damn well get us out of here." 
 570 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Aye aye, sir.    We'll be short an officer.    Ensign Bulottis hospitalized for two weeks." 
 
"Damnation.    That I forgot.    Well, we sail with four officers, then. 
 
Stand watch-and-watch till we get to Pearl, and try to hook us a fresh ensign out of the sub   
pool there.) 'Captain, do you know anybody in ComSubPac Personnel?" 
 
"Yes.    Why?" 
 
"Well enough to spean ensign off new construction?" 
 
To Aster's saucy grin, Hoban returned a droll grimace.    "Got someone in mind?" 
 
"'There is this ensign, a shipmate of mine off the S-45 who's just reported aboard the Tuna.    It's   
two whole months away from shakedown." 
 
"Is he a good officer?"    "Well, unfortunately he's a sack rat and goof-off."    "Then what do we   
want him for?" 
 
"I can make him deliver.    In a pinch he's resourceful and courageous. 
 
His father's a captain in War Plans, and his brother flies an SBD off the Enterprise.1 
 
that doesn't sound too bad.    What class is he?"    "He's a r se e. 
 
k, Captain e rv Loo n," Aster exclaimed, at Hoban's wry expression, the officer Pool will be   
full of reserves.    You're not going to keep a whole wardroom of regulars.    Not on the Devilfish. 
 
Byron stands a good diving watch, and I know him." 
 
"Byron?" 
 
"His name's Byron Henry.    Briny, they call him." 
 
"Okay, maybe I'll telephone Pearl.    Kind of a dirty trick to play on this Briny, though, isn't it?   
New construction, based in Pearl, is a lot better duty than going to Manila in the Devilfish." 
 
"Tough titty." 
 
Hoban looked curiously at his executive officer.    He did not yet have Aster sized up.    "Don't   
you like him, Lady?" 
 
ASter shrugged.    "We're short a watch gander." 
 
The Pacific showed no combative specks to the westward-moving sunrise. Early sunlight   
slanted into the hangar deck of the Enterprise, oored to buoys in Pearl Harbor, on   
disembowelled airplanes, halfassembled torpedoes, and all the vast clutter of the floating   
machine shop that this deck was in peacetime. Sailors in greasy dungarees and officers in   
khakis were at work everywhere. Through the steel hollow, smelling as all carriers do of   
gasoline, rubber, metal, and sea air, a boatswain's pipe reverberated above the workaday noise,   
 571 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
followed by a Southern voice on the loudspeaker: 'Now hear this. 
 
Meeting of all oflicers in the wardroom in ten minutes." Warren Henry climbed out of the   
cockpit of an SBD, wiping his hands on a greasy cloth.    He put on his khaki cap, saying to the   
sailors working with him, "noes me. Wish me luck." When he arrived in the wardroom,   
officers in khaki shirts and black ties already filled the chairs and lined the sides.    AmidshiPs,   
against the forward bulkhead, stood the movie screen, and on the green baize of a nearby table   
a slide projector rested.    The captain, a chubby man with thick prematurely gray hair, rose and   
strode before the screen as soon as he saw Warren. 
 
'Gentlemen, I guess you've all heard the news.    I've been keeping track on the shortwave, and it   
seems clear already that Der Fuhrer has caught Joe Stalin with his hammer and sickle down."   
The officers tittered fonnaby at the captain's pleasantry.    'Personally I feel sorry for the Russian   
people, saddled with such lousy leadership.      The few times I've encountered their navy   
officers, I've found them friendly and quite professional, though somewhat odd in their ways.  
 
"The question is, how does this affect the mission of the Enterprise? 
 
"Now, as many of us know, lieutenant Henry of Scouter Squadron Six is something of a red- 
hot on military history.    I've asked him to give us a short fin-in here, before we get on with the   
day's work, so that-attention on deck!" 
 
Rear Admiraral Colton appeared through a doorway, and with the noisy scrape of scores of   
chairs, all the officers stood up. He was a barrelchested man with a plump purplish face   
scarred by plane crashes, a naval captain conducted him to a leather armchair hastily vacated   
by his exec. 
 
aviator dating back to the Langley, now ComAirPac's chief of staff. The lighting an enormous   
black cigar, the admiral motioned at the officers to take their seats. 
 
Standing before the screen, Warren started in the modest monotone of most Navy instructors,   
hands on hips,    legs    slightly    apart.      He made the    conventional deprecatory    joke    about    his   
ignorance, then went straight at the topic. 
 
'Okay. Now, naturally,    our concern is the Japanese. In theory,    there should be no battle   
problem here.    We're so much stronger than japan in ilitary potential that any jap move to start   
a war looks suicidal.    So you hear civilians say we'll blow the little yellow bastards off the map   
in two weeks, and all that Poppycock.- Some of the young officers were smiling; their smiles   
faded. Warren hooked a blue and yellow Hydrographic Office chart over the movie screen,   
and took up a pointer. "Here's a chart of the Pacific. People shouldn't talk about blowing   
anybody off the map without a map in front of them." 
 
Warren's pointer circled the French, Dutch, and British possessions in southeast Asia. "Oil,   
rubber, tin, rice-you name what japan needs to be a leading world power, and there it sits.   
With what's happened to the armed forces of the European empires since 1939, it's almost up   
for grabs.    And the first thing to notice is that it's all in the jap back yard.    We have to steam for   
days, far past japan, just to get there. 
 572 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The territory in dispute, in any Pacific war, Will be ten thousand miles or more from San   
Francisco, and at some points only eight hundred miles from Tokyo. 
 
"Well, so our government's been trying to keep the japs quiet by letting them buy from us all   
the steel, scrap    iron, and oil they    want, though of    course the stuff goes straight into the   
stockpile they need to fight a war against us.    Now, I have no opinion of that policy-" 
 
"I sure have," came a sarcastic gravelly growl from the admiral. The officers laughed and   
applauded.    Colton went on, "It's not fit for tender ears.    Sooner or later they'll come steaming   
east, burning Texaco oil and shooting Pieceslof old Buicks at us. Some policy! Co ahead,   
Lieutenant. 
 
Sorry.)P Quiet ensued as Warren took away the chart.    A pallid slide flashed on the screen, a   
situation map of the Russo-Japanese war. 
 
"Okay, a little ancient history now.    Here's Port Arthur," Warren pointed, "tucked far into the   
Yellow Sea, behind Korea.    jap back yard again.    Here's where the japs beat the Russians in   
1905. Without a declaration of war, they made a sneak attack on the Czar's navy, a night   
torpedo attack.    The Russians never recovered.    The Nips landed and besieged this key ice-free   
port.    when Port Arth r finally fell, that was it.    the Czar accepted a negotiated peace with a   
primitive country, one-eth the size of his own! It was as great a victory for the japs as the   
American Revolution was for us. 
 
"Now I personally think our history books don't give that war enough Play. That's where   
modern Japanese history starts.    Maybe that's where all modern history starts.    Because that's   
where the colored man for the first time took on the white man and beat him." 
 
In one corner, near the serving pantry, the white-coated steward's nates, all Filipino or Negro,   
were gathered. When the topic was not secret, they had the privilege of listening to officer   
lectures. 
 
Glances now wandered to them from all over the wardroom, in a sudden stillness.    The Filipino   
faces were blank masks.    The Negroes' expressions were various and enigmatic; some of the   
younger ones tartly smiled.    This awkward moment caught Warren unawares.    The presence of   
the steward's mates had been a matter of course to him, hardly noticed. 
 
He shook off the embarrassment and plowed on. 
 
"Well, this was a hell of a feat, only half a century after Perry opened up the country.    The japs   
learned fast.    They traded silk and art objects to the British for a modern steam navy.    They   
hired the Germans    to train them an army.    Then they crossed to the mainland and licked   
Russia. 
 
"But remember, Moscow was a whole continent away from Port Arthur. 
 
The only link was a railroad.    Long supply lines licked the Czar. 
 
Long supply lines licked Cornwallis, and long supply lines licked Napoleon in Russia. The   
 573 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
further you have to go to fight, the more you thin out your strength just getting there and   
coming back. 
 
"Incidentally, at the Naval War College war games often start with a sneak attack by the japs   
on us, right here in Pearl Harbor.    That derives from the Port Arthur attack.    The way the jap   
mind works, why shouldn't they repeat a trick on the white devils that once paid off so well? 
 
"Well, of course 1941 isn't 1905.    We've got search planes and radar. 
 
This time the japs could get themselves royally clobbered.    Still, the nature of this enemy is   
strange.    You can't rule that possibility out. 
 
"But always remember his objective.    When the japs took on the Czar in 1904, they had no   
intention of marching to Moscow.    Their objective was to grab off territory in their own back   
yard and hold it. 
 
That's what they did, and they still hold it. 
 
"If war breaks out in the Pacific, the japs are not going to set forth to occupy Washington, D.C   
and my guess is they won't even menace Hawaii. They couldn't care less.    They'll strike south   
for the big grab, and then they'll dare us to come on, across a supply line ten thousand miles   
long, through their triple    chain of fortified    island airfields-the Gilberts, the Marshalls, the   
Mananas-and their surface and submarine fleets, operating close to home under an umbrella of   
land-based air. 
 
"So I don't exactly see us blowing them off the map in two weeks." 
 
Warren looked around at the more than a hundred sombre young faces. 
 
"Peace in the Pacific once rested on a rickety three-legged stool. 
 
One leg was American naval power; the second, the European forces in southeast Asia; and the   
third, the Russian land power in Siberia. 
 
"The European leg of the stool got knocked out in 1940 by the C;ermans. Yesterday,    the   
Germans knocked out the Russian leg. 
 
Stalin's not going into any Asian war-not now.    So it's all up to us, and with two legs out of the   
stool, I would say peace in the Pacific has fallen on its ass." 
 
Warren had been talking along very solemnly, flourishing his pointer. 
 
The joke brought surprised chuckles. 
 
"As to Captain Nugent's question, what is Hitler's motive toti oe the mean us, the answer   
therefore comes out loud and Clear, when you look at the map. Der Fuhrer has sounded   
general quarters for the Enterprise. 
 
Rear Admiral Colton was first on his feet to lead the applause. 
 574 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Clenching the cigar in his teeth, he pumped Warren)s hand. 
 
Gliding across an imaginary line that splits the Pacific Ocean from the north to the south polar   
caps, the sunrise acquired a new label, June 23.    Behind that line, June 22 had just dawned.   
This murky international convention, amid world chaos, still stood.    For the globe still turned   
as    always    in the light    of the sun, ninety million    miles    away in black space, and the tiny   
dwellers on the globe still had to agree, as they went about their mutual butcheries, on a way to   
tell the time. 
 
The daylight slipped westward over the waters, over charming green island chains, once   
German    colonies, all    entrusted    to    japan    under her    pledge    not    to    fortify them-all 
fortified.   
Endeavoring to emulate the white man, japan had studied European history in the matter of   
keeping such pledges. 
 
Day came to the city of Tokyo, dotted with charming    parks and temples    and an imperial   
palace, but otherwise a flat sprawling slum of matchbox shacks and shabby Western buildings.   
Catching up with the white man in two generations had impoverished the Japanese; four years   
of the "China Incident" had drained them dry.    Obedient to their leaders, they were bending to   
their tasks, eating prison fare, building war machines by borrowed blueprints with borrowed   
metals under borrowed technical advisers, desperately trading silk, cameras, and toys for oil to   
make the machines go.    Ninety million of them toiled on four quake-ridden rocky islands full   
of slumbering volcanoes, an area no larger than California- Their chief natural resource was   
willpower. 
 
The rest of the world knew little more about them than what could be learned from Gilbert and   
Sullivan's Mikado. 
 
They were puzzling people.    Their Foreign Minister, a little moustached man named Matsuoka,   
American-educated and much travelled in F-urope, gave the impression of being a lunatic, with   
his voluble, self-contradictory chatter, and his wild giggling, grinning, and hissing, so different   
from the expected deportment of the Oriental. 
 
White diplomats guessed that his strange ways must be part of the Japanese character.    C)nly   
later did it Turn out that the Japanese also thought he was demented. Why the militarist   
cabinet entrusted him with mortally serious matters at this time remains a historical mystery,   
like the willingness of the Germans to follow Hitler, who in his writings and speeches always   
appeared to people of other countries an obvious maniac. It is not clear just how crazy Stalin   
was at this    time, though most    historians agree he later went stark mad.    In any case, the   
deranged Matsuoka was in charge of japan's relations with the world, when the deranged Hitler   
attacked the deranged Stalin. 
 
Japanese historians recount that Matsuoka obtained an urgent audience with the emperor and   
begged him to invade Siberia right away. 
 
But the army and navy leaders were cool to the idea. In 1939, the army had had a nasty   
unpublicized tangle with Stalin's Siberian army, taking losses in the tens of thousands.    They   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
wanted to go south, where the Vichy French were impotent, the Dutch were cut off from home,   
and the beleaguered English could spare little force.    Warren Henry's amateur analysis on the   
Enterprise's hangar deck had not been wrong on these main alternatives. 
 
But Matsuoka insisted that by signing the Tripartite Pact with Germany and Italy, japan  had   
pledged to help them if they were attacked; and the German invasion clearly had taken place to   
fend off a Russian attack. Morality therefore required japan to invade Siberia at once.    As for   
the nonaggression pact with Russia-which he had himself negotiated -Russia never kept pacts   
anyway.    To attack right now was vital, before Russia collapsed, in order for the onslaught to   
appear honorable, and n just picking up pieces.      Matsuoka called this position "moral   
diplomacy." 
 
One high-placed official is supposed to have commented quite seriously at this time that the   
foreign minister was insane; to which an elder statesman replied that insanity in Matsuoka   
would be an improvement.    So much one can sift from the Japanese record. 
 
The official secret decision was to 'let the persimmon ripen on the tree"-that is, not to attack the   
Soviet Union until its defeat looked like more of a sure thing.    For the China war went on and   
on, an endless bog, and    the Japanese leaders were    not eager to take on    heavy    new land   
operations.    The thrust south looked like the easier option, if they had to figbtPlanning for this   
was to proceed.    Matsuoka was dismayed, and he soon fell from office. 
 
At the time of sunrise in Tokyo, the sun had already been traversing Siberia for over three   
hours, starting at Bering Strait. 
 
Before bringing a second sunrise to the battlefront, it had eight more hours to travel, for the   
Soviet Union stretches halfway around the globe. Amid the invasion rumors of May and June,   
a bitter story had swept through Europe, crossing the frontiers between German-held and free   
territory.    A Berlin actress, the story went, resting after lovemaking with a Wehrmacht general,   
persuaded him to tell her about the coming invasion of Russia.    He obligingly took down an   
atlas of the world and began, but she soon interru ted him: p 'Liebchen, but what is that great   
big green space there all across the map 
 
'y that, Liebchem, as I told you, is the Soviet 
 
Union." 
 
"Ach so.    And where did you say Germany was?" 
 
The general showed her the narrow black blob in mid-Europe. 
 
'Liebchen," the actress said pensively, "has the Fuhrer seen this map?" 
 
It was a good joke.    But the nerve center of the Soviet Union was not in Vladivostok, at the far   
eastern end of the green space.    The sunrise of lune 23, passing west of the Russian capital,   
shone out within the hour on German columns, twenty-five miles advanced toward Minsk and   
Moscow in one day,    through the massed    forces    of the Red Army and its    heaviest    border   
 576 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
defenses. 
 
ULE lightning cracked down the black sky, forking behind the PWashington Monument in   
jagged streams.    July on the Potomac    was    going out, as    usual, in choking    heat and wild   
thunderstorms.    "There goes my walk home," Victor Henry said.    Through the open window, a   
tongue of cool air licked into the stifling, humid office, scattering heavy raindrops On the wall   
charts.    It began to pour in the street, a thick hissing shower 'Maybe it'll break the heat wave,"   
Julius said.    Julius was a chief yeoman who had worked with him in the Bureau of Ordnance, a   
fat placid man of fifty with a remarkable head for statistics. 
 
"No such luck.    The steam will be denser, that's all."    Pug looked at his watch.    "Hey, it's after   
six.    Ring my house, will you?    Tell the cook dinner at seven." 
 
"Aye aye, sir." 
 
Tightening his tie and slipping into a seersucker jacket, Pug scooped up papers from the desk.   
"I want to study these figures some more. They're kind of incredible, Julius." 
 
With a shrug and wave of both hands, Julius said, "They're as good as the premises you gave   
me to work from." 
 
"Jebosephat, if it comes to that many landing craft for the two oceans, how can we build   
anything else for the next three years?" 
 
Julius gave him the slightly superior smile of an underling who, on a narrow topic, knows more   
than the boss.    "We produce    million tons of steel a year, sir.    But making all those hair dryers   
and refrigerators and forty different models of cars too-that's the problem." 
 
Pug dove through the rain to a taxicab that drew up at the Navy Building.    A very tall man got   
out, pulling a soft hat low on his head. 
 
"All yours-why, hello there." 
 
"Well, hi!"    Pug pulled out his wallet and gave the taxi driver a bill saying, "Wait, please.-How   
long have you been in Washington, Kirby?" 
 
"About a month." 
 
"Come home with me for a drink.    Better yet, join me for dinner." 
 
"Thanks, but I don't think I can."    "I'm alone," said Victor Henry. 
 
Kirby hesitated.    "Where's your wife?" 
 
"Spending my money in New York.    She saw off our daughter-in-laA, and grandson on a plane   
to Hawaii.    Now she's shopping for furniture and stuff.    We bought a house." 
 
"Oh?    Did she get the one on Foxhall Road?" 
 
"That's the one.    How'd you know about it?" 
 577 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Well-I ran into Rhoda when she was house-hunting.    You were out at sea, I guess.    We had   
lunch and she showed me the place.    I was all for it." "Got much to do?"    Pug insisted.    "I'll   
wait for you." 
 
"As a matter of fact," Kirby said abruptly, "I only have to pick up some papers.    Let me dash in   
here for a minute.    I'll be glad to have that drink with you." 
 
Soon they sat together in the cab, moving slowly in the clogged rushbour traffic of Constitution   
Avenue, in torrents of rain.    "What are you doing in this dismal town?"    Pug said. 
 
"Oh, this and that." 
 
"U know what?"    grinned Pug, stressing U for uranium. 
 
Kirby glanced at the bald round head and red ears of the driver. 
 
"Driver, turn on your radio," Pug said.    "Let's catch the news." 
 
But the driver could only get jazz, buzzing with static. 
 
"I don't know what you hope to hear," Kirby said.    "Except that the Germans are another fifty   
miles nearer Moscow." 
 
"Our deparunent's getting edgy about the japs." 
 
"I can't figure out the President's order," Kirby said.    "Neither can the papers, it seems.    Okay,   
he froze their credits.    Does it or doesn't it cut off their oil?"    "Sure it does.    They can't pay." 
 
"Doesn't that force them to go to war?" 
 
"Maybe.    The President had to do something about this Vichy deal that puts jap airfields and   
armies in Indo-China.    Saigon's    a    mighty    handy jump-off point for Malaya    and    Java-and   
Australia, for that matter." 
 
Kirby deliberately packed his pipe.    "How is Rhoda?" 
 
"Snappish about various foul-ups in the new house.    Otherwise fine." 
 
Through puffs of blue smoke, the scientist said, "What do we actually want of the japs now?" 
 
"To cease their aggression.    Back up out of Indo-China.    Get off the Chinese mainland.    Call   
off that Manchukuo farce, and free Manchuria." 
 
"In other words," said Kirby, "give up all hope of beconidng a major power, and accept a   
military defeat which nobody's inflicted on them." 
 
"We can lick them at sea." 
 
"Do we have an army to drive them out of Asia?" 
 
"No." 
 578 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Then don't we have our gall, ordering them out?" 
 
Pug looked at Kirby under thick eyebrows, his head down on his chest. The city was giving   
him a headache, and he was very tired. 
 
"Look, militarist fanatics have taken charge there, Kirby.    You know that. 
 
Slant-eyed samurais with industrial armaments. If they ever break loose and min southeast   
Asia, you'll have a yellow Germany in the Pacific, with unlimited manpower, and most of the   
oil and rubber in the world. We have to maneuver while we can, and fight if we must.    The   
President's freezing order is a maneuver.    Maybe he'll work out some deal with them." 
 
'Appeasement," Kirby said. 
 
"Exactly, appeasement.    We've been appeasing them right along with the oil shipments.    So far   
they haven't attacked south and they haven't hit Russia in the back.    I think the President's just   
feeling his way, day by day and week by week." 
 
'y doesn't he declare war on Germany?" Kirby said. "Why this interminable pussyfooting   
about convoys?    Once Russia collapses, the last chance to stop Hitler will be gone." 
 
'I can tell you why Roosevelt doesn't declare war on Germany, mister," spoke up theta)d driver   
in a rough, good-humored Southern voice, not looking around. 
 
"Oh?    Why?"    said Kirby. 
 
"Because he'd be impeached if he tried, that's why, mister.    He knows goddamned well that the   
American people aren't going to war to save the Jews."    He glanced over his shoulder.    Blue   
eyes twinkled in a friendly fat face, smiling jovially.    "I have no prejudices.    I'm not prejudiced   
against the Jews.    But I'm not prejudiced for them, either. 
 
Not enough to send American boys to die for them.    That's not unreasonable, is it?"    'Maybe   
you'd better look where you're driving," said Pug. 
 
The cabbie subsided. 
 
'It's a nice spot," Kirby said.    They were on the back porch and Pug was pouring martinis.    The   
house stood on a little knoll, topping a smooth lawn and a ravine of wild woods. A fresh   
breeze smelling of wet leaves and earth cooled the porch. 
 
"Rhoda likes it." 
 
They drank in silence. 
 
"How about that cabbie?"    said Kirby. 
 
"Well, he said it straight out.    It's been said on the Senate floor often, in double-talk." 
 
Kirby emptied his glass, and Pug at once refilled it. 
 579 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Thanks, Pug.    I'm having unusual feelings these days.    I'm starting to suspect that the human   
race, as we know it, may not make it through the industrial revolution."    "I've had a bad day   
myself," Pug said, as the scientist lit his pipe. 
 
"No," Kirby said, slowly waving out the thick wooden match, "let me try to put this into words.   
It's occurred to me that our human values, our ideas of right and wrong, good and bad, evolved   
in simpler times, before there were machines. Possibly the Germans and the Japanese are   
really adapting better to the new environment.    Their successes suggest that. Also the way their   
opponents keep stumbling and crumbling.    We may be having a Darwinian change in society. 
 
Authoritarian rule may be best suited to urban machine life-armed bosses indifferent to mercy   
or probity, keeping order by terror, and ready to lie and kill as routine policy. 
 
After all, most of the machines aren't a hundred years old.    The airplane isn't forty years old.   
And democracy's still a fragile experiment."    Kirby paused to drain his glass.    "You called the   
Japanese industrial samuraisThat rang the bell. They've starved themselves, stripped their   
country,    to build or buy machines, and they've    jumped    out of nowhere to center stage of   
history.    The Nazi or samurai idea may just make more sense in a changed world, Pug.    Is this   
merely martini talk, and is there any left in that jug?" 
 
"There's plenty," said Pug, pouring, and more where it came from. 
 
I'm feeling better by the minute.    It's nice on this porch." 
 
"It's Marvelous," said Palmer Kirby. 
 
"Why don't you stay for dinner?"    Pug said.    "What else do you have to do?" 
 
"I don't like to impose on you." 
 
"I'm having chops, potatoes, and a salad.    It's just putting on a couple more chops.    Let me tell   
the cook." 
 
"All right, Pug.    Thanks.    I've done a lot of eating alone lately." 
 
"Be back in a minute," said Victor Henry, taking the jug.    He brought it back full and tinkling. 
 
"I put off dinner," he said.    "Give us a chance to relax." 
 
'Suits me," said Kirby, "though from the mood I'm in and the size of that jug, you may have to   
lead me to the dining room." 
 
"It's not far," Pug said, "and the furniture has few sharp edges." 
 
Kirby laughed.    "You know, about the first thing your very sweet wife Rhoda said to me was   
that I drank too much.    At the dinner she gave me in Berlin.    You remember, when you had to   
fly back to see the President. I was in a bad mood, and I did swill a lot of wine fast. 
 
She brought me up short." 
 580 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"That was rude, The amount a man drinks is his own business," said Pug. "Not to mention that   
on occasion my proud beauty has sort of a hollow leg herself." 
 
"Say, you mix a hell of a good martini, Pug." 
 
"Kirby, what you were saying before, you know, is only this wave-of the-future stuff that the   
Lindbergbs have been peddling." 
 
"Well, lindy's the type of the new man, isn't be?    Flying an ocean by himself in a single-motor   
plane!    He pointed the way to much that's happened since."    "He's not a liar and murderer." 
 
"Only the bosses need be, Henry.    The rest, including the scientific and mechanical geniuses   
like lindy, and the wheelhorses like me, merely have to obey. That's obviously what's been   
happening in Germany." 
 
"I'll tell you, Kirby," Pug said, swirling his glass and feeling very profound, "there's nothing   
new about such leaders. 
 
Napoleon was one.    He had his propaganda line, too, that weakened the foe before he fired a   
shot.    Why, he was bringing liberty, equality, fraternity to all Europeans. 
 
So, he laid the continent waste and made it run with blood for a dozen years or so, until they   
got wise to him and caught him and marooned him on a rock." 
 
"You think that'll happen to Hitler?" 
 
"I hope so." 
 
"There's a difference.    Napoleon had no machines.    If he had had airplanes, telephones, tanks,   
trucks, machine guns-the whole industrial apparatus-don't you think he might have clamped a   
lasting tyranny on Europe?" 
 
'I'm not sure.    I happen to have a low opinion of Napoleon. 
 
Napoleon sold Jefferson nearly a million square miles of prime land, you know -our whole   
Middle West, from Louisiana to the rockies and the Canadian border-for fifteen million dollars.   
Fifteen million! 
 
It figured aut to four cents an acre for real estate like Iowa and Nebraska.    And Minnesota, with   
all that iron ore.    Colorado with its gold and silver.    Oklahoma with its oil.    I don't see how   
anybody, even a Frenchman, can figure Napoleon as a genius.    He was a bloodthirsty ass.    If   
he'd sent just one of his smaller armies over here to protect that territory-just a couple of   
divisions to hold the Louisiana territory, instead of wandering around Europe slaughtering and   
looting-and a few thousand Frenchmen to colonize the land, there's little doubt tha t France   
would be the world's greatest power today. 
 
Instead of what she is, a raped old bag."    "I can't say that has occurred to me before," Kirby   
said, smiling at the phrase.    "It's probably fallacious." 
 581 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'What's happening with uranium?"    Victor Henry said. 
 
Kirby's smile turned wary.    "Is that why you're plying me with martinis?" 
 
"If martinis can loosen you up about uranium, Kirby, let it happen first with an officer in War   
Plans, and thereafter don't drink martinis." 
 
"Doesn't War Plans have any information?" 
 
"No.    It's still Jules Verne talk to us." 
 
"Unfortunately, it's more than that." 
 
The rain was starting again, with a whistle of wind, a rumble of thunder, and a whoosh of   
raindrops through the porch screen.    Pug dropped a canvas flap on the windward side, fastening   
it down as Kirby talked. 
 
"The best present judgment, Pug, is that the bomb can be built. 
 
It might take, with an all-out effort, two years or fifty years. 
 
Those are the brackets.    But we're not making an all-out effort. 
 
We're making a good effort on the theory end, that's all.    Tremendous brains are at work, some   
of them driven from Europe by the Germans, for which we owe them cordial thanks.    The big   
question is, how far ahead are the Germans by now?    We aren't even started.    There's no money   
available and no plan.    Making uranium bombs will go in several stages, and some of us fear   
that the Germans have cracked stage one, which is to get enough of the isotope to start a   
controlled chain reaction." 
 
"What kind of weapon are we talking about here?"    said Pug.    "How powerful an explosive?" 
 
"Again, the answer is X. The power may be too much altogether. 
 
That is, the bomb may blow itself apart before it can really work. 
 
In theory one bomb might level New York City.    Or even an area like Rhode Island.    You're   
dealing here with very large unknowns. 
 
There's talk that it could start a process that could blow up the earth. The best men don't take   
that too seriously.    I frankly don't know enough to be sure." 
 
"You're talking about a pretty good bomb," said Victor Henry. 
 
"Hellooo!" 
 
Rhoda Henry's voice rang through the spacious house, and they heard heels clicking on the   
parquet floor.    "Surprise!    Anybody home? 
 
I'm DPENcmw.    I'm a drowned RAT." 
 582 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Hi!    I'm out here," Pug called, " and we've got company." 
 
"We have?" 
 
"Hello, Rhoda," said Kirby, standing. 
 
'Oh my GAWD!"    She froze in the doorway, staring.    Rhoda's purple hat dripped, she carried a   
sodden paper bundle, and her flowered silk dress clung wetly to her shoulders and bosom.    Her   
face glistened with rain. Her eye makeup was blurred, her lipstick blotchy on pale lips. 
 
Wet strands of hair hung down her forehead and neck. 
 
Pug said, "You finished up sort of fast in New York, didn't you? 
 
I asked Fred Kirby in for a drink, because we happened-' Rhoda vanished. Her scampering   
footsteps dwindled into the house and up a staircase. 
 
"Dad, what a place! It's a mansion' Madeline walked through the doorway, as wet as her   
mother, shaking rain from her hair and laughing. 
 
"Well, Mattyl You too?"    "Look at me!    Christ, did we catch it! 
 
No cabs in sight, and-hello, Dr.    Kirby."    'You'll both get the flu," Pug Henry said. 
 
'If somebody gave me a martini," said Madeline, eyeing the jug, 'I might fight the infection   
off."    She explained, as her father poured the drink, that Hugh Cleveland had business at the   
War Department next morning.    Rhoda had decided to come back to Washington with them. 
 
The girl took a quick practiced pull at the cocktail. 
 
"Where's your luggage?"    Pug said.    "Go put on dry clothes." 
 
"I dropped my stuff at the Willard, Dad."    "What?    Why?    Here's a whole big house at your   
disposal." 
 
'Yes.    I came to have a look at it.    Then I'll go back to the hotel and change." 
 
"But why the devil are you staying at the hotel?" 
 
'Oh, it's simpler."    She glanced at her watch.    "Christ, almost seven o'clock." 
 
Pug wrinkled his nose at his daughter, not caring much for her brassiness. But she looked   
pretty, despite her wet hair and wrinkled pink linen sifit.    Rhoda's fear that Madeline would   
Turn plain at twenty-one was proving flat wrong.    "What's the rush?" 
 
"We're having dinner with a big Army wheel, Dad, to try to sell him on a new program idea.   
Hugh visits a different military installation every week.    We put on amateurs from the service,   
and do a tour of the base, and a pitch about preparedness.    I suggested the idea, even the name.   
The Happy Hour.    The network is wild about it." 
 583 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
She looked at the two middleaged men, her eyes very bright, and held out her glass.    "Can I   
have a little more?    I'll own stock in this thing if it goes through!    Imagine!    I actually will.   
Hugh Cleveland's going to form a corporation and give me some stock.    He promised me. 
 
How about that?    Maybe I'll be rich!    Well, Dad?" 
 
she added with an arch giggle.    "You look kind of sour."    "To begin with," Pug said, " come   
September we may not have an army. 
 
Don't you read the papers?" 
 
Madeline's face fell.    "You mean about the draft?" 
 
"Yes.    Right now it's fifty-fifty or worse that Congress won't vote for renewal." 
 
"But that's insane.    Why, by September I-Ltler will probably have beaten Russia.    How far is he   
from Moscow now?    A hundred miles, or something?" 
 
"I'm not saying the politicians make sense.    I'm telling you the fact." 
 
"Christ, that would blow The Happy Hour sky high, wouldn't it? 
 
Oh, well.    We'll see."    She stood, shaking out her skirt.    "Ugh. 
 
I have rain trickling around inside, in odd little places. I'll take a fast gander at the house.   
Then I'll tool off." 
 
"I'll show you around," Pug said.    "How about it, Kirby?    Want to join the tour?" 
 
"I guess I'll leave," said Kirby.    "Rhoda's back, and I don't want to intrude, and besides I have a   
lot of-" 
 
"You sit right down," Victor Henry said, pushing Palmer Kirby into a wicker armchair.   
"Houses bore me too.    Have one more shortie, and I'll be joining you." 
 
"I've had plenty," Kirby said, reaching for the jug. 
 
Madeline went from room to room with her father, exclaiming with pleasure at what she saw.   
"Christ, look at the moldings in this dining room... Oh, Christ, what a stunning fireplace...   
Christ, look at the size of these closets!" 
 
"Say, I'm no prude," Pug remarked at last, "but what's this 'Christ, Christ," business? You   
sound like a deckhand." 
 
Rhoda called from her dressing room, "That's right, Pug, tell her! 
 
I've never heard anything like it. You get more Christs from her in five minutes than in a   
church sermon an.    hour long.    It's so vulgar." 
 
Madeline said, "Sorry, it's a habit I've caught from Hugh." 
 584 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
i, Oh, Pug"-Rhoda's voice again, loudly casual-"where did you dig up Palmer Kirby?    Did he   
telephone?" 
 
"Just ran into him.    He's staying for dinner.    Is that all right?" 
 
"Why not?      Madeline, you're not really staying at the Willard, are you? It looks SO   
PECULIAR, dear.    Please go and bring your bags home." 
 
"Never mind, Mother.    Bye-bye." 
 
Pug said, walking down the stairs with her, "We bought a big place just so you kids could stay   
here when you're in town." 
 
She put a hand lightly on his arm and smiled.    The condescension embarrassed him.    "Really,   
Dad, I know what I'm doing.    We'll be up very late with the writers tonight." 
 
"This fellow Cleveland," said Victor Henry with difficulty.    "Is he okay?" 
 
Her secure womanly smile broadened.    "Daddy, if there were any hanky-panky going on, I'd be   
a lot sneakier, wouldn't I?    Honestly. 
 
Give me some credit."    "Well, you're grown-up.    I know that.    It just came on kind of fast." 
 
"Everything's fine.    I'm having the time of my life, and one day you'll be real proud of me."   
"I'll call a cab for you," Pug muttered, but as he reached for the telephone in the marble-floored   
hallway, it rang. "Hello?    Yes, speaking... 
 
yes, Admiral."    Madeline saw her father's face settle into tough alert lines. 
 
"Aye aye, sir.    Yes, will do.    Good-bye, sir." 
 
Pug dialled Rhoda's room on the intercom line.    "Are you almost dressed?" 
 
"Five minutes.    Why?" 
 
"I'll tell you when you come down." 
 
He called for a taxicab.    Madeline was used to asking no questions when Victor Henry's face   
took on that look and he spoke in those tones. 
 
They returned to the porch, where Kirby lolled in the wicker armchair, smoking his pipe.   
Rhoda appeared almost at once in a swishy green dress, her hair smartly combed and curled,   
her face made up as for a dance. 
 
"Well!    Quick-change artistry," Pug said. 
 
"I hope so.    When I got here I looked like the witch in Smw White." "Rhoda, I just got a call   
from Admiral King.    He's at the Department. 
 
I'll ride downtown with Madeline.    You go ahead and give Fred his dinner. 
 585 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maybe I'll get back in time for coffee, or something.    Anyway, I'll call you when I know what   
it's all about." 
 
The    honked outside.    Kirby offered to leave too.    Victor Henry wouldn't hear of it.    He liked   
the scientist.    He had invited him home partly for company, partly to pump him about uranium.   
Pug Henry no more imagined anything between this man and Rhoda than he suspected his wife   
of cannibalism.    He prevailed on Kirby to stay, and left with his daughter. 
 
When the outside door closed, Rhoda said brightly, "Well!    How long has it been, Palmer?    An   
age." 
 
Kirby sat forward, hands on his knees.    "Pug doesn't know he's put you in a spot.    I'll be going." 
 
Rhoda sat composed, legs crossed, arms folded, head atilt. 
 
"You'll waste some good double lamb chops, Can't you smell them? 
 
Dinner's about ready." 
 
"Rhoda, I really believe you don't feel in the least awkward." 
 
"Oh, Palmer, I take things as they come.    I'm very glad to see you, actually.    What brings you   
to Washington, anyway?" 
 
"A defense job, about which I can tell you nothing except that it's going very badly." 
 
"You mean you're living here?" 
 
"I have an apartment in the Wardman Park." 
 
"Well, well.    What about your factory?" 
 
"I have excellent managers and foremen.    I fly to Denver every two weeks or so.    I just got   
back." With a sarcastic, one-sided grin he added, "It's disturbing how well    things go on   
without me." 
 
"And how is that house of yours?" 
 
"Fine.    I didn't sell it, and now I won't," 
 
"Oh?    And now, here you are.    Funny." 
 
"Funny'isn't the word I would choose." 
 
Rhoda dropped her voice to a soft, intimate note.    "Was my letter so very upsetting?" 
 
"It was the worst blow I've had since my wife died." 
 
Rhoda blinked at His rough tone, and sighed.    "I'm sorry."    She sat clasping and unclasping her   
fingers in her lap.    Then she tossed her head. 
 586 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"I'm trying to think how to tell this so I don't come out a flibbertigibbet, but to hell with that.    I   
sat next to the President at that White House dinner.    He was nice to me.    He liked me.    He said   
wonderful things about Pug, about his future career.    A divorced man is very handicapped in   
the service, especially when he's in sight of flag rank.    I'm very aware of that. 
 
I've seen how it works.    And-well, so I did what I did.    I've slept badly ever since, Palmer, and   
I've been an awful crab.    But I've stuck to him, and I don't intend to apologize." 
 
"Dinner, Miz Henry."      A gray-haired colored woman in a white smock appeared in the   
doorway, looking sad and reproachful. 
 
"Oh dear.    Oh yes.    What time is it, Barbara?" 
 
"It's half past eight now, Nfiz Henry." 
 
"That's awful.    I never intended for you to remain this late. 
 
Palmer, you're staying, of course.    just put it on the table, will you, Barbara?    Then you can   
go." 
 
By the time Rhoda Henry and Palmer Kirby had finished off the thick chops, a salad, and a   
bottle of wine, the tension between them was gone, and he was laughing at, her droll stories of   
troubles with the new house. 
 
She was laughing too, though, as she said, at the time the mishaps had put her in wild rages. 
 
"What would you say to another glass of St.    Julien with the cheese, Palmer?" 
 
"Rhoda, if he comes home and finds us cracking a second bottle, those eyebrows will go way   
up, so." "Oh, pshaw." She began clearing dishes. "Many's the second bottle he and I have   
cracked.    And third ones, on occasion."    She paused, holding a stack of dishes.    'I can't tell you   
how good I feel.    This couldn't possibly have been planned. 
 
But there's a great weight off my mind." 
 
Rhoda brought the coffee, and the second bottle, out to the back porch. The rain was over.   
Beyond the dim trees, in July twilight fading into darkness, a few stars showed. 
 
"Ah!    Isn't this pleasant?"    she said.    "I think this porch is the reason I wanted the place.    It   
makes me think of the house we had in Berlin." 
 
"This is like a Berlin summer evening," Kirby said.    "The light that lingers on, the fresh smell   
of rained-on trees-" She said, "You remember?" "I have an excellent memory. A little too   
good." 
 
"I have a very handy one, Palmer.    It tends to remember the good and forget the bad." 
 
"That is a female memory."    Dr.    Kirby gulped his wine with an abrupt motion.    "Now let me   
ask you something, Rhoda.    This may really sound offensive.    But we may never talk like this   
 587 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
again.    I've had a lot to drink. 
 
Much too much, no doubt.    Your letter was a bad shock.    I've thought and thought about this   
thing ever since.    You told me that until I came along there had been no one else.    I believed   
you.    I still do.    But I have a question to ask you.    How come?"    After a marked silence, broken   
only by the chirping of birds, he said, "I've made you angry." 
 
"No."    Rhoda's voice was throaty and calm.    "Of course I know the answer you want-that you   
were irresistible and there'd never been anyone remotely like you.    That's true enough.    Still,   
I've had plenty of chances, dear.    And I don't just mean drunken passes at the officers' club.   
There have been times... but to be absolutely honest, these men have all been naval officers   
like Pug. That's the circle I move in. Not one has measured up to him, or even come very   
close." She was silent for a space. "Don't take this wrong. I'm not blaming Pug for what   
happened this time.    That would be too low.    But he does shut me out so much!    And from the   
moment the war started, that got much worse. Pug's a fanatic, you know.    Not about religion, or   
politics.    About getting things done." 
 
"That's an American trait," said Palmer Kirby.    "I'm the same kind of fanatic." 
 
"Ah, but in Berlin, whether you knew it or not, you were courting me. When Pug courted me, I   
fell in love with him, too."    She uttered a lo"7 
 
chuckle, and added, "Let me say one thing more.    Though you, of all people, might give me the   
horselaugh.    I'm a good woman.    At least I think I am.    So, with one thing and another, there's   
been no one else. 
 
Nor will there be.    I'm a quiet grandma now.    That's that." 
 
They did not speak for a long time.    In the darkness, they were two shadowy shapes, visible   
only by the dim reflection of unseen streetlamps on the leaves. 
 
"Pug's never called," said Rhoda quietly. 
 
The shape of Kirby emerged from the wicker chair, looming tall. 
 
"I'll go now.    The dinner was a success.    I feel remarkably better. 
 
Thanks." 
 
She said, "Will I see you again?" 
 
"Washington's a pretty small town.    Look at the way I bumped into Pug." "Can you find your   
way out, dear?" 
 
"Certainly." 
 
"I don't mean to be rude, but to be frank, at the moment my eyes are messy. 
 
Palmer Kirby came to her, bowed over her hand, and kissed it.    She put her other hand over his   
 588 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
and gave it a soft lingering pressure. 
 
"My," she said.    "So continental.    And very sweet.    Straight through the living room, darling,   
and Turn left to the front door." 
 
WEEK later, Victor Henry lay in the upper bunk of an officer's cabin Ain the heavy cruiser   
Tuscaloosa, above a gently snoring colonel of the Army War Plans Division.    A hand on his   
shoulder and a whisper, "Captain Henry?" brought him awake. In the red glow from the   
corridor, he saw a sailor offering a dispatch board.    Pug switched on his dim bunk light. 
 
DEsrRE C"TAIN VICTOR HENRY TRANSFER WITH ALL CFAR TO 
 
AUGUSTA PRIOR TO 0500 TODAY FOR FORTHCOMING RCISE X "What time is it?"   
Pug muttered, scribbling his initials on the flimsy sheet. 
 
043o, and the O.O.D says the captain's gig is standing by for you, sir.)) Pug tried to pack   
quietly, but a squeaky metal drawer woke the colonel.    "Hey, skipper, leaving me?    Where are   
you off to?" 
 
"The Augusta." "What?" The colonel yawned, and snuggled under his blanket. Even in   
midsummer, the morning air was cool in Nantucket Bay. 
 
"I thought that boat's only for big brass and the President."    "I guess the admiral decided he   
needs another typist." 
 
"Would that be Admiral King?    The one who shaves with a blowtorch?" 
 
Henry laughed politely.    "Yes, that's the one." 
 
"Well, good luck." 
 
A brisk wind was tumbling and scattering the fog in the twilit anchorage, and the choppy water   
tossed the slow-moving gig so that the bell clanged randomly and Henry had to brace himself   
on the dank leather seat.    After a dull rocky ride the Augusta loomed ahead through the mist, a   
long dark unlit shape.    The cruiser was not even showing anchor lights, a serious and strange   
peacetime    violation. In the breaking fog, the President's yacht and the dunes of Martha's   
Vineyard were barely visible. As Captain Henry mounted the cruiser's ladder, a faint pink   
glow was appeanng in the east.    The cleanliness of the old vessel, the fresh smooth paint, the   
pale gleam of brightwork, the tense quiet gait of sailors in spotless uniforms, marked it as   
King's flagship.    Peculiar long ramps on the decks, and freshly welded handrails, were obvious   
special fittings for the crippled President. 
 
Admiral King in starchy whites, lean legs crossed, sat in his high bridge chair querying the   
captain of the Augusta about arrangements for Roosevelt. He took no notice whatever of   
Henry's arrival.    The captain , a classmate of Pug, was answering up like a midshipman at an   
examination.    When King dismissed him, he ventured a subdued "Hi, Pug," before leaving his   
bridge. 
 589 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Henry, the President will want a word with you when he comes aboard." Fitting a cigarette   
into a black filter holder, King turned cold eyes on Pug.    "I just learned that, hence this transfer.   
We'll be under way before you can get back to the Tuscaloosa.    I trust you're prepared with any   
reports or information he may desire." 
 
"I have my work papers here, Admiral."    Pug touched the dispatch case which, in the transit   
between cruisers, had not left his hand. 
 
King, with chin high, looked down at Victor Henry through halfclosed eyes, puffing at the   
cigarette.    "As I told you last week, the President asked to have you along on this exercise.    He   
didn't mention that he wanted you at his beck and call, however. Are you by any chance a   
distant relative or an old family friend of Mr. 
 
Roosevelt?" 
 
"No, Admiral." 
 
"Well-you might remember, when occasion offers, that you work for the United States Navy." 
 
'Aye aye, sir." 
 
Virtually nobody saw the crippled man hoisted aboard.    The ship's company in dress whites   
was mustered on the long forecastle at attention under the main battery guns.    No band played,   
no guns saluted.      The yacht Potomac came along the port side, out of    sight of Martha's   
Vineyard. 
 
Sharp commands rang out, a boatswain's pipe squealed, the Potontac churned away, and the   
President appeared in his wheelchair, pushed by a Navy captain, with an impressive following   
of civilians, admirals, and Army generals.    As on a theatrical cue, the sun at that moment came   
out and sunlight shafted down the decks, illuminating the grinning, waving President. The   
white suit and floppy white hat, the high-spirited gestures, the cigarette holder cocked upward   
in the massive bespectacled face, were almost too Rooseveltian to be real. An actor would   
have come on so, and Pug thought FDR actually was putting on a little show for the crew,   
perhaps responding to the burst of sunshine. 
 
The wheelchair and its entourage passed across the forecastle and went out of sight. 
 
At once the two cruisers weighed anchor and steamed out to sea, with a destroyer division   
screening ahead of them. The morning sun disappeared behind the clouds. In dreary gray   
North Atlantic weather, the formation plunged northeast at twenty-two knots, cutting across   
main ship lanes. Victor Henry walked the main deck for hours relishing the sea wind, the tall   
black waves, and the slow roll of iron plates under his feet. 
 
No summons came from the President.    That scarcely surprised him. 
 
His chief in the War Plans Division was aboard the Tuscaloosa; they had intended to do a lot of   
work enroute.    Now when the two cruisers reached the rendezvous, they would need an all- 
night conference.    The separation was probably pointless, but the President's whim had to be   
 590 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
endured. 
 
He was finishing bacon and eggs next morning in the flag mess, when a steward's mate handed   
him a sealed note on yellow scratch paper: If you're not standing watch, old man, you might   
look in about ten or so. 
 
The Skipper He folded the note carefully away in his pocket. Pug was preserving all these   
communications, trivial or not, for his grandchildren. At the stroke of ten he went to flag   
quarters.    A rugged frozen-eyed marine came to robot attention outside the President's suite. 
 
'Hello there, Pug!    just in time for the news!"    Roosevelt sat alone in an armchair at a green   
baize-covered table, on which a small portable radio was gobbling a corrunerdal.    Dark fatigue   
pockets under Roosevelt's eyes showed through the pince-nez glasses, but the open shirt collar   
outside an old gray sweater gave him a relaxed look. He had cut himself shaving; a gash   
clotted with blood marred the big chin. 
 
His color was good, and he was snuffing with relish the wind that blew in through a scoop and   
mussed his thin gray hair. 
 
He shook his head sadly at a Moscow admission that the Germans had driven far past   
Smolensk.    Then the announcer said that President Roosevelt's whereabouts were no longer a   
secret, and he perked up.    FDR was vacationing aboard the Potomac, the announcer went on.   
Reporters had seen him on the afterdeck of the yacht at eight o'clock last evening, passing   
through the Cape Cod Canal.    Roosevelt's eyes darted cunningly at Captain Henry.    His smile   
curved up, self-satisfied and wise.    "Ha ha. 
 
And here I was at eight o'clock, out on the high seas.    How do you suppose I worked that one,   
Pug?" 
 
"Pretty good deception, sir.    Somebody in disguise on the yacht?" 
 
'Dam right!    Tom Wilson, the engineer.    We got him a white suit and white hat.    Well, that's   
just grand. It worked!" He tuned down another commercial. 'We didn't want U-boats out   
gunning for Churchill and me. But I admit I get a kick out of giving the press the slip, Pug.   
They do make my life a misery."    Roosevelt was searching through piles of paper on the desk.   
"Ah.    Here we are.    Look this over, old fellow."    The typewritten document was headed "For   
The President-Top Secret, Two Copies Only." 
 
Turning up the radio again, the President slumped in his chair, and the mobile face went weary   
and grave as the announcer described a newspaper poll of the House of Representatives on the   
extension of the draft, predicting defeat of the bill by six to eight votes.    "That is wrong," the   
President interjected, his heavy black-ringed eyes on the radio, as though arguing with the   
announcer.    In the next item, the German propaganda ministry ridiculed an accusation by world   
Jewish leaders of massacres of Jews taking place in German-held parts of the Soviet Union.   
The Jews were spreading Allied atrocity propaganda, the ministry said, and the Red Cross was   
free to come in at any time to verify the facts. "There's another lie," the President said, turning   
off the radio with a disgusted gesture.    "Those Nazis are the most outrageous liars, really. The   
 591 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Red Cross can't get in there at all. I think, and I certainly hope, those stories are terribly   
exaggerated. 
 
Our intelligence says they are. Still, where there's smoke-" He took off his pince-nez, and   
rubbed his eyes hard with thumb and forefinger. 
 
"Pug, did your daughter-in-law ever get home with her uncle?" 
 
"I understand they're on their way, sir." 
 
"Good. Very good." Roosevelt puffed out a long breath. "Quite a lad, that submariner of   
yours."    "A presumptuous pup, I'm afraid." 
 
Victor Henry was    trying    to read the document,    which was explosive,    while    chatting    with   
Roosevelt.    It was hard because the pages were full of figures. 
 
"I also have a son who's an ensign, Pug.    He's aboard, and I want you to meet him." 
 
"My pleasure, sir." 
 
Roosevelt lit a cigarette, coughing.    "I received a copy of that Jewish statement.    A delegation   
of some old good friends brought it to me.    The way the Jews stick together is remarkable, Pug.   
But what's one to do? Scolding the Germans is so humiliating, and so futile. 
 
I've exhausted that line long ago.    We've tried to get around the immigration laws, with this   
device and that, and we've had some luck, actually.    But when I've got a Congress that's ready   
to disband the Army, can you imagine my going to them with a bill to admit more Jews? 
 
I think we'll beat them on the draft, but it'll be close at best." 
 
While he was saying this, Franklin Roosevelt cleared a space on the table, took up two decks of   
cards, and meticulously laid out a complex solitaire game.    He moved cards around in silence   
for a while, then said in a new cheerful tone, as the ship took a long roll, "By George, Pug,   
doesn't it feel wonderful to be at sea again?" 
 
"It sure does, Mr.    President."    "Many's the time I've sailed in these waters.    I could navigate   
this ship for them, honor bright!"    He observed Pug turning over the last page. 
 
"Well?    What do you think?" 
 
"This is something for my chief, Mr.    President." 
 
"Yes, but Kelly Turner's over on the Tuscaloosa. Anyway,    another squabble between the   
service heads is just what I don't want."    The President smiled at him with flattering warmth.   
"Pug, you    have a feeling for facts, and when you    talk I understand    you.    Those are two   
uncommon 2. r virtues.    So let's have it.    Take your time." 
 
"Yes, Mr.    President." 
 
Pug flipped through the document again, making quick notes on a pad. The President, chain- 
 592 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
lighting a cigarette, carefully put down card on card. 
 
Nothing in the document surprised Henry.    He had heard it all before, in arguments with Army   
war planners.    But here the Army was taking its case to the President, either through Marshall,   
or by some devious route which the President in his usual fashion kept open.    The document   
was a scorcher indeed; if it leaked to isolationist senators, it might well end Lend-Lease, kill   
Selective Service, and even start an impeachment drive. 
 
Hence he was taken aback to see that it existed at all. 
 
Roosevelt had called for the preparation of a "Victory Program," a fresh start to unlock the   
paralysis of Lend-Lease and war production. 
 
Half a dozen agencies had tangled themselves and the big industries into impotence-the Army   
and Navy Munitions Board, the War Resources Board, the Office of Emergency Management,   
the National Defense Advisory Commission, the Office of Production Management. 
 
Their heads were jockeying for presidential favor; all Washington was bewildered by the flood   
of new initials; shortages and bottlenecks were mounting; and actual munitions were being   
produced in a feeble trickle. 
 
To break this up, Roosevelt had ordered the armed forces to list everything they needed to win   
a global war, and to work out new priorities from this master list. 
 
For weeks planners like Victor Henry had been calculating possible American invasions of   
France, Africa, Germany, Italy, China, and Honshu, air strikes against industrial cities, and   
joint operations with the British and even the Russians.      The Army and the Navy, not   
particularly trusting each other, we liar c redly communicating about the program. Each had   
prepared a draft, and each had of course called for the greatest possible share of manpower and   
industrial output. 
 
They had been at the greatest pains to keep the Victory Program secret and the papers few.   
The document now in Victor Henry's hands was a sharp critique by the Army of the Navy's   
demands. 
 
"How about some orange juice?"    the President said, as a steward entered with a pitcher on a   
tray. "Wouldn't you like that? Felipe squeezes it fresh. He's gotten hold of some glorious   
oranges." 
 
"Thank you, sir."    Pug sipped at a glass of foaming juice.    "This thing needs a paper just as   
long in reply, Mr.    President. 
 
Essentially, the Navy and the Army are just using two different crystal balls.    That's inevitable.  
 
The Armyy's    the big service, and it's ultimately responsible for the security of the United   
States.    No argument there.    They figure they may have to fight the Axis single-handed, after   
Russia and England fold. That's why they demand so much.    They arrive at the army of nine   
million men b'y working backward from the total manpower of the United States. It's the   
 593 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
biggest force our country can field." 
 
'And we may well need it," said the President. 
 
"Yes, sir.    It's mainly on Lend-Lease that we see the thing differently The Army says we want   
to give away too many arms and machines which the Germans may capture and use against us.   
But our contention is that even if the Soviet Union does go down soon, and the British too, a   
hell of a lot of Germans will have to die first to lick them.    And every German who dies is one   
less German who'll be shooting at us one day." 
 
"I agree," the President said, very flatly. 
 
"Well, then, Mr.    President, shouldn't we at any cost strengthen these people who are killing   
Germans right now?    We can rebuild and replace lost materiel pretty fast, but it takes twenty   
years to raise a live Boche to replace a dead one." 
 
The President observed with a slight grin, "Well said.    But LendLease isn't the only bone of   
contention here. I notice the Navy wants a pretty hefty share of our total steel production."   
'Mr. 
 
President"-Pug leaned forward, elbows on knees, hands outstretched, talking as forcefully as he   
could-"Hitler didn't beat England last year because he couldn't land the strongest army in the   
world on a coast a few miles away.    He had all the ships he needed to carry them across. 
 
But he couldn't dock them on the other side.    Assault from the sea is a tough battle problem,   
Mr.    President.    They don't come much tougher, it's easy to put your men ashore, one place or   
another, but then how do you keep the defenders from wiping you out?      Your men are   
stranded. 
 
The defenders have all the mobility, the numerical superiority, and the firepower.    They can   
concentrate and crush you."      As Pug talked, the President was nodding, cigarette holder   
drooping between his teeth, eyes piercingly attentive. "Well, sir, the answer is special craft   
that can hit an open beach in large numbers. You throw a large force ashore, and keep it   
supplied and reinforced until it captures a harbor. 
 
Then you can pile in with your regular transports, your luxury liners too-if you've got 'em-and   
your invasion's on.    But those landing craft, you need swarms of them, sir, of many different   
designs. This analysis has been assigned to me. It looks as though we're going to have to   
manufacture something like a hundred thousand, all told." 
 
"A hundred thousand!" The President tossed his big head. "Why, all the shipyards in the   
United States couldn't do that in ten years, Pug even if they stopped doing everything else.   
You're talking sheer nonsense. 
 
Everybody exaggerates his little specialty."    But Roosevelt was smiling in an excited way and   
his eyes were lighting up.    He spoke of landing boats the Navy had used in the last war, when   
he was Assistant Secretary, and of the disastrous British landing at Gallipoli. Victor Henry   
 594 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
took from his briefcase pictures of German invasion craft and of new British models, and some   
designs for American boats. The President scanned these with zest. Different craft would   
perform different missions, Pug said, from a big landing ship to cross the ocean with a great   
load of tanks and trucks in its belly, to little amphibious tanks that could crawl out on land,   
chug back into the water, and maybe    even submerge. Roosevelt obviously loved all this.   
Under the spread of pictures and sketches lay his solitaire game, scattered and forgotten. 
 
"Say, have you fellows ever thought of this?" The President seized a yellow ruled pad and   
sketched with crude black pencil strokes as he talked. 
 
"It's an idea I had back in 1917, studying the Gallipoli reports. 
 
I sent it to BuShips, sketches and all, and never heard another word. 
 
I still say it has merit, though it hadn't crossed my mind again until this minute.    Look here,   
Pug." 
 
The drawing showed an oblong, flat-bottomed craft.    Amidships on an arching frame, over the   
heads of crouched soldiers, an airplane engine whirled its big propeller in a screened housing.   
"I know there's a stability question, with all that weight so high, but with a broad enough beam,   
and if you used aluminum-you see that boat could go right up on the beach, Pug, through   
marshes, anywhere. Underwater obstacles would be meaningless." The President grinned   
down at his handiwork with approval, then scrawled at the bottom, FDR on board USS   
Augusta, en row tote meet Churchill, 7 August 1941- "Here.    Don't bury it the way BuShips   
did! 
 
Look into it.    Maybe it's just a wild notion, but- Well!    Will you look at Old Man Sunshine,   
pouring through that porthole at last!"    The President put on the white    and smoothly slid into   
his wheeled kitchen chair, pressing his hands on the table with almost simian strength to lift   
and move himself.    Victor Henry opened a door to the sun deck. 
 
Roosevelt wheeled himself brisuy across the gray-painted wooden ramps over the coaming.   
'Ah!    Doesn't this feel sweill Warm sun and ocean air.    Just what the doctor ordered - Give me   
a hand, Pug."    The President eased himself into a blue leather reclining chair, in an angle of the   
deck structure sheltered from the wind.    They were looking aft at the long gray guns and the   
foaming wake of the gently pitching cruiser. 'I still say you'll never find the shipyard or Navy   
Yard space for those landing craft, Pug. 
 
There are the merchant ships to build, the destroyer escorts, the carriers. 
 
You're going to have to use factories wherever you can find them-on rivers and inland   
waterways-hundreds of little factories." 
 
President Roosevelt cocked his head, staring out at the sea.    "You know? This program could   
be a godsend to small business.    Congress has given us all kinds of trouble about that.    There's   
a real thought. 
 595 
 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Money going out to small factories in many states-" The President lit a cigarette, deftly   
cupping the match against the breeze.    "Very good. 
 
Let me have your notes on that Army paper, Pug.    just write them up yourself, and give them to   
me today." 
 
"Yes, Mr.    President." 
 
"Now I'm extremely interested in that landing craft problem, but I don't want you    getting   
bogged down in it.    Once the Victory Program is finished, let's detach you from War Plans, and   
send you out to sea. 
 
You're overdue." 
 
Victor Henry saw that he had scored with Roosevelt and that the moment was favorable.    He   
said, "Well, Mr.    President, for a long time I've been yearning to be exec of a battleship." 
 
"Exec?    Don't you think you can command one?"    Trying hard not to show emotion in face or   
voice, realizing that a lifetime might hang on the next few words, Henry said, "I think I can,   
sir."    "Well, you've been delayed on the beach by unrewarding jobs.    The Commander-in-Chief   
ought to have a little say in this.    Let's get you command of a battleship." 
 
The President spoke lightly.    But the ring in his cultured voice, the self-satisfied tilt of his head,   
the regal way he held the arms of his chair and smiled at Captain Henry, showed his relish for   
Power and his satisfaction in bestowing largesse. 
 
"thank you, Mr.    President." 
 
"Now, Pug, you'll find Chief Yeoman Terry in the flag office. 
 
Will you tell him to come here?" 
 
Dazed by the last Turn of the conversation, Victor Henry walked back into the President's   
suite, and interrupted a chat between General Marshall, Admiral King, Admiral Stark, and   
General Watson, sitting relaxed on a couch and armchairs in splendid uniforms. The four   
elderly awesome heads turned at him.    Admiral King gave him a'puzzled scowl. 
 
Pug crossed the room as fast as he could without running, and went out. 
 
the i It was for this chat, lasting less than an hour, that Franklin Roosevelt had evidently   
summoned Victor Henry to the Augusta. 
 
Except at a distance, the Navy captain did not see the President again all the way to   
Newfoundland. 
 
Pug no longer tried to fathom the President's purposes.      He did not feel flattered when   
Roosevelt summoned him, or put out when the Presii dent forgot he was alive.    He was under   
no illusion that be held a high place in the President's esteem, or that anything he said or did   
influenced the course of history.    The President used other obscure men.    The identities and   
 596 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
missions of some were fogged in secrecy. He himself knew of a marine colonel who ran   
presidential errands in japan, China, and India; and an elderly Oregon lumberman, a friend of   
his own father, whose specialty was buying up scarce war materials in South America, to deny   
them to the Germans.    Pug counted himself among these small fry, and took the President's use   
of him as the result of random impulse. Roosevelt liked him because he was knowledgeable,   
got things done, and kept his mouth shut.    A lucky guess about the Nazi-Soviet pact had earned   
him more credit for acumen than he deserved.    There was also the odd phrase Roosevelt had   
used: "When you talk, I understand you." 
 
Still, the President's promise of a battleship command gave Victor Henry sleepless nights.   
Only two of his classmates had battleships. 
 
He went to the flag office and checked the Navy Register, to narrow down the possibilities.    Of   
course, new construction-the North Carolina class, or the Indiana class giants-was out of the   
question for him.    He would get a modernized    old ship. The deadline for delivering the   
Victory Program was less than a month off.    Scanning the records, he noted that places might   
open up within a couple of months in the California or the West Virginia.    This was a heady   
business for Captain Victor Henry, after thirty years in the Navy, checking over the battleship   
roster to guess which one he might soon command! 
 
He tried to crush down his elation.    Henry admired the President, and had moments when he   
almost loved the gallant cripple with the big grin and the boundless appetite for work.    But he   
did not understand Roosevelt or trust him; and he did not in the least share the unlimited   
devotion to the warm jolly aristocratic this man of people like Hary Hopkins.    Behind surface,   
there loomed a grim ill-defined personality of distant visions and hard purpose, a tough son of   
a bitch to whom nobody meant very much, except perhaps his family; and maybe not they,   
either. It might be that ROOsevelt would remember to get him a battleship command.    It was   
equally likely that some new job would put the promise off until it faded. 
 
Roosevelt had taught Victor Henry what a great man was like; the captain thought time and   
again of the Bible's warning, that the clay pot should keep its distance from the iron kettle. 
 
Gray peace pervaded the wilderness-ringed Argentia Bay in Newfoundland, where the   
American ships anchored to await the arrival of Winston Churchill.    Hare and mist blended all   
into gray: gray water, gray sky, gray air, gray hills with a tint of green. The monstrously   
shaped gray-painted iron ships, queer intruders from the twentieth century into the land of the   
Indians, floated in the haze like an ugly phantom vision of the future.    Sailors and officers went   
about their chores as usual on these ships, amjd pipings and loudspeaker squawks. 
 
But a primeval hush lay heavy in Argentia Bay, just outside the range of the normal ships'   
noises. 
 
At nine o'clock, three gray destroyers steamed into view, ahead of a battleship camouiqaged in   
swirls and splotches of color like snakeskin. 
 
This was H.M.S. Prince of wales, bigger than any other ship in sight, bearing the guns that had   
 597 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
hit the Bismark.    As it steamed past the AUgusta, a brass band on its decks shattered the hush   
with "The StarSpangled Banner." Quiet fell. The band on the quarterdeck of the Augusta   
struck up ' Save the King.."    Pug Henry stood near the President, under the awning rigged at   
number-one turret, with admirals, generals, and august civilians like Avse ereu Harriman and   
Sumner Welles.    Churchill was plain to e not five hundred yards away, in an odd blue costume,   
gesturing with a big cigar. 
 
The President towered over everybody, stiff on braced legs, in a neat brown suit, one hand   
holding his hat on his heart, the other clutching the arm of his son, an Air COrps officer who   
strongly resembled him. 
 
Roosevelt's large pink face was self-consciously grave. 
 
At this grand nwment Pug Henryps thoughts were prosaic. BuShips experts were disputing   
over camouflage patterns. Some liked this British IroPical splashing, some preferred plain   
gray or blue horizontal bands. 
 
Pug had seen the mottled battleship through the mist before espying monochrome destroyers   
that were a mile closer.    He intended to report this. 
 
"God Save the King" ended.    The President's face relaxed.    "Well! 
 
I've never heard 'My Country 'Tis of Thee' played    better." The men around him laughed   
politely at the presidential joke, and Roosevelt laughed too.    The squeal of boatswains' pipes   
broke up the dress parade on the cruiser's deck. 
 
Admiral King beckoned to Pug.    "Take my barge over to the Prince of Wales, and put yourself   
at Mr.    Harry Hopkins's service.    The President desires to talk with him before Churchill comes   
to c;ill, so expedite." 
 
'Aye aye, sir." 
 
Passing from the Augusta to the Prince of Wales in King's barge, over a few hundred yards of   
still water, Victor Henry went from America to England and from peace to war. It was a   
shocking jump.      King's spick-and-span flagship belonged to a different world than the   
stormwhipped British vessel, where the acconunodation ladder was salt-crusted, the   
camouflage paint was peeling, and even the main battery guns looked pitted and rusty.    Pug   
was aghast to see cigarette butts and wastepaper in the scuppers, though droves of bluejackets   
were doing an animated scrubdown.    On the superstructure raw steel patches were welded here   
and there-sticking plaster for wounds from the Bismarck's salvos. 
 
The officer of the deck had a neatly trimmed brown beard, hollow cheeks, and a charming   
smile.    Pug envied the green tarnish on the gold braid of his cap.    "Ah, yes, Captain Henry," he   
said, smartly returning the salute in the different British palm-out style, "Mr. Hopkins has   
received the signal and is waiting for you in his cabin. The quartermaster will escort you."   
Victor Henry followed the quartermaster through passageways hauntingly like those in   
American battleships, yet different in countless details: the signs, the fittings, the fire   
 598 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
extinguishers, the shape of the watertight doors. 
 
'Hello there, Pug."    Hopkins spoke as though he had not seen the Navy captain for a day or   
two, though their last encounter had been on the train to Hyde Park early in March, and   
meantime Hopkins had travelled to London and Moscow in a blaze of worldwide newspaper   
attention.    "Am I riding over with you?" 
 
"Yes, sir." 
 
"How's the President feeling?"    Hopkins had two bags open on his bunk in a small cabin off the   
wardroom.    In one he carefully placed papers, folders, and books; in the other he threw clothes,   
medicine bottlesp and shoes as they came to hand.    Hopkins looked thinner than before, a bent   
scarecrow with a gray double-breasted suit flapping loosely on him. 
 
In the longi curved, emaciated face, the clever, rather feminine eyes appeared enormous as a   
lemur's.    The sea voyage showed in his fresh color and bouncy movements. 
 
"He's having the time of his life, sir." 
 
"I can imagine.    So's Churchill.    Churchill's like a boy going on his first date.    Well, it's quite a   
historic moment, at that."    Hopkins pulled dirty shirts from a drawer and crammed them in the   
suitcase. 
 
"Almost forgot these.    I left a few in the Kremlin and had to scrounge more in London." 
 
"Mr.    Hopkins, what about the Russians?    Will they hold?" 
 
Hopkins paused, a stack of papers in his hand, and pursed his mouth before speaking   
decisively.    "The Russians will hold.    But it'll be a near thing.    They'll need help."    He resumed   
his hurried packing. 
 
"When you fly from Archangel to Moscow, Pug, it takes hours and hours, over solid green   
forests and bro%m swamps.    Often you don't see a village from horizon to horizon.    Hitler's   
bitten off a big bite this time."    He was struggling with the clasps on his suitcase, and Pug gave   
him a hand.    "Ah, thanks.    What do you suppose Stalin wants from us most of all, Pug?" 
 
"Airplanes," Victor Henry said promptly.    "'Clouds of airplanes." 
 
Same as the French were yelling for last year." 
 
'Aluminum," said Harry Hopkins. "Aluminum to build airplanes with. Well, let me correct   
that-his number one item was anti-aircraft guns. Next comes aluminum.    Wants a lot of Army   
trucks, too.    Stalin isn't planning to get beaten in three weeks, or six weeks, or three years."   
Hopkins tidied the papers in the smaller case, and closed it. 
 
"Let's go." 
 
The way led through the wardroom, stretching granchy the width of the vessel, furnished like a   
London club, with dark panelling, easy chairs, rows of novels and encyclopedias, and a bar.   
 599 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
When the door to the Prime Minister's cabin was opened by his valet, a strange sight greeted   
them. 
 
Winston Churchill, barefoot, was contemplating himself in a mirror in morning coat, tie, and   
yellow silk underdrawers.    "Hello there, Harry." 
 
He ignored Captain Henry, stewing a long cigar around in his mouth. 
 
"I'm not aware that His Majesty's First Minister has ever before paid a call on the President of   
the United States at sea.    I saw the President wearing a plain brown lounge suit.    But he is the   
head of state.    I am only a minister."    Churchill's fat aged face was lit with puckish relish of the   
unique historical problem.    "This looks odd, I know.    My man of protocol wants me to wear the   
same old brass-buttoned jacket and cap. But it's such an informal dress." 
 
"Prime Minister," Hopkins said, "you do look more like a Former Naval Person in it." 
 
Churchill grinned at the whimsical name he used in messages to Roosevelt. He said to the   
valet, "Very well.    The Trinity House uniform again. 
 
"This is Captain Victor Henry, Prime Minister, of Navy War Plans." 
 
Pulling down his eyebrows, Churchill said, "Hello there.    Have you done anything about those   
landing craft?" 
 
The eyes of Hopkins and Victor Henry met, and Churchill's wide mouth wrinkled with   
gratification.    Pug said, "I'm amazed that you remember me, Mr.    Prime Minister.    That's part   
of my job now.    The other day I talked with the President at length about landing craft." 
 
"Well? Is the United States going to build enough of them? A very large number will be   
called for." 
 
"We will, sir."    "Have our people given you everything you've requested?" 
 
"Their cooperation has been outstanding." 
 
"I think you'll find," Churchill rasped, as the valet helped him into enormous blue trousers,   
"that we simple islanders have hit on a design or two that may prove usable."    Churchill spoke   
slowly, lisping on his s's, in a tone that was almost a growl. 
 
Hopkins said a word of farewell to Churchill, and they left. In the passageway,    with an   
incredulous grin, Hopkins remarked, "We've been having ceremonial rehearsals for days, and   
yet he's fussing to the last minute about what to wear!    A very, very great man, all the same." 
 
As Hopkins shakily stepped aboard King's barge from the accommodation ladder, the stern   
rose high on a swell, then dropped away from under him.    He lost his balance and toppled into   
the arms of the coxswain, who said, "Ooops-a-daisy, sir." 
 
'?ug, I'll never be a sailor."    Hopkins staggered inside, settling with a sigh on the cushions.    "I   
flopped on my face boarding the seaplane that flew me to the Soviet Union.    That nearly ended   
 600 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
my mission right there." 
 
He glanced around at the flawlessly appointed barge.    "Well, well. 
 
America!    Peacetime!    So-you're still in War Plans.    You'll attend the staff meetings, then." 
 
"Some of them, yes, sir." 
 
"You might bear in mind what our friends will be after.    It's fairly clear to me, after five days at   
sea with the Prime Minister." 
 
Hopkins held out one wasted hand and ticked off points on skeletal fingers.    He seemed to be   
using Victor Henry as a sounding board to refresh his omen mind for his meeting with the   
President, for he talked half to himself.    "First they'll press for an immediate declaration of war   
on Germany.    They know they won't get that.    But it softens the ground for the second demand,   
the real reason Winston Churchill has crossed the ocean.    They want a warning by the United   
States to japan that any move against the British in Asia means war with us.    their empire is   
mighty rickety at this point.    They hope such a warning will shore it up.    And they'll press for   
big war supplies to their people in Egypt and the Mddle East.    Because if Hitler pokes down   
there and closes the canal, the Empire strangles.    They'll a]SO try, subtly but hard-and I would   
too,    in    their    place-for    an    understanding    that    in    getting    American aid    they    come   
ahead    of   
Russia.    Now is the time to bomb the hell out of Germany from the west, they'll say, and build   
up for the final assault. Stuff we give Russia, it will be hinted, may be turned around and   
pointed against us in a few weeks." 
 
Victor Henry said, "The President isn't thinking that way." 
 
"I hope not.    If Hitler wins in Russia, he wins the world.    If he loses in Russia he's finished,   
even if the Japanese move.    The fight over there is of inconceivable magnitude.    There must be   
seven million men shooting at each other, Pug.    Seven million, or more."    Hopkins spoke the   
figures slowly, stretching out the wasted fingers of both hands. 
 
-the Russian, have taken a shellacking so far, but they're unafraid. 
 
They want to throw the Germans out.    That's the war now.    That's where the stuff should go   
now.)) "Then this    conference    is    almost    pointless," said Pug. The barge was    slowing and   
clanging as it drew near the Augusta. 
 
"No, it's a triumph," Hopkins said.    The President of the United States and the British Prime   
Minister are meeting face to face to discuss beating the Germans.    The world will know that.   
That's achievement enough for now."    Hopkins gave Victor Henry a sad smile, and a brilliandv   
intelligent light came into his large eyes. He pulled himself to his feet in' the rocking boat.   
"Also, Pug, this is the changing of the guard." 
 
Winston Churchill came to the Augusta at eleven o'clock.    Among the staff members with him,   
Captain Henry saw Lord Burne-Wilke, and a hallucinatory remembrance of Pamela Tudsbury   
in her blue W.A.A.F uniform distracted him from the dramatic handshake of Roosevelt and   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Churchill at the gangway.    They prolonged the clasp for the photographers, exchanging smiling   
words. 
 
All morning, recollections of England and Pamela had been stirring Pug. The O.O.D's very   
British greeting at the Prince of Wales ladder, the glimpses of Undon magazines in the   
wardroom, Winston Churchill's voice with its thick s's, had wakened his memory like a song or   
a perfume. 
 
Goering's 1940 air blitz on London already seemed part of another era, almost another war.   
Standing well back in the rank of King's staff officers, this    short unknovm Navy captain,   
whose face would be lost in the photographs, tried to shake irrelevancies from his brain and   
pay attention. 
 
In an odd way the two leaders diminished each other.    They were both Number One Men.    But   
that was impossible.    Who, then, was Number One? Roosevelt stood a full head taller, but he   
was    pathetically    braced    on lifeless leg    frames, clinging    to    his son's    arm,    his full   
trousers   
drooped and flapping. Churchill, a bent Pickwick in blue uniform, looked up at him with   
majestic good humor, much older, more dignified, more assured. 
 
Yet there was a trace of deference about the Prime Minister.    By a shade of a shade, Roosevelt   
looked like Number One.    Maybe that was what Hopkins had meant by "the changing of the   
guard." 
 
The picture-taking stopped at an unseen signal, the handshake ended, and a wheelchair   
appeared.    The erect front-page President became the cripple more familiar to Pug, hobbling a   
step or two and sinking with relief into the chair.    The great men and their military chiefs left   
the quarterdeck. 
 
The staffs got right to business and conferred all day.    Victor Henry worked with the planners,   
on the level below the chiefs of staff and their deputies where Burne-Wilke operated, and of   
course far below the summit of the President, the Prime Minister, and their advisers. 
 
Familiar problems came up at once: excessive and contradictory requests from the British   
services,    unreal plans, unfilled    contracts, jumbled    priorities,    fouled    communications.    One   
cardinal point the planners hammered out fast. 
 
Building new ships to replace U-boat sinkings came first. No war materiel could be used   
against Hitler until it had crossed the ocean. 
 
This plain truth, so simple once agreed on, ran a red line across every request, every program,   
every projection.    Steel, aluminum, rubber, valves, motors, machine tools, copper wire, all the   
thousand things of war, would go first to ships. This simple yardstick rapidly disclosed the   
poverty of the 'arsenal of democracy," and dictated-as a matter of hightening urgency-a   
gigantic job of building new steel mills, and plants to Turn the steel into combat machines and   
tools. 
 
Through all the talk of grand hypothetical plans-hundreds of ships, tens of thousands of   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
airplanes and tanks, millions of men-one pathetic item kept recurring: an innnediate need for a   
hundred fifty thousand rifles. If Russia collapsed, Hitler might try to wrap up the war with a   
Crete-like invasion of England from the air.    Rifles for defending British airfields were lacking.   
The stupendous materiel figures for future joint invasions of North Africa or the French coast   
contrasted sadly with this plea for a hundred fifty thousand rifles now. 
 
Next morning, boats from all over the sparkling bay came clustering to the Prince of Wales for   
church services.    On the surrounding hills, in sunlight that seemed almost blinding after days of   
gray mist, the forests of larch and fir glowed a rich green. 
 
An American destroyer slowly nosed its bridge alongside the battleship, exactly level with the   
main deck, and a gangplank was thrown across. Leaning on his son's arm and on a cane,   
Franklin Roosevelt, in a blue suit and gray hat, lurched out on the gangp lank, laboriously   
hitching one leg forward from the hip, then the other.    The bay was calm, but both ships were   
moving on long swells.    With each step, the tall President tottered and swayed.    Victor Henry,   
like -all the Americans crowding the destroyer bridge, hardly breathed as Roosevelt painfully   
hobbled across the narrow unsteady planks. 
 
Photographers waiting on the Prince of Wales quarterdeck were staring at the President, but   
Pug observed that not one of them was shooting this momentous crippled walk. 
 
He thought of Franklin Roosevelt as he had first known him-the young Assistant Secretary of   
the Navy, the athletic cocksure dandy, the obvious charmer and lady-killer, full of himself, on   
top of the world, bounding up and down a destroyer's ladders and spouting salty lingo. 
 
The yearz, had made of him this half-disabled gray man, heaving himself one agonized step at   
a time    over a gangplank    a few    feet long; but here was enough willpower displayed,    Pug   
thought, to win a world war. 
 
A ramp could have been.jury-rigged and laid across with ease. 
 
Franklin Roosevelt might have wheeled over in comfort and with dignity. 
 
But in his piteous fashion he could walk; and to board a British battleship, at Winston   
Churchill's invitation for church parade, he was walking. 
 
His foot touched the deck of the Prince of Wales.    Churchill saluted him and offered his hand.   
The brass band burst forth with The StarSpangled Banner."    Roosevelt stood at attention, his   
chest heaving, his face stiff with strain.    Then escorted by Churchill, the President hitched and   
hobbled all the way across the deck, and sat.    No wheelchair ever appeared. 
 
As the sailors massed in ranks around the afterdeck sang "O God, Our Help in Ages Past" and   
"Onward Christian Soldiers, " Winston I Churchill kept wiping his eyes. The old hymns,   
roared by a thousand young male voices in the open air under the long guns, brought prickles   
to Victor Henry's spine and tears to his eyes.    Yet this exalting service made him uneasy, too. 
 
Here they were, men of the American and the British navies, praying as comrades-in-arms.   
 603 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
But it mens a phony picture.    The English were fighting, the Americans were nota The Prime   
Nunister, with this church parade under the guns, was ingeniously working on the President's   
feelings.    Here was diamond cut diamond, will against will!  
 
Churchill was using everything he could, including Roosevelt's supposed religious tendency, to   
move him. If Franklin Roosevelt could come away from this experience without giving a   
promise to declare war on Germany, or at least to lay down an ultimatum to japan, he was a   
hard man; and the weeping old fat politician beside him was playing a damned hard game   
himself, for which Victor Henry admired him. 
 
The British chaplain, his white and crimson vestments -flapping in the wind, his thick gray hair   
blowing wildly, read the closing Royal Navy prayer: Preserve us from the dangers of the sea,   
and from the lence of the enemy; that we may be a security for such as pass upon the sea upon   
their laujul occasions... and that we may return in safety to enjoy the blessings of the land, with   
the fruits of our labors. 
 
. 
 
. and to praise and glorify Thy Holy Name; through Jesus Christ our Lord..."    A few British   
sailors cautiously moved out of ranks. 
 
One, then another, sneaked cameras from their blouses.    When nobody stopped them, and the   
two leaders smiled and waved, a rush began. 
 
Cameras appeared by the dozens.    The sailors swarmed into a laughing, cheering ring around   
the two men.    Pug Henry, watching this unwonted disorder on a warship with mixed feelings of   
amusement and outrage, felt a touch on his elbow. 
 
It was Lord Burne-Wilke.    'Hello there, my dear fellow.    A word with you?" 
 
Either the British worried less about fire than the Americans, or they had found a good way to   
fake wood panels.    Burne-Wilkes cabin had the dark, warm, comfortable look of a library den.   
"I say, Henry, what is your position on shipboard drinking?    I have a fair bottle of sherry here." 
 
"I'm for it." 
 
"Good.    You're dry as a bone in your service, aren't you?    Yet last night the President served us   
an excellent wine." 
 
"The President is the source of all Navy regulations, sir, and can tailor them to his desires." 
 
"Ah?    Jolly convenient."    Burne-Wilke lit a cigar, and they both sipped wine.    "I suppose you   
know that this ship crossed the ocean without escort," the air commodore resumed.    "Our first   
night out of England, we ran into a whole gale.    Our destroyers couldn't maintain speed, so we   
zigzagged on alone." 
 
"Sir, I was appalled to hear about it."    "Really?    Rather sporting of the British Prime Minister,   
don't you think, to give the Hun a fair shot at him on the open sea? Three thousand miles   
 604 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
without air cover or surface escort, straight through the entire submarine fleet?" "You had   
your good angels escorting you.    That's all I can say." 
 
"Oh, well, at any rate here we are.    But it might be prudent not to overwork those good angels,   
what?    Don't you agree?    On our way back, every U-boat in the Atlantic will certainly be on   
battle alert. 
 
We shall have to run the gamut."    Burne-Wilke paused, studying the ash on his cigar. 
 
'We're stretched thin for escorts, you know. We've rounded up four destroyers. Admiral   
Pound would be happier with six."    Victor Henry quickly said, 'I'll talk to Admiral King." 
 
"You understand that this cannot be a request from us.      The Prime Minister would be   
downright annoyed.    He's hoping we'll meet the Tirpitz and get into a running gun fight." 
 
"Let me start on this now, sir."    Pug drank up his sherry, and rose to his feet. 
 
"Oh?    Would you?"    Burne-Wilke opened the cabin door.    "Thanks awfully." On the afterdeck,   
the photographing was still going on. 
 
Officers with cameras were now shouldering sailors aside, as the two politicians cheerfully   
chatted.    Behind them stood their glum chiefs of staff and civilian advisers.    Hopkins, squinting   
out at the sunny water, wore a pained expression. The military men were talking together,   
except for Admiral King, who stood woodenly apart, his long nose pointing seaward, his face   
consealed in disapproval. Pug walked up to him, saluted, and in the fewest possible words   
recounted his talk with Burne-Wilke.    The lines along King's lean jaws'deepened.    He nodded   
twice and strolled away, without a word.    He did not go anywhere.    It was just a gesture of   
dismissal, and a convincing one. 
 
Amid much willing and dining, the conference went on for two more days. One night Churchill   
took the floor in the Augusta wardroom after dinner, and delivered a rolling, rich, apocalyptic   
word picture of how the war would go.      Blockade, ever-growing air bombardment, and   
subversion would in time weaken the grip of Nazi claws on Europe. 
 
Russia and England would 'close a ring' and slowly, inexorably tighten it.    If the United States   
became a full-fledged ally, it would all go much faster, of course.    No big invasion or long land   
campaign would be needed in the west.    Landings of a few armored columns in the occupied   
countries would bring mass uprisings.      Hitler's black empire would suddenly collapse in   
rubble, blood, and flame.      Franklin Roosevelt listened with bright-eyed smiling attention,   
saying nothing, and applauding heartily with the rest. 
 
On the last day of the conference, just before lunch, Admiral King sent for Pug.    He mid the   
admiral in undershirt and trousers in his cabin, drying face and ears with a towel.    "Task Unit   
26 point 3 point i, consisting of two destroyers, the Mayrant and the Rhind, has been formed,"   
King said without a greeting.    "It will escort the Prince of Wales to Iceland.    You will embark   
in the Prince of Wales as liaison officer, disembark in Iceland, and return with our task unit." 
 605 
 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'Aye aye, sir." 
 
'You'll have no written orders. But we're not in the kind of spot we were in last time. In   
confidence, we'll soon be convoying all ships to Iceland.    Maybe by next week.    Hell, our own   
marines are occupying the place now.    The President's even sending a young officer along as a   
naval aide to Churchill while he tours our Iceland base.    Ensign Franklin D. 
 
Roosevelt, junior."    King spoke the name with an expressionless face. 
 
"Yes, sir." 
 
Now, Henry, how are you at languages?" 
 
"It's a long time since I tried a new one, Admiral." 
 
"Well, a military supply missim will go to the Soviet Union in September.    If Russia's still in   
the war by then, that is.    Mr. 
 
Hopkins has brought up your name. He appears impressed, and the President too, by your   
expertise on landing craft and so forth. Now your service record has been checked, and it   
seems you claim a 'poor to fair' knowledge of Russian. Hey?    How is that? That's very   
unusual." 
 
Admiral, I put that down when I entered the Academy in 1911. It was true then. I don't   
remember ten words now."    Henry explained the circumstances that had given him Russian- 
speaking chums in his Sonoma County boyhood. 
 
'I see.    Well, it's there on the record.    Upon returning from Iceland you will be detached from   
War Plans to prepare yourself, with an intensive refresher course in Russian, for a possible trip   
to the Soviet Union on special detached duty.    You'll have interpreters. But with even a   
smattering, your intelligence value will be greater."    'Aye aye, sir."    King put on his uniform   
jacket, stared at Victor Henry, and for the first time that Henry could recall, favored him with a   
smile. 
 
"On the record, incidentally, I see you used to be a fair gunnery officer, too."    "My one hope is   
to get back to that."      "Have you heard that extension of the draft passed the House of   
Representatives an hour ago?" 
 
"It did?    Thank God." 
 
"By one vote." 
 
"What!    One vote, sir?" 
 
"One vote."    "Whew!    That's not going to encourage the British, Admiral." 
 
"No, nor the President, but it's how the American people feel right now. It may be suicidal, but   
there it is.    Our job is to keep going anyway. 
 606 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Incidentally, Henry, I'll soon be needing an operations officer on my staff. 
 
After your Russian errand, if it comes off, that's an assignment you may get."    Victor Henry   
kept his face rigid.    "It would be an honor, Admiral." 
 
"I thought you might like it.    I believe you'll measure up," King said, with an awkward trace of   
warmth. 
 
Compared to a battleship command, it was a crushing prospect. 
 
Desperation forced Pug to say, "President Roosevelt may have other ideas.    I just never know." 
 
"I mentioned this to the President.    He said it sounded like the perfect spot for you." 
 
A verse from Psalms knifed into Pug's mind: 'Put not your trust in princes." "Thank you,   
Admiral.Within the hour, as Victor Henry was packing, a summons came from the President.   
The interview this time took but a minute or two. 
 
Roosevelt appeared fatigued and preoccupied, making quick pencilled notes on one document   
after another at the baize-covered table.    Harry Hopkins was in the room, and beside him a tall   
handsome ensign, with a strong    resemblance to the Assistant Secretary    who    in 1917 had   
bounded around the destroyer Davey- The President introduced Franklin D. Roosevelt,   
junior,"to Pug, saying "You gentlemen will be travelling together. 
 
You should know each other."    As the ensign shook hands, the President gave Captain Henry a   
poignant man-to-man glance, as much as to say "Keep an eye on him, and talk to him This   
human touch half dissolved Victor Henry's hard knot of mistrust for the President. 
 
Perhaps    Roosevelt    had turned off King with a pleasantry and meant    to still    give him the   
battleship.    The President's bland manner in dismissing him was, as always, unfathomable.  
 
To brass band anthems and booming gun salutes, in a brisk breeze smelling of green hills and   
gunpowder, the Prince of Wales left Argentia Bay.    The great conference was over. 
 
In the wardroom of the Prince of Wales, Victor Henry could sense the subtle gloom hanging   
over the ship.    What the conference had accomplished to increase help fOr England remained   
undisclosed; and in itself this clearly struck the battleship's officers as a bad sign. 
 
These men, veterans of two combat years, of air attacks and gun fights, had a subdued dismal   
air, despite the grandeur of their ship and the stuffy luxury of their wardroom.      The   
predicament of England seemed soaked in their bones.    They could not believe that Winston   
Churchill had risked the best ship in their strained navy, and his own life, only to return empty- 
handed. 
 
That wasn't Winnie's style.    But vague hope, rather than real confidence, was the note in their   
conversation.    Sitting in the lounge over a glass of port after dinner, Pug felt quite out of things,   
despite their politeness to him.    It struck him that his presence embarrassed them.    He went to   
bed early.    Next day he toured the Prince of Wales from flying bridge to engine rooms, noting   
 607 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
contrasts with American ships, above all the slovenly, overburdened, tense crew, so different   
from the scrubbed happy-go-lucky Augusta sailors. 
 
Major-General Tillet came up to him after dinner that evening, and laid a lean hand on his   
shoulder.    "like to have a look at the submarine sightings chart, Henry?    The Prime Minister   
thought you might.    Quite a reception committee gathering out there." 
 
Pug had seen the forbidding old military historian here and there at the conference.    Two nights   
ago, at a wardroom party for the American visitors, some junior British officers had started   
what they called a "rag, marching in dressed in kilts or colored towels, bizarre wigs, and not   
much else; skirting bagpipes, setting off firecrackers, and goose-stepping over chairs and   
tables, After a while Major-General Tillet had stood up unsmiling-Pug thought, to put a stop to   
the horseplay-and had broken into a long, wild jig on a table, as the bagpipers marched around   
him and the whole mess applauded.    Now he was as stiff as ever. 
 
Red secrecy warnings blazed on the steel door that Tillet opened. 
 
Dressed in a one-piece garment like a mechanic's coveralls, stooped and heavy-eyed, Churchill   
pondered a map of the Russian front all across one bulkhead. Opposite hung a chart of the   
Atlantic.    Young officers worked over dispatches at a table in the middle of the room, in air   
thick with tobacco smoke. 
 
"There," said the Prime Nbnister to Tillet and Pug Henry, gesturing at the map of the Soviet   
Union with his cigar, 'there is an awful unfolding picture." 
 
The crimson line of the front east of Smolensk showed two fresh bulges toward Moscow.   
Churchill coughed, and glanced at Henry.    'Your President warned Stalin.    I warned him even   
more explicitly, basing myself on very exact intelligence.    Surely no government ever had less   
excuse to be surprised.    In an evil hour, the heroic, unfortunate Russian people were led by a   
pack of outwitted bungling scoundrels." 
 
The Prime Minister turned and walked to the other bulkhead, with the tottering step Victor   
Henry had observed in his London office.    At Argentia, Churchill had appeared strong, ruddy,   
springy, and altogether ten years YOLinger. 
 
Now his cheeks were ashy, with red patches. 
 
"Hullo- Don't we have a development here?" 
 
Little black coffin-shaped markers dotted the wide blue spaces, and an oit-icer was putting up   
several more, in a cluster close to the battleship's projected course. Farther on stood large   
clusters of red pins, with a few blue pins. 
 
"This new U-boat group was sighted by an American patrol plane at twilight, sir," said the   
officer. 
 
"Ah, yes.    So Admiral Pound advised me.    I suppose we are evading?" 
 608 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'We have altered course to north, sir." 
 
"Convoy H-67 is almost home, I see." 
 
"We will be pulling those pins tonight, Mr.    Prime Minister." 
 
"That will be happy news."    Churchill harshly coughed, puffing at his cigar, and said to Pug   
Henry, "Well.    We may have some sport for you Yet.    It won't be as lively as a bomber ride   
over Berlin.    Eh?    Did you enjoy that, Captain?" 
 
"It was a rare privilege, Mr.    Prime Minister." 
 
"Any time.    Any time at all." 
 
"Too much honor, sir.    Once was plenty." 
 
Churchill uttered a hoarse chuckle.    "I daresay.    What is the film tonight, General Tillet?" 
 
"Prime Minister, I believe it is Stan Laurel and Oliver Hardy, in Saps at Sea."    , "Saps at Sea,   
eh?    Not inappropriate!    The surgeon-general has ordered me to remain in bed.    He has also   
ordered me not to smoke. I shall attend Saps at Sea, and bring my cigars." 
 
Pug Henry's enjoyment of Saps at Sea was shadowed by an awareness that at any moment the   
battleship might run into a U-boat pack.      German skippers were adept at sneaking past   
destroyer    screens. But the film spun to the end uninterrupted.    "A gay but inconsequent   
entertainment," the Prime Minister remarked in a heavy, rheumy voice, as he plodded out. 
 
Clement Attlee's broadcast the next day packed the wardroom. 
 
Every officer not on watch, and all staff officers and war planners, gathered in the wardroom   
around one singularly ancient, crack-voiced radio. The battleship" plowing through a wild   
storm, rolled and pitched with slow long groans. For the American guest, it was a bad half   
hour. He saw perplexed looks, lengthening faces, and headshakes, as Attlee read off the   
"Atlantic    Charter."    The high-flown language    bespoke    not a shred of increased    American   
commitment. Abuse of Nazi tyranny,    praise of "four freedoms," dedication to a future of   
world peace and brotherhood, yes; more combat help for the British, Some sentences about   
free trade and independence for all peoples That meant the end of the British Empire, if they   
meant anything. 
 
Franklin Roosevelt was indeed a tough customer, thought Captain Henry, not especially   
surprised. 
 
"Umph!"    grunted Major-General Tillet in the silence after the radio was shut off.    "I'd venture   
there was more to it than that.    How about it, Henry?"    All eyes turned on the American.  
 
Pug saw no virtue in equivocating.    "No, sir, I'd guess that was it." 
 
"Your President has now pledged in a joint communique to destroy Nazi tyranny," Tillet said.   
"Doesn't that mean you're coming in, one way or another?"    "It means Lend-Lease," Pug said. 
 609 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Questions shot at him from all sides. 
 
"You're not going to stand with us against japan?" 
 
"Not now." 
 
"But isn't the Pacific your fight, pure and simple?" 
 
"The President won't give a war warning to japan.    He can't, without Congress behind him." 
 
"What's the matter with your Congress?" 
 
"That's a good question, but day before yesterday it came within one vote of practically   
dissolving the United States Army." 
 
"Don't the congressmen know what's happening in the world?" 
 
"They vote their political hunches to protect their political hides." 
 
"Then what's the matter with your people?" 
 
"Our people are about where yours were at the time of the Munich pact." 
 
That caused a silence. 
 
Tillet said, 'We're paying the price."    "We'll have to pay the price." 
 
"We had Chamberlain then for a leader, sir," said a fresh-faced lieutenant.      "You have   
Roosevelt." 
 
"The American people don't want to fight Hitler, gentlemen," said Pug. "It's that simple, and   
Roosevelt can't help that.    They don't want to fight anybody.    Life is pleasant.    The war's a ball   
game they can watch. 
 
You're the home team, because you talk our language.    Hence Lend-Lease, and this Atlantic   
Charter.    Lend-Lease is no sweat, it just means more jobs and money for everybody." 
 
An unusually steep roll brought a crash of crockery in the galley. 
 
The crossfire stopped.    Victor Henry went to his cabin.    Before disembarking in Iceland, he did   
not talk much more to the British officers. 
 
Atlantic Charter, like the elephant, resembled a tree, a snake, a Twall, or a rope, depending on   
where the blind took hold of it. 
 
Axis propaganda jeered at its gassy rhetoric about freedom, cited enslaved India and Malaya,   
noted the cowardice of the degenerate Americans in evading any combat commitment, and   
concluded that it was all a big empty bluff, tricked out with the usual pious Anglo-Saxon   
hypocrisy, to cover impotent hatred of the triumphant New World Order, which a thousand   
Atlantic Charters could no longer roll back. 
 610 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the United States, a howl went up that Roosevelt had secretly committed the country to go to   
war on England's side.    A cheer went up-not nearly so loud-for the most glorious document in   
man's struggle toward the light since the Magna Carta. 
 
British newspapers implied that much more than this fine charter had been wrought at Argentia   
Bay; but for the moment the rest had to be hushed up'. 
 
The Russians hailed the meeting of Roosevelt and Churchill on a triumph for peace-loving   
battleship at sea as a urn all peoples everywhere; hinting that, as was well known, a second   
front in Europe now was crucial, and the Atlantic Charter, failing to mention a plan for this,   
was somewhat disappointing. 
 
No reaction was stronger or blinder than the one that swept the immured Jews in Minsk. 
 
The Germans had confiscated their radios. The penalty for possessing one was death. A   
sixteen-year-old boy had heard the Russian broadcast imperfectly on a tiny receiving set rigged   
in his attic.    He had joyously spread the story that Roosevelt had met Churchill, and that the   
United States was declaring war on Germany! The effect on the ghetto of this lie was so   
wonderful, so life-giving, that one may wonder whether falsehood may not sometimes be a   
necessary anodyne for souls in torment. 
 
The spirit of the Minsk Jews had recently been shattered.    They had resigned themselves, with   
the coming of the Germans, to be herded into a few square blocks, to be forced to register for   
work, to be arrested and maltreated, to endure hooligan raids and perhaps even shootings. This   
ia,as a pogrom time, German pogroms could be expected to be very bad. But jewry survived   
pogroms. 
 
Then one night gray trucks had swarmed into the ghetto, and squads of Germans in unfamiliar   
dark uniforms had cleared out the dwellers along two main streets, house by house, loading the   
people into the vans -for resettlement, they announced. Some of the Germans were brutal,   
some polite, as they pushed and urged the people into the trucks. In other streets, behind   
barred doors, other Jews wondered and shivered.    'what had happened afterward-according to   
reports brought by parti.    sans who haunted the woods-was so hideous and unbelievable that   
the Minsk Jews were still trying numbly to come to grips with it. 
 
The gray vans had driven five miles away, to the woods outside a village.    There in a moonlit   
ravine the Germans had ordered the people out of the trucks, had lined them up in groups, and   
had shot every last one-including the babies and the old people-and then had thrown them in a   
big hole already dug, and shovelled them over with sand. 
 
Peasants who had dug the huge sandy hole had seen this horror with their own eyes; so the   
partisan report went.    The Germans had rounded them up for the job, then had ordered them to   
go home, and not to linger or to talk about the excavation, on pain of being shot.    A few had   
sneaked back through the trees, all the same, to see what the Germans were up to; and they had   
recounted to the partisans the massacre of the "Zhids" from the gray trucks. 
 
To the Jews trapped in Minsk, three hundred miles behind the German armies approaching   
 611 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Moscow, this story was an unimaginable shock. 
 
The Germans were already shooting people for small offenses, after swift crude trials.    Bloated   
smelly bodies of such victims, and of captured partisans, bung in the public squares. Such   
things could be expected in wartime.    But the sudden murder, evidently at random, of all the   
people who lived in two long streets-children, women, old people, everybody-exceeded their   
deepest fears of what even Germans could do. Either the story was a hysterical exaggeration, or   
if it were true-and the reports as they trickled in began to seem overwhelming-then the   
Germans were far worse than the most frightful rumors had ever pictured them. 
 
Yet next day Minsk looked much the same, the sunflowers bloomed, the sun shone in a blue   
sky.    Some buildings were ruined by bombs or fire, but most stood as before; German soldiers   
cruised the streets, already a common sight in their gray trucks and tanks marked with   
swastikas. The soldiers themselves looked entirely ordinary and human, lounging with their   
guns and squinting in the sunshine. Some even made jokes with passersby. Russians still   
walked everywhere, old neighbors of the Jews, and the same bells rang at the same hours.   
These streets were the scenes of the Jews' lives, as familiar as faces at home.    Only now all the   
houses on two streets stood quiet and empty. 
 
Into this stunned moment, the news broke that Roosevelt and Churchill had met at sea and that   
America was entering the war.    The word flew from house to house.    People cried, laughed,   
caught up their children and danced them on their shoulders, kissed each other, and found wine   
or vodka to drink to President Roosevelt.    One fact was graven in Europe's memory: last time,   
the coming of the Americans had won the war.    Happy arguments broke out.    Would it take   
three months? 
 
Six months?    However long it might take, there would be no more insane occurrences like the   
emptying of those two streets. The Germans would not dare now! The Germans were bad   
when they were on top, but how humble they could be when things turned around!    They were   
all cowards. 
 
Now they would probably start being nice to the Jews, to avoid punishment by the Americans.  
 
Berel Jastrow did not try to contradict the rumor, though he knew that it was untrue.    At the   
bakery, he still kept his shortwave radio concealed.    His papers allowed him to pass the ghetto   
boundaries, for the Germans needed bread and the Minsk bakers were fighting hundreds of   
miles away.    At the underground meeting of Jewish leaders that night, in the boiler room of the   
hospital, Berel did report the accurate broadcast he had heard from Sweden. But he was a   
foreigner, and he was telling the committee what it did not want to hear.    Somebody cut him   
short    with the    observation    that he    had    probably    been listening to    the German    -controlled   
Norwegian radio; and the excited planning continued for the armed uprising that would take   
place in Minsk, in cooperation with the partisans, as soon as the Americans landed in France.  
 
A few days later Jastrow and his son, with the wife and baby, disappeared.    They went silently   
in the night, asking nobody in the ghetto for perinion or help, or for passwords to contact the   
partisans    in the    woods. The    Jewish Board had    some    trouble    with the    Gestapo    about the   
 612 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
vanished Polish baker. But they pleaded that the Jastrows were refugees, for whom they   
couldn't be responsible.    The Germans had themselves issued Jastrow his special papers. 
 
The three Polish Jews with their infant did not come back to Minsk. 
 
The ghetto people assumed they had been shot right away by the Wehrmacht forest patrols, as   
most Jews were who tried to slip from the town without partisan guidance.    It was the German   
custom to throw fresh bodies from the forest into Jubilee Square, as a warning to the other   
Jews.    But nobody saw, in these gruesome stiff piles of dead unburied friends, the bodies of the   
Jastrows.    That was the one reason for believing the Jastrows might still be alive somewhere. 
 
in Rome the Germans were conducting themselves very well, at least within the purview of   
Natalie and her uncle.    A certain arrogance toward the Italians had perhaps intensified with all   
the conquests, but that had always been the German demeanor.      Ghastly rumor of Nazi   
treatment of Jews had been flying around Europe for years.    To these were, now added stories   
of the vilest atrocities against the captured hordes of Slav soldiers.    Yet when Aaron Jastrow   
and his heavily pregnant niece dined in the hotel, or at some fine Roman restaurant, there   
would very likely be Germans at table on either side of them. 
 
Enough wine might spark a bit of Teutonic boisterousness; but to ascribe a capacity for mass   
murder to then well-dressed, careful-mannered, good-looking people-so very much like   
Americans in some ways-passed all belief. 
 
Jastrow at last was eager to go home.      He had finished the first draft of his book on   
Constantine; he yearned to show it to his publisher, and then finish up the revisions in the   
Harvard Library's Byzantine section. 
 
The Vatican Library was better, of course, and he had made charming friends there.    But as   
shortages multiplied, Rome was getting drearier. 
 
Hitler's triumphs in the Soviet Union were sending earthquake tremors through Italy and   
sinking the Italians in gloom.    There was no real gladness even in the Fascist press, but rather   
some traces of alarm at these giant strides of the Fuhrer over the last unsubdued reaches of   
Europe. 
 
At any price, even in the best restaurants, Roman food was bad now, and getting worse.    The   
heavy chalky bread was quite inedible; the new brown spaghetti tasted rather like mud; each   
month the cheese grew more rubbery; the cooking and salad oils left a loathsome aftertaste;   
and a bottle of decent table wine was hard to come by.      Natalie obtained proper milk   
occasionally at the embassy; Italian expectant mothers had to drink the same blue slimy fluid   
that sad shrugging waiters served with the fake coffee. 
 
So Dr.    Jastrow was ready to go; but he was not scared.    He had read so much history that the   
events of the hour seemed a banal repetition of old games. He had delayed    and delayed   
leaving Italy, almost welcoming the difficulties with his papers, because in his heart he had   
thought the war was going to end soon.    Even if the villain with the mustache (as he loved to   
call Hitler) won, it might not matter so much, providing the Nazis did not march into Italy.   
 613 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
And why should they invade a grovelling satellite? 
 
Germany might    well be the new Byzantium,    he liked to say over wine: a stable well-run   
tyranny, geared to run a thousand years, just as Hitler boasted.    Byzantium had lasted almost   
that long, waxing and waning through the centuries as rivals grew strong or weak, pushing its   
borders out and shrinking them back much like Germany; but always hanging on, and often   
triumphing, with its military advantages of tyranny, centrality, and interior lines. A nation's   
history was formed by its geography, as another villainous tyrant, Napoleon, had long ago   
pointed out; and autocraty was the form of government most congenial to Europe anyway.    As   
a Jew, Jastrow of course detested Hitler.    But as a philosophical historian, he could place him,   
and even give him good marks for willpower and political skill. He quite disbelieved the   
atrocity stories; warmedover British propaganda, he said, which he still remembered well from   
the last war. 
 
Natalie, however, was getting scared.    Ever since Finland's entry into the war had stopped the   
freighter from sailing, she had sought another way out.    They were still quite free to go.    But   
now she had to deal with the Italian railroads, airlines, and emigration offices. 
 
Altogether, they made a soft fuzzy paralyzing snarl. The thought of confinement far from   
home, of feeding a newborn infant the rations of pinched Italy, began to alarm her as nothing   
had before. President Roosevelt was intervening more and more openly in the Atlantic; a   
sudden declaration of war by Hitler'would undoubtedly drag along Mussolini, and she and her   
uncle would be interned as enemy aliens! 
 
The worst stumbling block at this stage was a thing called an exit permit. Formerly it had   
given her no trouble at all.    The yellow card stamped in purple cost a few lire, and could be   
purchased as soon as one had ship, train, or air tickets to show.    But now an application caused   
hemming, hawing, and mighty searchings of bureaucratic hearts. 
 
Once, after several disappointments, Natalie did get hold of two plane seats to Lisbon, and   
rushed them to the emigration office.    An official took the tickets and the passports from her,   
telling her to come back in four days. 
 
On her return, the same stout and amiable official, breathing clouds of garlic, handed the   
passports back    to her    with    a sigh.    The    military had    requisitioned the    two    places    on   
the   
airplane. The e)tit permits were therefore not granted, he said, but in due course the fare   
money would be refunded. 
 
The very next day she heard the first exultant BBC broadcast about the meeting in   
Newfoundland.    The entry of the United States into the war sounded like an accomplished fact.   
Out of sheer despair she at once concocted a reckless scheme.    She would play the card most   
likely to touch the Italian heart: her pregnancy.    She was really having intermittent bleeding.   
The Americans she knew were sarcastic and skeptical about Roman doctors.    They had told her   
of an obstetrician in Zurich, one Dr.    Wundt, the best man outside the Nazi reach in Europe. 
 
She decided to request permission from Swiss authorities for a short medical visit: two weeks,   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ten days, whatever she could get. 
 
Pleading her bad condition, she would take her uncle along and so get e)tit permits.    Once in   
Switzerland, they would by book or by crook stay there until they obtained passage to the   
United States.    Aaron Jastrow had a publisher in Zurich, and she knew Bunky Thurston had   
been transferred there from Lisbon.    Once she thought of it, the idea seemed brilliant. 
 
To her delight, Aaron after some argument agreed to play his part. 
 
He would leave his travelling library, his luggage, and all his work papers at the hotel;   
everything except the typed book itself, which he would carry in one small valise with his   
clothing. If challenged, he would say he intended to work on the inky interlineated pages   
during the brief Zurich visit.    If the Italians did not want Jastrow to leave for good-something   
Natalie now half-suspected-such a casual departure might deceive them. 
 
The Atlantic Charter broadcast had given Jastrow, too, a flicker of concern; that was why he   
consented. 
 
The dodge worked like a charm.    Natalie booked passage to Zurich and got the exit permits.    A   
week later she and Dr.    Jastrow flew to Switzerland.    Everything was in order, except that he   
did not have formal permission from the Swiss, as she did, to stay for ten days. 
 
The document issued to him simply stated that he was accompanying an invalid for her safety   
enroute. When Natalie telephoned Bunky Thurston in Zurich about this, he said they had   
better leave it on that basis, and not push their luck further.    He could take care of Aaron once   
they arrived. 
 
The Zurich terminal was startling with its bustle, its clean glitter, its open shops crammed with   
splendid clothing, watches, porcelain, and jewelry, its heaped boxes of chocolates, exquisite   
pastries, and fresh fruits. 
 
Natalie ate a big yellow pear as she walked to Thurston's car, uttering little moans of delight. 
 
'Ah, this pear.    This pear!    My God," she said, "what a filthy thing Fascism is.    What a foul   
idiocy war is!    Europe's a rich continent. Why do the bloody fools lay it waste time after time?   
The Swis are the only smart Europeans." 
 
"Yes, the Swiss are smart," Thurston sighed, stroking the enormous mustache, which was as   
sleek and perfect as ever. The rest of his face had paled and aged as though he were ill.   
"How's your submariner?" 
 
'"Who knows? Dashing around the Pacific. Have you ever witnessed a crazier wedding?"   
Natalie turned to Jastrow, her eyes all at once gone from dulled suffering to the old bright   
puckish gleam.    "Bunky signed the marriage document.    Do you like Zurich better than Lisbon,   
Bunky?" 
 
"I don't like to think of eighty million Germans seething just beyond the Alps. But at least   
they're nice high Alps.-Here we are, the red Citroen.-The tragic refugee thing goes on here too,   
 615 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Natalie, but less visibly, less acutely.    In Lisbon it was just too horrible." 
 
Aaron Jastrow said as they drove down the highway, 'Will they -,end our passports to you at   
the consulate?" 
 
"Maybe you'll just pick them up when you go back." 'But we're not going back, darling,"   
Natalie said. "Aaron, give me your handkerchief, my face is all pear juice. I wish I could   
bathe in pear juice." 
 
"It's my only handkerchief," Jastrow said. 
 
Thurston pulled a handkerchief from his breast pocket and passed it to her. 'What do you   
mean, you're not going back?" 
 
"My uncle and I intend to hop the first train, plane, or goat cart out of here, so long as it heads   
for the good old USA.    I couldn't tell you that over the telephone, Bunky, obviously.    But it's   
the whole point of this trip." 
 
"Natalie, it won't work." 
 
"Why on earth not?" 
 
"Aaron got through Swiss immigration on my parole. I must return him there. He has no   
transit visa." 
 
After a silence Dr.    Jastrow said from the back seat, in a low sad voice, "I thought it was going   
too easily." 
 
"Bunky, wild horses can't get me back to Rome," Natalie said cheerfully. 'I won't have my   
baby there.    That's that.    You have to figure out some way to clear Aaron, too.    He's here now.   
His passport is good as gold. I know you can solve this." 
 
Thurston ran a careful hand over the mustache as he drove. 
 
"Well, you've caught me unawares.    Give me a little time." 
 
"I've got ten days," Natalie said. 
 
"There aren't too many ways to travel out of Zurich now," said Thurston. "I'll look into this a   
bit." 
 
He left them outside Dr.    Herman Wundt's office, which was in an old four-story house decked   
with flower-filled window boxes, and took their suitcases off to the hotel.    Jastrow dozed in an   
anteroom while Wundt examined Natalie. 
 
After asking a few questions and noting the answers on a card, the bald freckled doctor, a   
gnome not as tall as her uncle, with big ears and darting little brown eyes, probed, palpated,   
took specimens, and submitted Natalie to the usual indignities, and a couple of new painful   
ones with strange implements, all the while smiling and chatting in French. She lay on the   
 616 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
table panting and exhausted under a sheet her face sweating, all her lower body in an ache.   
The breeze brought a delicious scent of sweet peas from the window boxes. 
 
"Very well, take a little rest." 
 
She heard him washing his hands.    He returned with a notebook and sat beside her. 
 
"You're as strong as a horse, and you're carrying that baby perfectly." 
 
"I had three bleeding episodes." 
 
"Yes.    You mentioned that.    When was the last one?" 
 
"Let's see.    A month ago.    Maybe a little more." 
 
"Well, you can wait around a day or so for the result of the smear, and the urine test, and so   
forth.    I'm almost sure they'll be negative, and Dr. 
 
Carona will deliver a fine baby for you.    I know him well.    He's the best man in Rome." 
 
"Dr.    Wundt, unless I go back to the States, I'd rather stay and have the baby here.    I don't want   
to return to Rome." 
 
"So?    Why?" 
 
"Because of the war. If the United States becomes involved, I'll find myself on enemy soil   
with a newborn baby." 
 
"You say your husband is an American naval officer, in the Pacific Ocean?" 
 
"Yes. 
 
"You're too far away from him." 
 
Natalie sadly laughed.    'I agree, but that's done now." 
 
"What kind of name is that-Henry?" 
 
"Oh, I guess it's Scotch.    Scotch-English." 
 
"And your maiden name is Jastrow, you said?    Is that Scotch-English too?" 
 
"It's Polish."    After a pause, as the little brown eyes stared at her, she added, "Polish-Jewish." 
 
"And that gentlemen outside, your uncle?    Is he Polish-Jewish?" 
 
"He's a famous American writer." 
 
"Really?    How exciting.    Is he a Polish Jew?" 
 
"He was born in Poland." 
 617 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"You can get dressed now.    Then come into the other room, please." 
 
Dr. Wundt sat hunched in a swivel chair in his tiny office, smoking a cigar. The smoke   
wreathed up over wrinkled yellow diplomas on the walls, and a dusty engraving of the   
wounded lion of Lucerne.    He rested the cigar in an onyx tray, pressed his fingertips together,   
and put them to his mouth. 
 
The brown-patched old face stared blankly at her. 
 
'Mrs.    Henry, in the past few years-I have to be frank with youpregnancy has been used and   
abused to death here to solve passport difficulties. The immigration authorities have become   
very hard.    I am an alien myself, and my license can easily be revoked.    Do I make myself   
clear?" 
 
"But I'm having no passport difficulties," Natalie replied calmly. 
 
"None at all.    Do you think I can safely travel back to the United States? 
 
that's all I want to know.The doctor hunched his shoulders, pursed his lips, and cocked his head   
like a bright dog, his eyes never leaving her. 'By what means of transportation?" 
 
"Airplane, I suppose." 
 
"What was Dr.    Carona's opinion?" 
 
'I didn't ask him.    Despite what you say, I don't have much confidence in him.    That's why I   
want to stay here if I can't fly home." 
 
The old doctor's eyes sparked and he spread his hands.    "And that's precisely where I can't help   
you. The authorities will demand from me a written certificate that you're unable to travel.   
Otherwise they won't extend your stay.    You're quite able to fly back to Rome. 
 
About flying to the United States"-he cocked his head again-'that is bound to be a rough long   
journey." 
 
Natalie kept an unruffled manner.    "You mean I might lose the baby?" 
 
"Not necessarily, but an expectant mother with a first baby should avoid such a strain.    Your   
pregnancy history already is not one hundred percent." 
 
"Then why make me go back to Rome?    The milk and the food are abominable.    I don't like the   
doctor there.    He mishandled my bleeding." 
 
With a cold edge in his voice, the little doctor said, "Mrs. 
 
Henry, a flight to Rome is no problem for you, nothing to justify an extension of your stay.    I'm   
very sorry. The authorities    will ask me about your health, not about Roman milk or Dr.   
Carona."    He flipped open an appointment book and peered into it.    "I will see you tomorrow at   
a quarter past five, and we will discuss your tests," At dinner with Thurston and her uncle that   
 618 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
night, Natalie was quite blithe.    The buoyant excitement of being out of Rome, and in a city at   
peace, overbore Wundt's Sourness; and she was cheered by the examination results.    She was   
"strong as a horse," the infant was kicking lustily inside her, and they had escaped from Fascist   
Italy.    The rest would work out, she thought, especially since Thurston seemed in an optimistic   
mood.    She decided not to quiz him, but let him talk when he was ready. 
 
Meantime her common ground with him was Leslie Slote. She told droll anecdotes of her   
wretched Paris flat: the tiny stairwell elevator in which Slote got stuck and slept all one night,   
her Algerian landlord's efforts to keep her from cooking, the one-eyed homosexual sculptor on   
the floor above who pestered Slote to pose for him.    Aaron Jastrow had not heard these yarns   
of young love on the Left Bank.    What with the richly satisfying dinner, the fine wine, and the   
view from the open-air terrace restaurant of Zurich ablaze with lights, his spirits also rose. He   
accepted a cigar from Thurston, though he had a bad cough. 
 
"My lord.    Havana!"    Dr.    Jastrow rolled the smoke on his tongue. 
 
"This takes me back ten years to the commons room.    How gracious and easy and pleasant life   
seemed!    Yet all the time the villain with the mustache was piling up his tanks and his cannon.   
Ah, me.    You're very merry, Natalie." 
 
'I know.    The wine, no doubt, and the lights.    The lights!    Bunky, electric light is the strongest   
enchantment there is.    Live in a blackout for a few months and you'll see!    You know what   
Zurich reminds me of?    Luna Park in Coney Island, when I was a little girl.    You walked in a   
blaze of lights, millions and millions of yellow bulbs. 
 
The lights were more exciting than the rides and games. 
 
Switzerland's amazing, isn't it?    A little dry diving bell of freedom in an ocean of horror.    What   
an experience!    I'll never forget this." 
 
"You can understand why the Swiss have to be very, very careful," Thurston said.    "Otherwise   
they'd be swamped with refugees." 
 
Natalie and her uncle sobered at that last word, listening for what he would say next. 
 
The consul smoothed his mustache with both palms.    "Don't forget there are more than four   
million Jews caught in Hitler's Europe.    And in all of Switzerland there are only four million   
people.    So the Swiss have become almost as sticky about Jews as our own State Department,   
but with infinitely more reason.    They've got sixteen thousand square miles of land, much of it   
bare rock and snow.    We've got three and a half million square miles.    Compare population   
densities, and we're a vast empty wilderness. 
 
We're supposed to be the land of the free, the haven of outcasts. 
 
The Swiss make no such claim.    Who should be taking in the Jews? 
 
Yet they are doing it, but carefully, and within limits. Moreover the Swiss depend on the   
Germans for fuel, for iron, for all trade, in and out.    They're in a closed ring.    They're free only   
 619 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
as long as it suits the Nazis.    I can't take a high moral tone with the Swiss authorities about you.   
As an American official, I'm in a hell of a lousy position for moral tone." 
 
Jastrow said, "One can see that." 
 
"Nothing's been decided in your case, you understand," the consul said. "I've just been making   
inquiries.    A favorable solution is possible. 
 
Natalie, could you endure a long train trip?" 
 
"I'm not sure.    Why?" 
 
"The only airline operating from Zurich to Lisbon now is Lufthansa." 
 
Natalie felt a pang of alarm, but her tone was matter-of-fact.    "I see. 
 
What about that Spanish flight?" 
 
"You were misinformed. It shut down back in May. Lufthansa flies once a week, starting   
from Berlin and making every stop in betweenMarseilles, Barcelona, Madrid. It's a rotten   
flight.    I've taken it going the other way.    It's usually crowded with hotshots. 
 
Do you want to separate from your uncle and try Lufthansa?    Your passport doesn't say you're   
Jewish. You're Mrs. Byron Henry. Even the Germans have some tenderness for pregnant   
women.    But, of course, for twenty hours or so you'd be in Nazi hands." 
 
"What's the alternative?" 
 
"Train via Lyons, Nimes, and Perpignan, sliding down the French coast, crossing the Pyrenees   
to Barcelona, and then, heaven help you, clear across Spain and Portugal to Lisbon.   
Mountains, tunnels, awful roadbeds, and God knows how many breakdowns, delays, and   
changes, with a long stretch through Vichy France.    Maybe three, maybe six days enroute." 
 
Natalie said, "I don't think I should risk that." 
 
'I wouldn't mind trying Lufthansa," said Jastrow in a far-off voice, rolling the cigar in his   
fingers.    "I still don't believe, I truly don't, that the Germans would molest me." 
 
Thurston shook his head.    "Dr.    Jastrow, she's the wife of a Gentile naval officer.    I think she'd   
be all right.    Don't you go on Lufthansa!" 
 
"What I have to decide, then," Natalie said, "is whether I chance Lufthansa alone, or take the   
train with Aaron." 
 
'You don't have to decide anything yet.    I'm telling you some of the things to think about." 
 
Natalie    and her uncle killed the next day looking in shopwindows, buying    clothes, eating   
cream cakes, drinking real coffee, riding around in cabs, and luxuriating in the rich freedom of   
Switzerland, only a few hours by air from brown melancholy Rome.    Toward evening she saw   
Dr. 
 620 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wundt again.    With a sad shrug, he told her that all her tests were negative. 
 
'That's all right.    I may be able to stay, anyway," she said.    "My consul's looking into it." 
 
"Ah, so?"    the little doctor's face brightened.    "Perfect! 
 
Nothing would please me more. Let me book your lying-in right away, Mrs. Henry. The   
hospitals are crowded." 
 
"I'll let you know in a day or two." 
 
"Excellent." 
 
In the morning she found a white hotel envelope slipped under the door: Hi. Things are   
cooking.    Meet me at the lake front, both of you, four o'clock, at Zurich Pure Boats.    Bunky.  
 
When they arrived at the dock, the consul had already hired an open boat with an outboard   
motor, and was sitting in it, waiting. 
 
Without a word he helped them in, started the engine, and went puttering off from the shore.   
About a mile out he killed the motor, and they couldd hear a German waltz thumping brassily   
over the blue water from the band of an approaching excursion steamer. 
 
"Irve got quite a report for you," Thurston said, and Natalie's hart leaped at his happy grin.    "I   
thought we'd better be by ourselves while we talk it out" 'Is it all arranged?"    Jastrow said, with   
an eagerness that struck his niece as childish. 
 
Thurston smoothed a palm over his mustache.    "Well, we're not in bad shape."    The consul's   
eyes twinkled at Natalie.    'Say, I've been on the telephone and teletype to Rome.    Your Byron   
outdid his Lisbon feat, didn't he?    Talking to President Roosevelt about your uncle's passport! 
 
What sheer nerve!    Sight unseen, nobody in Rome likes him."    'I can imagine." 
 
"Yes, but your uncle's file carries a big 'presidential' flag on it now, and that's just fine.    Now,   
Natalie, you're set. I've put you on the waiting list at Lufthansa. The next two flights are   
booked, but you've got a reservation on the third.    Immigration will extend your stay till then."   
'But by then I'll be in my eighth month-' Holding up a hand, Thurston said, "Lufthansa is sure   
you'll get out sooner.    Maybe next week.    There are always cancellations, and you're high on   
the list, because of your pregnancy." 
 
'What about Aaron?" 
 
"Well, that's a different story." 
 
"She's the important one," Jastrow said dramatically, 'and what happens to me couldn't matter   
less. I've lived my life." "Hold on, hold on." Thurston smiled. 'Good lord, Dr. Jastrow!   
Everything's all right. You just can't stay on in Switzerland with her.      That's out of the   
question. But you're set, too.    Rome's in a big boil about you now. 
 621 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The ambassador is outraged.    He says that if he has to, he'll appoint you to his staff and send   
you home on a diplomatic priority. 
 
You're returning to Rome, but he'll assume responsibility for dealing with the Italians. We   
have a lot of Italian bigwigs in the States, Dr. Jastrow, and I promise you there will be no more   
trouble with your exit permit." 
 
"You do think that's better for me than taking the train to Lisbon?" 
 
Jastrow's question was rhetorical. He sounded pleased and relieved. "I'm quite willing to   
attempt that."    "Great heavens, Dr. 
 
Jastrow. I wouldn't do that    myself.    It's    a gruelling    schedule, and I'm not even sure the   
connections are still available. 
 
But the main objection is, you'd be leaving Switzerland illegally. 
 
You musn't think of that.    At all costs, now that you're legal, stay legal." 
 
Jastrow turned to his niece.    "Well, my dear!    Ills sounds like a parting of the ways."    Natalie   
did not reply. Flying in a German airliner, now that it was upon her, loomed as an ugly   
prospect.    Alw, she was nauseous from the rocking of the boat in the wash of the excursion   
steamer, which was passing close by with passengers idly looking down at them, and the band   
blasting out "The Blue Danube." 
 
With a keen glance at her, Thurston said, "I know you're set against returning to Rome, Natalie.   
But if you'll reconsider that, the ambassador will make the identical arrangements for you that   
he's working on for your uncle.    That's what I'd recommend to you, myself." 
 
"Well, it all takes some mulling over, doesn't it?"    Natalie said. 
 
"Can we go back?    I'm tired." 
 
"Of course."    Thurston at once yanked the cord on the flywheel, and the motor started up in a   
cloud of blue fumes. 
 
'We're so grateful to you," Jastrow exclaimed over the noise. 
 
"You've done wonders."    "That 'presidential' tag is a help," Thurston said, steering across the   
spreading wake of the steamer, in jolts and bumps that were almost in time with "The Blue   
Danube."    When Natalie came down to breakfast, her uncle was sitting at a window table of the   
restaurant in strong sunlight, sipping coffee. 
 
"Hello there, lazybones," he said.    "I've been up for hours.    I hope you're hungry.    They have   
the mort exquisite Polish ham this morning. 
 
How would they get Polish ham?    I suppose the Germans stole it, and they bought it for gold.   
It's the best in the world." 
 622 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Natalie ordered coffee and a roll. 
 
Jastrow bubbled on.    "You're not hungry?    I was famished. 
 
Strange, isn't it, how far one can come in a lifetime! When I lived in Medzice as a boy, I   
literally would have let myself be burned alive or shot rather than swallow a piece of ham.   
Those old taboos deprived us of such simple available pleasures."    He looked at his niece, who   
sat pallid, tense, and glum, with hands folded on her bulky stomach. 'You know, one of the   
prettiest sights on earth is a bowl full of fresh butter in morning sunshine.    Look at that butter! 
 
Fragile and sweet as flowers.    Be sure to try it.    And this coffee is so very good!    Natalie, my   
dear, I've slept on it, and I've quite made up my mind about what happens next" 
 
"Have you?    That's good.    So have I." He said, 'I'm going back to Rome. I would try Lufthansa,   
dear, I'm not afraid of the bogeymen.    But I know I might clog your escape. 
 
That comes first.    You absolutely must go your own way now.    That's my decision, and I'm   
afraid I'm going to be adamant about it.    My dear, what are you staring at? 
 
Do I have egg on my chin?"    'No, but that's precisely what I intended to tell you I would do." 
 
'is it?" His face lit up in a gentle smile. "Thank heaven. I thought you'd put up a heroic   
argument for returning with me.    No, it's absurd for you to drag yourself back.    As for me, I   
trust the ambassador, and anyway there's no sense thrashing against one's fate. 
 
Often fate knows best. 
 
I have a place on the afternoon plane to Rome. Going back seems to be as easy as sliding   
down a greased slope.    Only the other direction is hard."    Natalie sipped her coffee.    Was this a   
game to cajole from her an offer to go back to Rome?    She was, after long experience, wary of   
her uncle's selfishness, sometimes blatant, sometimes subtle. 
 
"Well," she said, 'I suppose it makes sense, if you want to leave via Rome, to get there and line   
it up, the sooner the better.    Are you sure you can manage?" 
 
'If the ambassador himself is intervening, how can I muck it up? 
 
I have only one request.    Will you take the manuscript?    Even if I beat you home, I'd rather you   
guarded the book.    I'll have all the draft notes, you see. 
 
There's two chances of preserving The Arch of Constantine instead of one." 
 
Now, for the first time, Natalie began to believe her uncle, and to allow herself some warmth   
toward him.    "Well, Aaron, all right. 
 
This parting is going to feel very, very strange." 
 
"Natalie, I'll be more red-eyed than you.    I bear a burden of guilt about you at least as large as   
that baby you've got there.    Some day you'll know the measure of my gratitude."    He put his   
 623 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
weak, bony little hand on hers.    "You've earned yourself-as our fathers quaintly put it-a large   
share in the world to come.    If only it existed!" 
 
So Aaron Jastrow went back docilely to Rome. His niece heard nothing for ten days, ten   
dreary days in which the comforts and rich food of the Swiss rapidly palled.    Even an albatross   
around one's neck, Natalie began to think, was company of a sort. She was terribly lonely.   
Bunky Thurston, carrying on a romance with the daughter of a refugee French novelist, had   
little time for her.    The Swiss treated her, as they did all foreigners, with cool paid courtesy, as   
though the whole country were the grounds of a huge Class A hotel.    The sad-eyed Jews in the   
shops, the streets, the excursion trains and boats, depressed her.    A letter came at last, sprinkled   
with special-delivery stamps and censors'markings. 
 
I assume this will be read, but it makes no difference. You and I are in the clear with the   
Italian authorities!    I now have in my possession, Natalie, two air tickets, and properly dated   
e)tit permits, and Portuguese transit visas, and Pan Am connections, and highest diplomatic   
prioritn, stickers.    The works!    They're lying on the desk before me, and I've never seen a more   
glorious sight. 
 
Thurston sparked an explosion in this embassy, my dear.    A fine chap. 
 
It was high time! The ambassador used all his available channels, including the Vatican- 
where, as you know, I have many friends.    I should have tried long ago myself to throw my   
weight around, but it seemed so infra dig to plead my literary distinction, such as it is! 
 
Now to cases. 
 
The date of the tickets is December fifteenth.    It's awfally far off, I know, but Pan Am's the   
bottleneck.    No sense going to Lisbon and sitting there for months!    And this transportation is   
sure.    Of course it does mean having your baby here, after all.    That decision is up to you.  
 
I enclose a note from the ambassador's charming and quite bright wife. If you don't want to   
languish in Zurich, waiting for a chance to ride out with the gallant Huns, her invitation may be   
welcome. 
 
I await your orders.    I feel twenty years younger.    Are you well? 
 
I worry about you day and night. 
 
Love Aaron. 
 
The ambassador's wife had written in an ornate finishing-school hand in green ink, with little   
circles over the i's: Dear Natalie: I sent my daughter home three months ago to have her baby.   
Her room is empty, her husband works in the embassy, and all of us miss her so much! 
 
If you can get home from Switzerland, nothing could be better. 
 
Otherwise, please consider coming here, where at least you would eat well, and the baby would   
be born on American "soil," so to speak, among your friends.    We would love to have you. 
 624 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
On this same morning, Bunky Thurston telephoned.    Lufthansa had come across with an early   
reservation, as a special courtesy to him: one seat to Lisbon, September 17, four days off.    No   
opening existed on Pan Am, he said, but they had put her high on the long Lisbon waiting list,   
and she would get any early vacancy. 
 
"I'd suggest you go straight to the Lufthansa office on the Bahnhofstrasse, just two blocks   
down from the hotel, and grab yourself this ticket," Thurston said.    "There are various forms to   
fill out, which I can't do for you, otherwise-" 
 
"Wait, Bunky, wait." Natalie was having trouble following him. She had awakened with a   
sore throat and a fever of over a hundred; she was groggy from the aspirins and depressed by   
her uncle's letter, which had thrown her into a vortex of indecision. "I have a letter from   
Aaron. Can you spare a moment?" 
 
"Shoot." 
 
She read him the letter. 
 
"Well! They really got hot, didn't they? Natalie, I can't presume to make your decision. I   
know what Leslie Slote would say. 
 
Byron too." 
 
"I know.    Play it safe, go straight back to Rome." 
 
"Exactly." 
 
"You're wrong about Byron.    Byron would tell me to get on Lufthansa." 
 
"Really?    You know him better than I do.    Whatever you decide, let me know if there's any   
way I can help you," Thurston said.    "I hear Francoise honking.    We're spending a day in the   
country."    Of all things, Natalie did not want to go back to Rome.    It was the fixed idea she   
clung to. Heavily, dizzily, she dressed herself and set out to walk to Lufthansa. She kept   
swallowing, her throat rasping like sandpaper despite the aspirins.    All the airline offices were   
in the same block. Air France, Pan American, and BOAC were closed and shuttered, the paint   
of their signs fading. The gilt of Lufthansa's eagle, perched on a wreathed swastika, shone   
bright in the sun.    The swastika made Natalie hesitate outside.    Through the window she saw   
behind a bare counter in a hospitalclean office a tanned blonde girl in an azure and gold   
uniform, perfectly groomed, laughing with very white teeth.    A tanned man in a checked sports   
jacket was laughing with her. 
 
Wall posters showed castles on river bluffs, and girls in Bavarian costume, and fat men   
drinking beer, and busts of Beethoven and Wagner hovering over a baroque opera house. 
 
They saw her looking in at them, stopped laughing, and stared. 
 
Shivering a little from the fever, Natalie entered the Lufthansa office. 
 
"Grass Gott," said the girl. 
 625 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Good afternoon," Natalie said hoarsely.    "The American consul, Bunker Thurston, has made a   
reservation for me to fly to Lisbon on the seventeenth." 
 
"Oh?    Are you Mrs.    Byron Henry?"    The girl switched smoothly to clear English.  
 
" yes."    "Fine.    Your passport?" 
 
"Do you have the reservation?" 
 
"Yes.    Let me have your passport, please." 
 
The girl held out a manicured, scrubbed hand. Natalie gave her the passport, and the girl   
handed her a long form printed on coarse green paper.    "Fill this out, please." 
 
Natalie scanned the lorin.    "My goodness.    What a lot of questions for an airplane ride." 
 
"Wartime security regulations, Mrs.    Henry.    Both sides, please." 
 
The first page asked for a detailed    accounting    of the passenger's    travels    in the past year.   
Natalie turned over the form.    The first question at the top of the page was GLAUBUNG (Foi)   
(Religion)........................................... 
 
Vater (Pe) (Father)............................. 
 
Mutter (Mgre) (Mother)........................................... 
 
A nerve spasm swept her.    She wondered why Thurston had not warned her of this risky snag.   
Here was a quick decision to make!    It was simple enough to write in "Methodist"; they had   
her mother's maiden name in the passport, but "Greengold" wasn't necessarily Jewish.    How   
could they check?    Yet, after Aaron's troubles, what lists might she not be on? 
 
How could she be sure that the Kenigsberg incident had not been recorded? And what had   
happened to those Jewish neutrals at Kenigsberg whom the Germans had marched oR As these   
thoughts raced in her fevered mind, the baby gave a little jolt inside her. 
 
The street outside seemed far away and inviting.    Natalie's head s,",am and her throat seemed   
to be choking shut with bits of gravel. 
 
She dropped the green form on the counter.    The Lufthansa girl was starting to write a ticket,   
copying data from the passport.    Natalie saw her glance in puzzlement at the form, then at the   
man in the sports jacket, who reached into a pocket and said to Natalie in German, "Do you   
need a pen?" 
 
"Give me my passport, please," she said. 
 
The girl's eyebrows arched.    "Is something wrong?" 
 
Too rattled to think of a deft answer, Natalie blurted, "Americans don't ask people's religion for   
travel purposes, and don't give their own." 
 626 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The man and the girl exchanged a knowing look. The man said, "if you want to leave that   
blank, it is up to you.    It is quite all right, Mrs. Henry." 
 
They both smiled slow queer smiles, the smile of the SS officer in Kenigsberg. 
 
"I'll take my passport, please." 
 
"I have started to write your ticket," said the girl.    "It is very hard to get passage to Lisbon,   
Mrs.    Henry." 
 
"My passport." 
 
The girl tossed the maroon booklet on the counter, and turned her back. 
 
Natalie left.    Three doors down, the Swissair office was open. 
 
She went in, and booked a flight to Rome the following morning. 
 
It was as Aaron Jastrow had said.    Going back was as easy as descending a greased slope. 
 
(from WORLD EMPIRE LOST) 
 
The Geography of Barbarossa In war the event is all, and Germany lost the war. This has   
obscured her victories in the field.    Her enemies never won such victories; they overwhelmed   
her in the end with numbers, and a cataract of machines. 
 
Defeat also, quite naturally, casts doubt on the conduct of the war by the loser.    Thus we have   
wide agreement among military historians, regrettably including noted German generals like   
Guderian, Manstein, and Warlimont, that our plan for the invasion of Russia was "vague" or   
"patched-up" or "without a strategic objective."      What is accomplished by this historical   
fouling of our own nest, except self- ' exculpation which should be beneath a soldier's dignity?   
it is bad enough that we lost the war, and world empire, by a heartbreakingly slender margin.   
There is no reason to describe ourselves, in our greatest notional effort, cls unprofessional dolts   
into the bargain. 
 
Such lickspittle writing, catering to the prejudices of the victors, does honor to nobody and   
violates history. 
 
I myself was detailed to temporary service on the planning staff of General Marcks, which in   
the fall and winter of 1940 worked out the original war games of the invasion of the Soviet   
Union and then drafted an operational proposal. 
 
I was therefore in the picture from the start.    It was a bold conception, for the factors of space   
and time,    for the numbers    of men and quantities    of supplies, and for the grandeur of the   
political stakes. In detail Barbarossa was almost too complicated to be grasped by any one   
human intelligence.    Yet in overall vision, it was a simple plan.    In this lay its merit and its   
strength. it was firmly rooted in geographic, economic, and military realities. Within the   
limits of risk inherent in all war, it was sound. 
 627 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Let the reader spend a moment or two studying the very simplified map I have prepared.   
Further on, in my operational narrative, there are more than forty situation maps from the   
archives.    Here is the picture of the Barbarossa assault in a nutshell. 
 
Map Deleted 
 
BO*U Line A was our main effort, or jump-off line in Poland. 
 
It was about five hundred miles long, running north and south from the Baltic Sea to the   
Carpathian Mountains.    (There was also a holding action out of Rumania, intended to scifenard   
the Ploesti oil fields.) Line C was our goal. Almost two thousand miles long, it ran from   
Archangel, on the White Sea, south to Kazan and then along the Volga to the Caspian Se(3Its   
farthest objectives were about twelve hundred miles from the starting point. 
 
Line B was as for as we got in December 1941.    The line runs from Leningrci, on the Gulf of   
Finlcind, down through Moscow to the Crimea on the Block Sea, i falling just short of Rostov   
on the Don. It is nearly twelve hundred miles long, and more than six hundred miles from   
where we started.    We were apparently stopped by the Russians, therefore, about halfway.    But   
that is not really so.    We were halted at the last moment, in the last ditch. 
 
The Attack Concept 
 
During the spring of 1941, our intelligence reported that the Red Army was massing in the   
west, near the line cutting Poland in two. 
 
This menacing pileup of armed Slavs threatened to inundate Europe with Bolshevism.    It was a   
main reason for the fuhrer's decision to launch his preventive war, and certainly justified all our   
earlier planning. 
 
This menacing disposition of Stalin's forces nevertheless pleased us, because he was giving up   
the great Russian advantage of maneuvering space, anci crowding the Red Army within reach   
of a quick knockout blow. Stalin was superior both in numbers and equipment. Our best   
information was that we would be marching with about one hundred fifty divisions against   
perhaps two hundred, with about thirty-two hundred tanks against as many as ten thousand,   
and with an unknown disadvantage in aircraft. Obviously, then, our hope lay in superior   
training, leadership, soldiers, and machines, and in the swift decisive exploitation of surpise.   
After Finland, this seemed a reasonable estimate of the situation. 
 
The strategic aim of Barbarossa was to shatter the Soviet state in one colossal summer stroke,   
and to reduce its fragments to disarmed socialist provinces garrisoned and ruled by Germany,   
from the Polish border to the Volga.    The primitive land east of the Volga, the frozen Siberian   
deserts and the empty forests beyond the Urals, could then be cordoned off or taken at leisure.   
From those remote areas no existing bomber could reach Germany, a vital factor to. 
 
consider. 
 
Operationally, we expected to break through the thick crust at the western border with three   
 628 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
huge simultaneous lightning attacks-two to the north of the marshland, one to the south-and   
encircle and mop up the broken forces within a couple of weeks.    Thus, the main bulk of the   
Red Army would cease to exist almost at the outset. 
 
This we estimated we could do; but we knew that would not be the end. We realized the enemy   
would maintain heavy reserve forces between the borders and Moscow, and that at some point   
these forces would dig in. We also knew that the stolid Slav fights best in defense of his   
fatherland. We therefore expected, and planned for, a second big central campaign during the   
first part of July, probably in the region behind the Dnieper-Dvina line, to round up and destroy   
these reserve forces. Finally, we expected that as we penetrated to the line Leningrad-Moscow- 
Sevastopol, we would encounter a last-ditch surge of Russian resistance (as we did), including   
a levee en masse of the populatons of the capital and the other big industrial cities lying along   
this spinal column of the Soviet Union.    Once we broke that spine, nothing lay beyond, in our   
judgment, to the Archangel-Volga line which was our goal, except for a gigantic mop-up of a   
panic-stricken population, with perhaps some minor partisan warfare. 
 
This was, of course, a difficult undertaking, a gamble against odds. The battlefield was Soviet   
Russia itself, a funnel-shaped landmass five hundred miles wide at one end, seventeen hundred   
miles wide at the other.    The northward slope of the funnel lay along the Baltic and the White   
seas; the southward slope, along the Carpathian Mountains and the Black Sea.    Our forces had   
to fan out into the vast level monotony of the Russian plain, stretching our lines of   
communication and thinning our front as we went.    This we expected, but we were surprised   
by the primitiveness of the roads and the wildness of the countryside.    Here our intelligence   
was faulty.    This was not terrain suited for blitzkrieg.    In fact, the very inefficiency and low   
standards of Communist Russia proved a formidable defensive factor. 
 
They had not troubled to build decent highways, and their railroad beds were defective and- 
deliberately, of course-of a different gauge than ours. 
 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTE: In Roon's view, German staff plans for attacks on other countries   
are always defensive and hypothetical; but the other fellow always does something stupid or   
evil that triggers off the plan. 
 
Historians still debate Stalin's intentions in 1941, but it seems he had no offensive plans.    The   
Soviets    were frightened to death    of the Germans,    and did everything    possible,    to the last   
moment, to oppease them and keep them from attacking.-V.H. 
 
Cutting the Pie Barbarossa clicked from the start, despite various problems. All along the   
front, we achieved surprise. This will remain a supreme wonder in the annals of warfare.   
Guderian records how German artillerymen around Brest-Litovsk, poised to start a barrage on   
the unsuspecting Bolsheviks before down, watched t the last Russian supply train chug   
faithfully out of the Soviet Union into our sector of Poland. Nothing could show more clearly   
how Stalin and his henchmen were fooled by the Fuhrer's adroit politics.    Western writers now   
call this a "perfidious attack," as though, at the outset of a struggle to the death, Germany could   
afford parlor-game niceties. 
 629 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
With this advantage in hand, Barbarossa proceeded according to plan. 
 
The Luftwaffe caught the enormous frontline Red air force on the ground and wiped it out in a   
few hours.    In the center and in the north our armored pincers advanced by timetable, with the   
infantry rolling forward in their support.    Six days saw us in Minsk and at the Dvina, bagging   
nearly half a million prisoners and thousands of guns and tanks.      Only in the south did   
Rundstedt encounter some real resistance. 
 
Elsewhere, the Red Army was like a huge thrashing body without a head. 
 
Stalin was invisible and silent, paralyzed in the throes of melancholia. 
 
Two more weeks, and a second vast armored encirclement had closed around Smolensk, two- 
thirds of the way along the main Moscow road.    In the north we had overrun the Baltic states,   
turning the Baltic into a German lake, and were rapidly approaching Leningrad through wild   
terrain. Rundstedt's drive in the south had picked up steam and was nearing Kiev. We had   
rounded up several hundred thousand more prisoners.      The Russians fought bravely and   
stubbornly in little pockets, but operationally we were no longer encountering the the   
organized resistance of a national force.    According to all reports from the field and the picture   
developing at Supreme Headquarters, we had once again won a war-Or, more exactly, a grand   
police action-in three weeks, and were engaged in mop-up: Poland, France, and now the Soviet   
Union. 
 
Of course, such a massive advance had taken its toll of men, supplies, and wear and tear on   
machines.    A pause for consolidation ensued, lasting to midAugust.    Some writers claim this   
was a "fatal display of irresolution," but they obviously know nothing of logistics. 
 
This pause was part of our original timetable. Far from being irresolute, the Wehrmacht,   
triumphant from the Baltic to the Black Sea, regrouped and tooled up in a flush of victorious   
excitement, which can still make the blood tingle in old soldiers who remember, As the staff   
man familiar with the smallest details of Barbarosso, I was present at the famous conference at   
the Wolf's Lair Headquarters on July 16, when Hitler, sweeping both hands over his table map,   
exultantly told Goering, Rosenberg, Bormann, and other high Party brass, "Essentially,    the   
point now is to slice up this gigantic pie for our purposes, in order to be able: First, to dominate   
it, Second, to administer it, and Third, to explojt "I" I can still see the radiant smile on Hitler's   
puffy, unhealthy face as he held up fingers to count, and the touch of hectic red that victory had   
brought to his wan cheeks. After the conference ended, he talked informally of disbanding   
forty divisions in September, in order to send the men back to the factories. He wanted to   
reduce tank and gun production, in favor of a swift air and sea building program for the final   
crushing of England and the end of the war.    All this made plain common sense, and not one   
voice was raised in objection. From the visible facts in the field, the eastern campaign had been   
won. 
 
The Critiques 
 
Armchair strategists have    the    advantage not    only    of hindsight,    but    of    being    irresponsible. 
 630 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nobody really cares what they think.    The contest is over, and nothing hinges on their opinions.   
They are just consuming ink and paper, which are cheap.    Before the event, however, every   
decision in war involves the lives of soldiers, perhaps the national existence itself.    It is unwise   
to dismiss out of hand, long afterward, the judgments of the men in the field who had to do the   
job. 
 
But this cauflon is seldom exercised in critiques of Barbarossa. 
 
Three fallacious objections to our campaign crop up over and over. 
 
They contradict each other, but that does not stop the critics from using one, or two, or all   
three.    it is alleged: First, that our invasion of the Soviet Union was doomed to fail, no matter   
how many military victories were won, because a small patch of Europe like Germany, with   
eighty million inhabitants, could not hope to hold down vast Russia with close to two hundred   
millions; Second, that Hitler's narsh treatment of the Russian inhabitants was fatuous, because   
they would otherwise have welcomed us with open arms and helped to overthrow the hated   
Communist regime. In this connection, the old story of village women coming to greet the   
German invaders with flowers, or with bread and salt, is invariably trotted out; Third, that the   
plan made the classic error of seeking territorial or economic objectives, instead of   
concentrating on destroying the enemy's armed forces. 
 
Very well.    To the first point, I reply that a glance at the world map shows that a tiny island   
like England, peopled by thirty or forty million, could not possibly have ruled South Africa,   
India, Canada, and Australia, with almost half a billion inhabitants.    Nevertheless, for a long   
time, England did.    Moreover, these subject lands were not contiguous, but thousands of miles   
away, at the end of thread-thin lines of sea communication.    The Soviet Union, on the other   
hand, was in land communication with Germany, directly under our guns. 
 
These critics forget that the Soviet Union in the first instance was the creation of a small   
extremist party of Bolsheviks, who overthrew the regime and seized control of a population ten   
thousand times as numerous as themselves, a conglomerate of many nationalities. 
 
Or that a small ferocious Mongolian invader, the Golden Horde, actually did rule the Slav   
masses for more than a century.    In short, these critics know nothing of the history of conquest,   
or the techniques of military administration, especially with modern communications and   
equipment.    Had we conquered the Soviet Union, we would have administered it.    We did quite   
well in the provinces we held for years. 
 
The second contention of course contradicts the first.    if we could not hold down the Russians   
in any case, what would we have gained by an easy policy toward them?    It would only have   
hastened the day of our overthrow.    But this criticism rests on an absurd misconception of the   
entire nature of the war between Germany and the Soviet Union. 
 
This was, in the strictest sense, a war to the death, History had come to a turn, There were two   
strong Industrial powers left on the Eurasian landmass, and only two.    They faced each other.   
They    were dedicated to totally different revolutionary ideologies.      If    Bolshevism were to   
 631 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
triumph, Germany as we knew it had to die.    If German National Socialism prevailed, there   
was no room on this    heartland for an independent,    armed, menacing    Bolshevik nation far   
bigger than the Reich. 
 
The Green Folder 
 
Much has been made of "The Green Folder," the master policy directive for the economic   
exploitation of conquered Russia, prepared by Economic Staff East under Goering. At the   
Nuremberg trials, I established that I had no part in drawing up this administrative plan, since   
my responsibilities were operational. 
 
The proposals of the Green Folder were, without question, draconic. They meant the death by   
starvation of tens of millions of Russians. Goering admitted as much, and the documents are   
spread on the record, so denying this is absurd. 
 
Nor would there,be either sense or profit in attempting to prove the "morality" of the Green   
Folder.    However, certain observations of a military nature may be in order.  
 
The Green Folder scheme rested on a plain eographic fact.    The fertile "black belt" region of   
southern Russia feeds not only itself and its own industries, but the whole industrial complex to   
the north. 
 
Northern Russia has always been a scrubby, impoverished area, where bad weather and bad   
soil combine to create a permanent deficit of foodstuffs.    The Green Folder proposed a drastic   
levy on the corn, meats, coal, oil, fats, hides, and factory products of the south, for the purposes   
of maintaining our armies in the field and our strained German folk at home.    The plan was to   
feed the southern Slavs a minimum caloric intake, so that they could keep up production.    But   
Germany's need for so much of Russia's produce would naturally create a food shortage on a   
large scale. A serious wastage of the northern Russian population had to be accepted as a   
result. 
 
Perhaps our administrative plan for Russia was less "moral" than the Americans' extirpation of   
the red race and the seizure from them of the richest lands on earth. Perhaps it lacked the   
religious high-mindedness with which the Spaniards socked Mexico and South America and   
destroyed the fascinating Inca and Aztec civilizations. 
 
And possibly, in some way not very clear to this writer, the British subjugation of India, or the   
commercial spoliation of China by all the European colonialists plus the United States, were   
nicer and more moral programs than the proposals in the Green Folder.    But the unprejudiced   
reader must never forget that, in the German world-philosophical view, Russia was our India. 
 
We Germans have always lacked the singular Anglo-Saxon gift for cloaking self-interest in   
pious moral attitudes.    We honestly say what we think, and thus invariably shock the tender   
sensibilities of Western politicians and writers. 
 
Adolf Hitler was a world-historical individual; that much is now a settled fact. 
 632 
 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
He presented the German nation with a world-historical goal. 
 
World-historical changes are, as Hegel taught, for beyond the petty limits of morality.    They   
are revelations of God's will. Perhaps in the vast effort and the vast tragedy of Germany,   
Providence had a dark design that will become clear to later generations.    The Green Folder   
was an integral part of that effort.    By worldphilosophical considerations, it was the just act of   
a people seeking to strike out new paths in mankind's endless Faustian journey. 
 
In the light of these ideas, the argument that we should have treated the Ukrainians and other   
Slavs nicely, so that they would help us overthrow their Communist rulers, becomes clearly   
ridiculous. 
 
Germany, a nation as poor as it was powerful, could not continue the war without confiscating   
the food of southern Russia.      Was it to be expected that the Slavs would accept   
impoverishment, forced labor, and the death of millions by starvation, without a really serious   
revolt, unless their spirit had been broken from the start, and unless they had seen nothing in   
prospect but an iron fist and the firing squad if they did not labor and obey?    Adolf Hitler said   
that the only way to administer southern Russia was to shoot anybody who made a wry face. 
 
He had a harsh way of putting things sometimes, but what he said in such matters seldom   
lacked realism. 
 
Finally, it must be pointed out that the Green Folder administration scheme never became a   
reality, since we failed to conquer the Soviet Union.    it was a hypothetical plan that could not   
be put into practice. The stress placed on it at the Nuremberg trials therefore seems highly   
excessive and distorted. 
 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTE: Roon's philosophical defense of the Green Folder-possibly the   
cruelest set of administrative    plans ever put on paper-will no doubt be indigestible    to the   
average reader in the United States.    However, it was when I read this passage that I decided to   
translate World Empire Lost.-V.H. 
 
-A 
 
The Turn South Basing themselves largely upon Guderian, many writers further maintain that   
Hitler lost the war in mid-July, after our amazing three-week advance to Smolensk-two-thirds   
of the way to Moscow-by ordering Guderion's panzer armies southward to help Rundstedt   
close the Kiev pocket, instead of allowing him to drive on. The contention is that precious   
weeks were thereby lost and the armored equipment become excessively worn, so that the   
punch was taken out of the final assault on the capital. 
 
There are several gaping holes in this "Turn South" critique. 
 
First of all, the closing of the Kiev pocket east of the Dnieper was the greatest military land   
victory in the history of mankind.    At a blow, Germany killed or captured armed forces and   
equipment equal to almost half the entire Wehrmacht force with which she began the invasion   
of the Soviet Unioni it is a little hard to dismiss such a mighty triumph as a "tactical diversion."   
 633 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
With this victory, we won secure possession of the riches of southern Russia, which alone   
enabled us to fight on in the years ahead and to come close to winning. We secured the   
breadbasket, the industrial basin, and the fuel reserve, which Germany had sought for so long,   
and which was the whole pivot of Adolf Hitler's politics. 
 
True, Clausewitz says the destruction of the enemy's armed forces, not the winning of   
territorial or economic objectives, is the chief aim of warfare.    But the much-criticized "Turn   
South" achieved a big destruction of enemy armed forces. 
 
Suppose that vast southern army had escaped and flanked us?    Even if we had destroyed the   
armies in front of Moscow and occupied the capital, would we have been any better off than   
Napoleon? Napoleon essentially followed a Guderian    strategy,    striking for the "center of   
gravity" in Moscow.    The trouble was, once he got there, that he could not feed his men or his   
horses, he was threatened on the left and right flanks, and after a while there was nothing to do   
but retreat to fathomless catastrophe. 
 
We who planned Barbarossa, and watched it unfold, were seldom without a copy of   
Caulaincourt's Memoirs in handle If the Wehrmacht held fast during the frightful winter of   
1941, one very good reason was that we did not repeat Napoleon's mistake.    We at least seized   
the    south,    which    supported    us and gave    us    hope    to    fight    another day.      When    Hitler   
told   
Guderian, who came to Wolf's Lair to protest against the "Turn South," that generals know   
nothing about the economics of war, he spoke the cold truth.    They are like pampered athletes   
who let some other fellow worry about the playing fields, the crowds, and the money; their   
only interest is in displaying their prowess. Such was Guderion, an opinionated if brilliant   
prima donna. 
 
The contention that the drive through the center was weakened is itself rather weakened by the   
plain fact that after finishing his assigned duties in the south, Guderian returned north and   
jumped off for our spectacular September and October victories.      There was nothing   
particularly enfeebled in that performance! I have not hesitated to point out Adolf Hitler's   
amateurish errors in other situations; some of these were disastrous, but the turn south was a   
sound, necessary, and successful move. 
 
To the Towers of the Kremlin 
 
The remnants of the Red Army in the north and center, beaten and broken once again, went   
staggering back into the enormous spaces of Russia. Hordes were captured, but more hordes   
abandoned tanks and guns to slip through our encirclements in the night.    In the north all our   
objectives were achieved except the actual taking of Leningrad.    The city was laid under siege   
which lasted nine hundred days, in which it withered into helplessness and almost perished.   
The Baltic coast was ours, so that we could supply our northern forces by sea.    We were in   
operational touch with our Finnish allies.    In the south we invested the Crimea and were racing   
for the Caucasus oil fields.    And in the center, giant armored pincers closed on Moscow from   
north and south, actually penetrating the suburbs.    Bock's indomitable infantry, marching up   
the road from Smolensk with amazing speed, was smashing forward in a frontal thrust toward   
the Bolshevik capital.    Panic seized Moscow.    October 16 is known to this day in Russian war   
 
 
 
 
 
 
literature as the date of the "Great Skedoddle," when the foreign diplomats, many government   
departments, and a large number of Soviet big shots, together with a huge throng of civilians,   
abandoned the city and scuttled east for the safety of the Urals. 
 
Stalin stayed behind in Moscow, making desperate speeches, and ordering women and children   
out to dig trenches in the path of our oncoming armies.    On the central Russian plain it was just   
beginning to snow. The Rasputitza had already begun in September-the autumn mud time.   
God knows it was hard to advance under such conditions, but we advanced. Never has an   
armed force shown greater energy and spirit under greater difficulties. A remarkable 61an   
glowed alike in the highest general and the humblest foot soldier.    The end of the long road, the   
incredible nine-year march of the German nation under the Fuhrer, was in view across muddy,   
snowy wild plains, on the misty Russian horizon lit by a low cold red sun.    Our advance patrols   
saw the towers of the Kremlin. World empire at last lay within the German grasp. 
 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTE:    General von    Roon    is tolerant    throughout    of    Hitler's    Barborossa   
Performance, perhaps because he took part in the planning and was in Hitler's favor at the time.   
Other historians contend that the armies caught in the Kiev pocket were rabble.    The hard nut   
of Russian resistance lay around Moscow, they saY, and destruction of these forces in October   
would have ended the war. The land campaigns in the Soviet Union are not in my field of   
competence, though I spent time there.    The full truth about that front may never be known.- 
V.H. 
 
sum dark-haired girl walked out on the stage of the open-air theAatre at the Pearl Harbor Naval   
Base, taking off sunglasses and blinking in the white glare of morning sun.    The swish of her   
ice-cream pink dress, displaying silk-sheathed legs, brought glad whistles from the soldiers and   
sailors who filled every seat in the theatre and most of the folding chairs before the stage.   
Directly up front sat the governor of Hawaii, the admirals, the generals, and their ladies, and   
photographers were still blinking feeble blue flashes at them.    It was just before eleven o'clock,   
somewhat early for staged fun, but this first Happy Hour broadcast was being aimed at the big   
night-time audiences along the Atlantic seaboard.    Beyond the low stage, where the Navy band   
sat with brass instruments glinting in the sun, several moored battleships were visible towering   
in a gray double row. 
 
At the microphone, the girl stood smiling till the good-humored commotion subsided.    Then   
she held up a varnished board lettered in black: APPLAUsis.    The audience responded with a   
heavy round of handclapping. 
 
"Thank you, and hello.    I'm Mr.    Cleveland's assistant, Madeline Henry." A lone piercing wolf   
whistle sliced do" from the topmost row, and laughter swept the stands.    She wagged a finger.   
"And you watch yourself up there!    I have two brothers sitting out here, a naval aviator and a   
submariner, and they're both big and strong."    This brought more laughter and applause. 
 
The audience was in a lively expectant mood.    This debut of a major new radio program at the   
naval base had been stirring the somnolent territory for days.    The island's good white families,   
a bored lotus-eating little clique, had been vying to entertain Hugh Cleveland, and people had   
flown in from other islands to Oahu just to attend the parties.    The Navy had even postponed a   
 635 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
fleet drill simulating an enemy surprise attack, since it conflicted with the broadcast time.   
Front-page headlines in Honolulu papers about the show quite overshadowed the news of the   
German encirclement of several Russian armies around Kiev. 
 
In an awkward, halting manner that had a certain shy charm, Madeline described the rules of   
the new show. Only genuine fighting men could take part in the amateur contest. Every   
participant would receive a five-hundred-dollar defense bond.    The performer winning the most   
applause would get an extra prize: the sponsor would fly in his girl or his parents to visit him   
for a week.    "Mr.    Cleveland just hopes there won't be too many winners with girls in Cape   
Town or Calcutta," she said, drawing a laugh. 
 
"Well, I guess that's about it.    Now here's the man you're all waiting forthe star of the famous   
Amateur Hour and now of our new Happy Hourmy nice boss, Mr.    Hugh Cleveland."    Walking   
to a seat near the band she demurely sat down, tucking her skirt close to her legs. 
 
Cheers greeted Cleveland as he walked to the microphone. 
 
"Okeybe-bedokey," he drawled.    This phrase, delivered in a cowboy twang, had become a sort   
of trademark for him, and it brought applause. 
 
'Maybe I ought to just let Madeline Henry keep going.    I've got the job, but she's sure got the   
lines."    He wagged his eyebrows, and the audience laughed. 
 
"I'd better introduce her brothers, so you'll see just how big and strong they are. The naval   
aviator is Lieutenant Warren Henry of the Enterprise. 
 
Where are you, Warren?" 
 
"Oh, Christ," Warren said.    "No.    No."    He cringed down in his chair in a midcue row. 
 
'Stand up, you fool," Janice hissed. 
 
Warren got grimly to his feet, a long lean figure in white, and dropped at oncp, sinking far   
down. 
 
(Welcome, Warren.    And now here's Byron Henry, of the Devilfish." 
 
Byron half rose, then sat down with an unpleasant mutter. 
 
"Hi, Byron! Their father's a battleship man, folks, so the family's    pretty well got the sea   
covered-the surface, the air, and the deeps. That's the Henry family, and one reason our country   
remains strong and safe is that we have plenty of Henry families." The governor and the   
admirals joined heartily in the handclapping.    Slumped low, Byron made a gagging sound in   
his throat. 
 
The first Happy Hour delighted the audience, and promised great popular success.    Cleveland   
had been all over the United States; he could make folksy knowledgeable jokes about out-of- 
the-way places. 
 636 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Working without a script, holding prepared gags in his memory, he created the illusion of an   
easy, bright, small-town wit. What emerged above all was the reticent homesickness of the   
soldiers and sailors who performed. Their little acts resembled church social entertainment;   
the band played patriotic marches; it was an hour of sentimental Americana. Madeline's   
awkioshing, fitted the wartiness, as she introduced the acts and took some e homey   
atmosphere. 
 
Byron was not amused.    He sat through the show in a slouch, his arms folded, looking vacantly   
at his shoe tips.    Once Janice nudged her husband, narrowing her eyes and tilting her head at   
Byron.    Warren pantomimed the bulge of a pregnant woman's stomach. 
 
After the show the stage was so crowded with the governor, his entourage, and the high brass,   
all ringing Cleveland, that the Henrys couldn't mount the steps. 
 
'Wouldn't you know," Byron said, "Branch Hoban's right in there." 
 
The handsome sidpper of his submarine, standing between two admirals, was shaking   
Cleveland's hand, talking to him like an old friend. 
 
"You having trouble with Branch Hoban?"    Warren said.    "He's an okay guy, Briny." 
 
"He's having trouble with me." 
 
'Hey, the big strong brothers! Come on up." Cleveland saw them and beckoned, laughing.   
"Gad, Madeline's one girl whose honor is safe, hey? Janice, the governor here has just invited   
me to lunch, and I've just turned him down.    Told him you're expecting me." 
 
Janice gasped, "No, please,.you mustn't do that." 
 
The governor smiled at her.    'It's all right.    Hugh's coming to Washington Place later.    I didn't   
realize Senator Lacouture's daughter was lurking in our midst.    We must have yo u to dinner   
soon." 
 
Janice took a bold chance.    'Won't you join us for lunch, Governor? 
 
We're just having steaks and beer on the lawn, nothing much, but we'd love to have you." 
 
"Say, steaks and beer on the lawn sounds pretty good.    Let me find my lady." 
 
Warren and Branch Hoban were exchanging cheerful insults about their nonexistent paunches,   
and about how old and married they both looked. Byron stood by with blank face and dull   
eyes.    He broke in, "Excuse me, Captain.    My sister-in-law's invited me to lunch.    May I go?"   
Warren said, "Hey!    Don't tell me junior's in hack." 
 
"Oh, Briny and I have had a leede disagreement.    Sure, Briny, you have your lunch with Janice   
and Warren.    Report aboard at fifteen hundred." 
 
"Aye aye, sir.    Thank you, sir."    At Byron's uncivil tone, Warren slightly shook his head. 
 637 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Janice rode home    in    the    governor's    limousine;    Madeline    and    Bymn went in    Warren's old   
station wagon.    The double lei of pink and yellow flowers around the sister's neck perfumed   
the air in the car.    She said, gaily, "Well, well, just the three of us.    When did this last happen?" 
 
"Listen, Briny," Warren said, "Branch Hoban's an old pal of iiiinc. 
 
What's the beep Maybe I can help." "I drew a sketch of an air compressor for my officers'   
course book.    He didn't like it.    He wants me to do it over.    I won't.    I'm in hack until I do." 
 
"that's ridiculous." 
 
"I think so myself." 
 
"I mean you're being ridiculous." 
 
'Warren, on our way from San Francisco, an air compressor conked out because the oil pump   
froze.    The chief was sick.    I stripped down that compressor and got it going." 
 
'Three cheers, but did you draw a good sketch?" 
 
"It was a lousy sketch, but I fixed that compressor." 
 
"That's beside the point." 
 
"It's the whole point." 
 
"No, the whole point is that Branch Hoban decides whether or not to recommend you for your   
dolphins." 
 
"I don't care about getting dolphins." 
 
"The hell you don't," Warren said. 
 
"Look, Warren, I was shanghaied aboard the Devilfish.    I had orders to new construction, the   
Tuna, but my exec and Hoban pulled a fast one at ComSubPac.    Moreover, it wasn't my idea to   
go to submarine school in the first place.    Dad shoved me in, mostly to keep me from marrying   
Natalie. That's why she went to Italy.    That's why she's still stuck there. 
 
My life is snafued beyond all measure because I went to sub school. God knows when I'll see   
my wife again.    And my baby, if I've got one. She's baying it on the other side of the world.   
That's what's on my mind, not dolphins." "You're in the Navy now. Do you want to get   
beached?" 
 
'Why not?    The hours are better and the mail is more reliable." 
 
"Oh, horseshit.    Pardon me, M4d." 
 
'Shucks, this is like old times.    Anyhow, you should hear Hugh talk. 
 
Yikes!" she squealed, as Warren bounced off the highway onto grass, avoiding a rusty old   
 638 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
green Buick cutting in front of him. 
 
Warren said calmly, "These Kanaka drivers give you gray hairs." 
 
"There's another fellow who leaves me cold, that Cleveland," Byton said. "How did you get   
mixed up with him, Matty?"I'm not mixed up with him," Madeline rapped out. "I work for   
him." 
 
Byron gave her an affectionate smile.    "I know, sis." 
 
"He does a good job," Warren said.    "That show goes over." 
 
Byron said, "what?    Why, the whole thing is so phony!    He doesn't make up those jokes, he's   
got them memorized."    "You're dead right about that," Madeline laughed. 
 
"It's obvious.    He just puts on a big smooth empty act.    He reminds me of Branch Hoban." 
 
'Branch is no phony," said Warren. "He has a remarkable record, Briny. And you'd better   
make up your mind that he's boss man on that submarine."    'Sure he's boss man, and sure he's   
got a great record, and sure I'm in hack, but hell will freeze over before he gets another sketch   
of that air compressor.    When I found out that Natalie had gone back to Italy to have her baby,   
I put in a request for transfer to the Atlantic.    Our subs operate in and out of the Med, and I   
might have a chance to see her, and maybe even to get her out.    I told him all this.  
 
He lectured me about subordinating my personal life to the Navy! 
 
Well, I said I was putting the request in anyhow. He forwarded it-he had to forward it-not   
recommending approval." 
 
Warren said, his eyes on the road, "You've been aboard that boat three months.    The usual tour   
is two years." 
 
"The usual ensign doesn't have a pregnant wife stuck n Italy." 
 
"Don't get me wrong, but that's not the Navy's fault."    "I'm not blaming the Navy.    I'm telling   
you why I'm not on fire to please Branch Hoban." 
 
Madeline struck into this curt exchange with a laugh. "Say, do you guys know that Dad is   
studying Russian again, of all things?" 
 
"Russian!"    Warren exclaimed.    'rmat for?" 
 
"He's going there.    I don't know when or how."    Madeline laughed. 
 
"Mom's fit to be tied.    He's taking a crash course, ten hours a day. She never sees him.    She sits   
around that big new house by herself, except when somebody shows up to play tennis with her   
or go to a movie." 
 
"Dad had better step on it," Warren said, 'if he wants to beat the Germans into Moscow." 
 639 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Byron took Madeline's lei and put it around his neck.    "Boy, these are strong frangipani.    God   
knows when we three will ever be together again like this.    I'm in a rotten mood, but I love you   
both.    How's the booze situation at your house, Warren?" 
 
"Ninety-seven percent. We just topped off." "Great. I intend to burn you down to fifty   
percent." 
 
"By all means." 
 
Byron came on the latest airmail Time at Warren's house, and read it in a deck chair among the   
multiple roots of a banyan    tree, while Warren, Janice, and their guests grew gay on hors   
doeuvres and rum drinks. 
 
At sea for two weeks, he had heard only fragmentary news. 
 
when the party reached the, Stage of hijla dancing to the guitar riiusic of the grinning houseboy   
Warren began broiling steaks in billows of fra ant smoke. Meantime Hugh Cleveland and   
Madeline d:id a baregr foot hula while the Navy people and islanders clapped and laughed, and   
a photographer from the society page snapped pictures. 
 
Byron sourly watched his sister's white feet writhe in the grass, and her pink-sheathed bottom   
gyrate; and he wondered who was mad-he or this playful group. 
 
According to Time, the Germans were rolling through Russia exactly as they had through   
Poland two years before. it was the -same month, September. The cheery German claims,   
backed by combat photographs, were, most convincing. The pictures showed villages afire,   
skies aswarm with Luftwaffe, roads through cornfields jammed with refugees, and unshaven   
Russian prisoners behind barbed wire in sullen hordes. 
 
The scenes brought vividly back to Byron's mind the days when he and Natalie had drawn   
together: the flight in the old automobile from Cracow to Warsaw, his wound, the child on the   
road crying over her mother's smashed face, the orange flares, the whistling bombs, Natalie in   
the malodorous jammed hospital, the song of grasshoppers in no-man's-land. 
 
Carrying two plates of sliced steak and french fries, Warren came and sat down beside him on   
the grass.    'Eat hearty, my lad." 
 
Byron said, 'Thanks.    Pretty grim issue of Time "Hell, Briny, you knew the Germans would   
take the Russkis, didn't You?    The Russian's a hardy soldier, but that Bolshevik government's   
just a mess of crackpot politicians.      Stalin shot half his officers in '38, including all the   
profmion s leal it from the Czarist days.    You can't fight a war without career officers.    That's   
where the Germans have us all licked. 
 
That General Staff of theirs has been going for a hundred years. 
 
The day they lost the last war, why, they just started collecting maps and dope for fighting this   
one.    That's a savvy outfit.    How about some wine?    California Burgundy gets here in pretty   
fair shape." 
 640 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'Sure." Returning with a big purple bottle, Warren said, "Well, there's one good thing.    If Hitler   
does take Moscow, the japs will jump north to grab their end of Siberia. That'll give us a   
breather.    Otherwise they're a cinch to come Soon.    Everybody thinks they're getting lower on   
oil.    We're sur as hell not ready for them.    We need a year just to harden the Philippines 
 
to where we can hold." 
 
Byron slapped the copy of Time. "Incidentally, did you read about r father-in-law's latest   
speech?    He wants us to explore making a deal you with the Germans." 
 
'I know.    Well, he's way off base on that.    Hitler's not making any deals, not while he's winning   
so big.    But eventually, Briny, the Krauts may be easier to come to terms with than the japs.   
They're white people." 
 
"True, except for starters we'd have to shoot our Jews." 
 
Warren slowly turned his bronzed face at his brother.    An embarrassed smile played on his thin   
lips. 'Even the Germans aren't shooting their Jews, guy. I think their policy is disgusting,   
but-""You don't know what they're doing.    I run into a stone wall when I try to tell people here   
what the Germans are like. Branch Hoban thinks this war is Saxon civilization against the   
rising tide of Asia, and the Russians count as Asia, and we and the British should wise up and   
mall. 
 
common cause with the Nazis in a hurry, because they're fighting our battle, and its the white   
race's last chance.    He gets all this out of books by a nut called Homer Lea.    He reads those   
books to pieces. 
 
The Valor of Ignorance is the main one, and The Day of the Saxon." 
 
'I've    read Homer Lea," said Warren, looking at his watch.      "He's a screwball, but pretty   
interesting-well, our friend Vic's due for a bottle, but it's a cinch Jan's not going to abandon the   
governor." 
 
"I'll feed the baby." 
 
"Do you like babies, or something?" 
 
"I like this one." 
 
NWIE Victor lay on His uncle's lap drinking milk, Byron drank California Burgundy.    Each   
finished his bottle at about the same time. 
 
He tucked the baby away in his side-porch crib, and returned to the lawn. 
 
The breeze had ched, and it was very hot.    The scent from the lemon trees filled Byron with   
melancholy.      He lay face down under the banyan tree and fell asleep.      When he woke,   
Lieutenant Aster, drink in hand, was shaking him. 
 
"Blazes," Byron said, sitting up, a stale taste of wine in his mouth, l was supposed to report in   
 641 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
at three, wasn't I?    Are you here to take me back in irons?"    "Amnesty.    You're out of back,"   
Aster grinned, "and you've got twenty-four hours' leave.    This just came in on the harbor circuit   
from Rome, forwarded via Lisbon, Washington, and San Francisco." 
 
He handed a dispatch to Byron, who read it sitting cross-legged on the grass. 
 
ENSIGN BYRON HENRY, USS DEVILVISH X CAN YOU TH OVA GOOD NAME FOR   
A SEVEN-POUND BOY X BOTH FINE BOTH LOVE YOU X NATALIE AND WHOSIS   
HENRY Byron bowed his head and put a hand over his face.    Like his father, he had a simple   
religious streak; he muttered a prayer of thanks for the rmracle of a boy, born from the wild   
lovemaking in Lisbon that had briefly joined two bodies, now almost as far apart as they could   
be on the planet. 
 
After a moment he looked up with a slow smile, his eyes glistening. 
 
'How about that, Lady?" 
 
'Congratulations, Briny." 
 
Byron got to his feet, looking around dazedly at the party.    The radio was pouring out "Lovely   
Hula Hands," Janice was Niggling barefoot with the captain of the Enterprise, the go ta' e   
vemor was dancing with Madeline, evincing pop-eyed pleasure at the play of her hips, and   
Hugh    Cleveland was singing an obscene parody that brought barks of male laughter and   
delighted shrieks from the women.    "I guess I'll tell my brother and sister." 
 
Aster strolled beside him, rattling the ice in his glass.    "Quite a wingding here.    Isn't that the   
governor? Your sister-in-law is sure nice. I hardly had my foot inside the door when she   
handed me a planter's punch." 
 
"Janice is okay." 
 
"Is that her name, Janice?    Pretty name.    She's about the best-looking white woman I've seen on   
this godforsaken island. 
 
"Easy, Lady." 
 
'y, Briny, I admire her like a sunset, or the Washin ton Monument." 
 
"Say, Madeline-" 
 
Hurrying past him toward the house behind Cleveland and the Hawaiian houseboy, Madeline   
flipped a hand at him.    "Long-distance call from New York, honey.    Our sponsor.    Imagine! 
 
Byron told the news to Warren and Janice.    Before he could stop her, Janice made a delighted   
announcement. The guests ringed him with alcoholic jokesp congratulations, and questions,   
exclaiming over the odd fact that his wife was away off in Italy.    The society columnist of the   
Honolulu Star, a bony hawk-faced blonde named Petsy Peters, stood at Bryon's elbow,   
scribbling notes. 
 642 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
He went into the house after Madeline.    He wanted to be the first to tell her.    The telephone lay   
in its rack on a table in the hall.    He heard a chuckle, and glancing down the zigzagging halls to   
the side porch where the baby lay asleep, he saw Hugh Cleveland embracing Madeline, out of   
sight of the lawn.    Cleveland was holding Byron's Sister with both hands by the rump.    Her   
pink skirt was pulled up in back, exposing her thighs and underwear.    She was clinging to him   
with obscene intimacy.    Byron walked out of the house into the sunlight. 
 
"I guess I'll get back to the Devilfish," he said to Warren. 
 
"Why?    I thought Branch gave you a twenty-four." 
 
"I want to write Natalie and the folks.    Maybe shoot off a cable or two." 
 
"Briny, the governor's just invited the whole crowd over to Washington Place for cocktails   
with Cleveland." 
 
"Cleveland's in the house there kissing Madeline. I mean kissing her, and she's going right   
along with it." 
 
'Is she?" the aviator said with a crooked grin. "I guess their sponsor liked the broadcast."   
Madeline came hurrying out of the house, her face alight, her hair disorderly, and ran to her   
brothers.    Behind her Cleveland emerged, wiping his mouth with a handkerchief.    "Hey, guess   
what, fellows?"    Madeline chirruped.    'He talked to me, too.    He said I sounded fine!    But that's   
2 ts nothing.    We had a spot check rating Of 3-5.    That's only four poin less than Fred Allen- 
and on our very first show!" 
 
Byron took the dispatch from his breast pocket and showed it to his sister. 
 
'Oh my! More good news! Say, Hugh, what do you know? Briny's wife had her baby."   
"Hey!    Congrats, papa!"    He put out a hand that Byron ignored, but he took no offense.    "Come   
on, Madeline, let's tell the governor what Chet Fenton said." 
 
Byron, arms folded, glowered at their departing backs. 
 
'Look, Briny his brother said, "you're not going to make trouble, are you?    You'll embarrass   
Janice."    'The grinning son of a bitch," muttered Byron. 
 
'Come off it.    She's over twenty-one."    'He's a married man.    I'll talk to Madeline, if you won't.   
Depending on what she says, I may tell the bastard to keep his distance from her, if he doesn't   
want the shit beaten out of him."    Warren sized up his brother with amusement.    "He's got the   
weight on you, and he looks in good shape."    "That's just fine," Byron said. 
 
The radio began blaring the news signal.    It was four O'clock, and the governor had turned up   
the volume of the little portable sitting on the outdoor bar. 
 
'Berlin.    German Supreme Headquarters announces the capture of Kiev and coms the greatest   
victory in the war, and perhaps in the history of the world.    According to German sources, four   
entire Russian armies, numbering almost a million    men,    have been surrounded and cut to   
 643 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
pieces, and with the fall of Kiev all organized resistance in the vast pocket has come to an end.   
Radio Berlin proclainwd at midnight that, quote, 'The Soviet Union no longer has a military   
capability, and the end of hostilities on the eastern front is in sight."    More news in a moment. 
 
Now a word about Pepsi-Cola."    The governor said, swishing his rum drink as merry girlish   
voices burst into a jingle, "Well, well.    The Russkis would really seem to be on the run, hey?" 
 
"Where is Kiev, Governor?"    said Petsy Peters.    "Is that where caviar comes from?    I hope this   
doesn't mean no more cawy.    There's always the Persian, but that's so expensive." 
 
"Kiev is in the north, I think," the governor said.    "Frankly my Russian geography is not so   
hot." 
 
The Pepsi-Cola commercial ended. The announcer came on with drama in his voice "We   
interrupt this newscast for an urgent announcement by the Ioint Army-Navy Command of the   
Hawaiian Islands.    SURPRISE ENEMY ATTACK ON HAWAIII This is a DRILL.    A hostile   
fleet of battleships and aircraft cas has been lorated approximately four hundred and fifty miles   
northwest of Oahu.    This is a DRILL." 
 
'Oh no!"    Petsy Peters said.    'Not again.    Four o'clock on a Sunday afternoon!    What a misery!   
Are they going to keep us off the streets again for hours and hours?" 
 
The governor put his finger to his lips. 
 
"All leaves and liberties are cancelled, and all military personnel will return to their units at   
once.    This is a DRILL.    We repeat, this is a DRILL. 
 
Surprise enemy attack on Hawaiii All military personnel return to their units at once.    Special   
permission is granted to the players of the baseball game between the Air Comnand and the   
Battleship Force to complete the ninth running, and for spectators to remain at the game until   
then.    Restrictions on civilian travel are not, repeat, not in force."    "Well, thank goodness for   
that, at least," said Petsy Peters. 
 
"All ships in the area will report to force commanders readiness to sortie, but u;,ill not, repeat   
not, leave anchorages or nworings unless ordered.    At 1830 target planes towing sleeves will   
simu attack on Pearl Harbor.    All ships and shore batteries will Conduct tracking and aiming   
exercises but will not, repeat not, fire ammunition. 
 
Vessels in dry dock or alongside for repairs    will proceed with maintenance    work and are   
excused from this exercise.    We repeat. 
 
Surprise attack on Hawaii.    This is a DRILL.    This announcement will be repeated." 
 
The governor snapped off the radio.    "I wasn't sure they'd still try to get it in today.    It was   
originally scheduled for ten this morning, Hugh, but The Happy Hour conflicted." 
 
"Yes, sir, that was a real courtesy.    My sponsor is writing letters of appreciation to the Army   
and the Navy." 
 644 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"That's a fine idea." 
 
The general invitation for cocktails at Washington Place, the goveror's mansion, was called off.   
The party rapidly broke up.    Soon only Cleveland, Madeline, Janice, and the two submariners   
remained on the lawn amid the party debris, with the governor and his wife.    Aster and Byron   
were in no hurry to leave because the Devilfish was in dry dock. 
 
"Why not join us at Washington Place for a drink, Janice?" said the governor. "Hugh and   
Madeline are coming along."    -Oh, not without a man, thank you, Governor," Janice said. 
 
"There's an old Navy rule against sucking one's neck out, Janice," Lieutenant Aster spoke up,   
with a fetching grin.    'But I don't know when I'll get another chance to see the inside of that   
mansion.    I volunteer." 
 
Janice laughed. "Why,    you're on, lieutenant. Give me three minutes, Governor." Byron   
separated Madeline from the others, saying he wanted to talk to her and would take her to   
Washington Place in Warren's car. "It's wonderful news about your baby, Briny," Madeline   
remarked, as they drove off. 
 
Byron said, looking straight ahead at the road, "I went into the house before, looking for you.    I   
saw you and Cleveland." 
 
After a pause filled with engine noise he glanced at her.    Her brows were contracted over wide   
dark eyes in a scowl, and she looked lovely, but tough.    She very much resembled their father.   
"Is this why you offered to drive me to the governor's place?    To lecture me? 
 
Thanks, dear." 
 
"That's a married man, Madeline.    Mom and Dad would be damned upset at what I saw." 
 
"Don't talk to me about upsetting Mom and Dad.    I have yet to marry a Jew. 
 
Those were the last words spoken in the car until it drew up at Washington Place.    Madeline   
opened the door.    "I'm sorry, Briny.    That was nasty.    But didn't you deserve it, accusing me of   
God knows what? 
 
I have nothing against Natalie.    I like her." 
 
Byron reached across her legs and slammed the door shut.    The glare on his white face was   
frightening.    "One minute.    You tell Hugh Cleveland -you be sure to tell him, Madeline-that if I   
ever find out he's done anything to you, I'll come after him and I'll put him in a hospital." 
 
The girl's eyes filled with tears.    'Oh, how dare you?    You're cruel, and you have a dirty mind.   
Do you actually think I'd play around with a married man?    Why, The Happy Hour was my   
idea.    I was so excited when Mr.    Fenton told us about the rating, I'd have kissed anybody who   
was handy.    You're being horrible, Byron."    She took a handkerchief from her purse and wiped   
her eyes. 
 
"All right.    I didn't want to make you cry." 
 645 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Don't you believe me?"    Madeline spoke in soft and wistful tones, tearfully sing.    "My God, I   
thought we knew each other so well.    We used to.    I admit Hugh would sleep with me if he   
could.    He'll sleep with anybody, and I find that disgusting.    He's nothing but a whoremaster,   
and his wife's the most miserable woman alive. I appreciate your concern for my honor.   
You're very old-fashioned and sweet, like Dad. But don't you worry about Madeline.    Forgive   
me for that mean crack, darling.    I'm awfully happy about the baby."    She kissed his cheek.    He   
felt the tears on her skin. She got out of the car, twinkled her fingers at him, and ran into   
Washington Place. 
 
When Byron got back to the naval base, target planes were coming in high over the harbor,   
towing long fluttery red sleeves, and on all the ships the gun crews were shouting, and slanting   
their weapons skyward; but there were no sounds of firing, and the excitement seemed forced   
and silly.    The Devilfish, sitting high and dry on blocks, was deserted except for yard workmen   
and the watch.    Byron took out of his desk drawer a writing pad, and the record of the fado   
song that he and Natalie had heard together in Lisbon. He put the record on the wardroom   
phonograph, and started to write: My darling, The news about the baby just came andThe   
hissing of the bad needle gave way to the guitar chords that opened the song.    He put his head   
down on his arms. 
 
He wanted to picture his wife and the new baby, a boy who perhaps looked like Victor. 
 
But when he closed his eyes, what he saw was his sister's uncovered thighs and garters. 
 
Byron stopped the record and spent the next hour drawing a sketch of an air compressor.   
Working from memory, using different colored crayons and inks, he produced a picture   
accurate and clear enough to be printed in a manual.    To this he clipped a letter he typed in the   
abandoned mildewy-smelling yeoman's cubicle, formally requesting transfer to Atlantic duty.   
He added a scrawled pencil note on a chit: Captain-I deeply appreciate the amnesty and the   
leave.    The only thing I want in the world now is to see my wife and baby, and try to get them   
out of Europe.    I'm sure you will understand. 
 
Next morning Branch Hoban congratulated Byron on his sketch, explained with regret that he   
couldn't spare an officer from the watch list, declared his conviction that Natalie and her baby   
were quite safe in Rome, and said he would forward the request, not recommending approval. 
 
ODA was startled by the bulk of the wax-sealed envelope from the RHState Department.   
Inside she found another fat envelope with pale blue Russian printing on the flap.    The eleven- 
page typewritten letter it contained was much struck-over with pen and ink.    Clipped to it, on a   
small sheet headed memommum FROM ALISTAM TUDSBURY, was a redpencilled note in   
Pug's firm slanted hand: 3 Oct Moscow (and still can't believe it!" Don't get sed-guess I   
haven't written a letter this long si you"t'e known nw-haven't had man experiences like this. 
 
Krin banquet    was    another    incredible    business-that's    for next    letter,    this    one has    to go 
off   
prontoRegards from Tudsburys.    I've used his typewriter and stationery. Letter explains.    He's   
fatter than ever, daughter's a wraithLove Pug 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hotel National, Moscow 
 
OCt.    2, 1941 
 
Dearest RhodaThree hours from now I'll be dining in the Kremlin. 
 
How about that? 
 
It's God's truth.    And the rest of this trip has been every bit as fantastic. 
 
Now that we've got ourselves two grandsons (and how about that, Granny?) I'm beginning to   
feel I should record some of these things I'm going through, while they're fresh in my mind.   
I'm no writer, but just the bare record of the facts should interest those infants one day.    So   
don't think I'm becoming a garrulous old fud if I start sending you occasional batches of these   
pages.    After you've read them, tuck them away for the babies. 
 
I'm somewhat punchy; haven't had a real night's sleep since I left London.      The trip to   
Archangel in a British destroyer could have been restful, but for night conferences, and GQ   
alarms all day long. That is a hot run; you're in Luftwaffe range almost all the way. The   
convoys on this route take quite a shellacking.    Luckily we had fog covering us about half the   
time. 
 
I'm making    all    these typing    mistakes    because Tudsbury's    typewriter    is    cranky,    and 
there's   
nobody in the Soviet Union who can fix a British typewriter-or who wants to, you're never sure   
which.    I've been cadging embassy typewriters for my work, but they're swamped today getting   
out the final conference documents.    The Tudsburys occupy the best quarters in the National.   
Naturally!    Leave that to Talky.    His suite faces out on Red Square, and I can see the Kremlin   
through a drizzle from where I sit.    Lenin stayed in this suite, they say; now here I am.    It's all   
maroon plush and gold chandeliers and alabaster statues, with a Persian rug about an acre big,   
and this room even has a rosewood grand piano, almost lost in a corner.    (The piano's out of   
rune.) Me, I'm lodged in a back room on the top floor about five feet by ten, with bare yellow   
plaster walls."    Tudsbury's here right now, dictating to Pamela his broadcast for tonight.    Leave   
it to Talky to show up where the action is! 
 
He got the War Information Office to requisition Pamela for him; his stories and broadcasts are   
considered ace propaganda, and he pleaded failing eyesight.    She's on extended leave from the   
R.A.F and seems miserable about it.    Her flier has been a German prisoner for over a year, and   
she hasn't had a word of him in months. 
 
like all the correspondents here, Tudsbury's trying to make bricks without straw.    He bent my   
ear for two hours last night about how tough it is.    The Russians keep the reporters in Moscow,   
and every other day or so just call them in and give them some phony handout.    Most of them   
think the war's going very badly, but they don't have much to go on besides Moscow rumors   
and Berlin shortwave broadcasts.    It seems the Russians have been more or less admitting all   
the German claims, but two or three weeks late.    The pessimists here-and there are plenty-think   
Moscow may fall in a week!    I don't, nor does Tudsbury; but our embassy people are nervous   
as hell, some of them, about Harriman being captured by the Nazis.    They'll be mighty relieved   
 
 
 
 
 
 
tomorrow when the mission Hies out. 
 
Well, as to the tripthe sea approach to Russia reminded me of Newfoundland.    Up north the   
world is still mostly conifer forest and white water, Rhoda.    It may be that man in his jackass   
fashion will devastate the temperate and tropical zones, and civilization will make a scrubby   
new start at the top of the globe. 
 
The first surprise and shock comes at Archangel.    It's a harbor town in the wilds all built of   
wood. Piers, warehouses, sawmills, factories, churches, -A crane towers-wood. Stacks of   
lumber, billions of board feet, wherever you look.    God knows how many trees were cut down   
to build that town and pile that lumber, yet the forests around Archangel look untouched. 
 
There's an Alaskan look about Archangel, like Pictures of the Klondike. 
 
The first honest-to-God Russian I saw was the harbor pilot. He came aboard well down   
channel, and that was another surprise, because he was a woman.    Sheepskin coat, pants, boots,   
and a healthy, pretty face.    I was on the bridge and watched her bring us in, and she was quite a   
seaman, or seawoman.    She eased us alongside very handily. 
 
Then she shook hands with the skipper and left, and all that time she hadn't cracked a smile.  
 
Russians smile only when they're amused, never to be pleasant.    It makes them seem distant   
and rly.    I guess we strike them as grinning monkeys. 
 
SU This epitomizes the job of communicating with Russians. 
 
Language aside, we just have different natures and ways. 
 
Mr.    Hopkins told me about the forests of Russia, but I still was amazed.    You remember when   
we drove west in midsummer, I think in $ 35, and didn't get out of cornfields for three days?   
The north Russian woods are like that.    We knew to fly Moscow at treetop height.    Those green   
branches rushed by below our wings for hours and hours and hours, and then all at once we   
climbed, and ahead of us was a tremendous sprawl from horizon to horizon of houses and   
factories.    Moscow is flat and gray. 
 
From a distance it could be Boston or Philadelphia.    But as you get closer in and see the onion- 
top churches, and the dark red Krerlirl by the nv,r, with a cluster of churches inside, you realize   
you're coming to a peculiar place. The pilot flew a circle around Moscow before landing,   
maybe as a special courtesy, and we got a good look. 
 
Incidentally, the takeoffs and landings are expert, but by our standards hairy. The Russian   
pilot jumps OfF the ground and zooms, or he dives in and slams down. 
 
Well, since we got to Moscow we've been in the meat grinder.    It's been round-the-clock.    Our   
orders literally are to work through the night. 
 
when we aren't conferring we've been eating and drinking.    The standard fare for visitors seems   
to be a dozen different kinds of cold fish and caviar, then two soups, then fowl, then roasts,   
 648 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
with wine going all the dine.    Each man also has his own carafe of vodka.    It's a hell of a way   
to do business, but on the other hand the Russians may be wise.    The alcohol loosens things up.   
The feeling of getting drunk is evidently the same for a Bolshevik or a capitalist so there at   
least you strike some common ground. 
 
I think this conference has been an historic breakthrough, When have Americans and Russians   
sat down before to talk about military problems, however cagily? It's all most peculiar and   
new. The Russians don't tell    hard facts    of their military production, or of the battlefield   
situation.    Considering that the Germans three short months ago were sitting where we and the   
British sit now, I don't exactly blame them. The Russians have been a hard-luck people.    You   
can't forget that when You talk to them. 
 
This is a point that our interpreter, Leslie Slote, keeps making. 
 
I'm not revg secrets when I tell you the British are yielding some Lend-Lease priorities and   
even undertaking to sent the Russians tanks. 
 
It'll all be in the papers.    They were stripped bare at Dunidrk, so this is decent and courageous.   
Of course, they can't use the tanks on the Germans now, and the Russians can.    Still, Churchill   
can't be sure Hitler and Stalin won't make a deal again, so the Germans may suddenly Turn and   
throw everything into a Channel crossing.    I don't think it'll happen.    The growing hate here for   
the Germans is something savage; you only have to see the gruesome newsreels of villages   
they've been driven out of to unden=d why.    Children strung up, women raped to death, and all   
that.      SfiU, Hitler and Stalin seem to have mercury for blood. Nothing they do is too   
predictable or human, and I give the British lots of points for agreeing to send the R tanks. 
 
Some of us Americans feel peculiar at this meeting, damn peculiar. 
 
The British, in danger themselves, are willing to help the Russians, while our Congress yells   
about sending the Russians anything. 
 
We sit between men of two countries that are fighting the Germans for their lives, while we   
represent a land that won't let its President lift a finger to help, not without outcries from coast   
to coast. 
 
Do you remember Slote?    He's the second secretary here now.    He looked me up in Berlin, you   
remember, with a lot of praise for Briny's conduct under fire in Poland.    He's the man Natalie   
went to visit.    He still seems to think she's the finest girl alive, and I don't know why he didn't   
marry her when he had the chance.    Right now he's g to romance Talky's daughter.    Since she's   
one of the few unattached Western girls-I, almost said white girls-in Moscow, Slote has   
competition. 
 
(Incidentally, my remark about white girls is ridiculous.    After two days in Moscow, g to put   
my finger on what was so different here, I said to Slote there were two things: no   
advertisements, and no colored people.    It made him laugh.    still, it's so.    Moscow has a real   
American feel in the informality and equality of the people, but you don't find such a sea of   
white faces in any big city in America.    All in an I like these Russians and the way they go   
 649 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
about their business with determination and calm, the way the Londoners did.) Now I have a   
story for you, and for our grandsons to read one dayespecially Byrort's boy. It's a grim one, and   
I'm still not sure what to make of it, but I want to write it down.    Yesterday between the last   
afternoon conference and the official dinner at the Metropole Hotel, I went to Slote's apartment   
for a while with Tudshury and Pam.    Talky engineered this little party. He wanted to pump me   
about the conference, but there wasn't much I could disclose. 
 
Anyway, I was having a drink with them-if you get this tired you have to keep up an alcohol   
level in your bloodstream, it's a sort of emergency gasoline-when a knock came on the door,   
and in walked a fellow in worn-out boots, a cap, a heavy shabby coat, and it was a Jewish   
merchant from Warsaw, jochanan Jastrow, Natalie's uncle!    The one they call Berel. 
 
Briny and Natalie went to his son's wedding in south Poland, you recall, and that's how they   
got caught in the invasion.    He's clean-shaven, and speaks Russian and German with ease, and   
he doesn't seem Jewish, though Slote remarked that in Warsaw he wore a beard and looked like   
a rabbi. 
 
This fellow's escape from Warsaw with the remnants of his family is a saga.    They landed in   
Minsk and got caught there when the Germans blitzed White Russia.    He gave us only bare   
details of how he got himself and his family out of Minsk through the woods, but obviously   
this is quite a guy for maneuvering and surviving. 
 
Here comes the incredible part. Jastrow says    that late one night, about a month after the   
capture of Minsk, the Germans came into the Jewish ghetto they had set up, with a caravan of   
trucks.    They cleaned out two of the most heavily populated streets, jamming everybody into   
these trucks: men, women, children, babies, old folks who couldn't walk. Several thousand   
people, at least.    They drove them to a ravine in the forest a few miles out of town, and there   
they shot them, every single one, and buried them in a huge freshly dug ditch.    Jastrow says the   
Germans had rounded up a gang of Russians earlier to dig the ditch, and then had trucked them   
out of the area.    A few of them sneaked back through the woods to see what would happen, and   
that was how the story got out.    One of them had a camera and took pictures.    Jastrow produced   
three prints.    This occurrence, whatever it was, took place at dawn. 
 
In one of them you see a line of gun flashes.    In another you see this distant shadowy crowd of   
people.    In the third, which is the brightest, you just see men in German helmets shovelling.   
Jastrow also gave Slote two documents in Russian, one handwritten and one typed, that   
purported to be eyewitness accounts. 
 
Jastrow says he decided to get to Moscow and give some American diplomat the story of the   
massacre in Minsk- I don't know how he got Slote's address. He's a resourceful man, but   
naive.    He believed, and evidently still believes, that once President Roosevelt found out this   
story and told the American    people, the United States    would immediately declare    war on   
Germany. 
 
Jastrow turned over these materials to Slote, and said he'd risked his life to get that stuff to   
Moscow, and that a lot of women and children had been murdered, so would he please guard   
 650 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
those pictures and documents with care.    He and I talked a bit about the kids; his eyes filled up   
when I told him Byron and Natalie'd had a boy. 
 
After he left, Slote offered the stuff to Tudsbury. He said, "There's your broadcast for you.   
You'll hit all the front pages in the United States." 
 
To our surprise, Tudsbury said he wouldn't touch the story.    He worked in British propaganda   
after he was wounded in the last war, and helped concoct and plant atrocity yarns.    He claims   
the British invented the business of the Germans making soap out of the bodies of soldiers. 
 
Maybe this Minsk massacre happened, but to him Jastrow looked like an NKVD plant.    It was   
too coincidental that a distant Polish relative of mine by marriage-a freakish connection to   
begin with-should suddenly pop up of his own free will in Moscow with this yarn and these   
documents. 
 
A heated argument ensued, and Tudsbury finally said that even if he knew the story were true,   
he wouldn't use it.    This thing could backfire and keep America out of the war, he claimed, just   
as Hitler's Jewish policy worked for years to paralyze the British.    'Nobod wants to fight a war   
to y save the Jeun," he kept insisting while banging the table, and Hitler still has a lot of people   
convinced that anyone who fights Germany is really spilling blood just for the Jews. Talky   
says this is one of the great war propaganda ideas of all time, and that this story about the   
Minsk Jews would play into German hands. 
 
Well, I've just set down the bald facts of dais.    I didn't mean to get so long-winded, but it's been   
haunting me. If there's even an element of truth in Jastrow's yarn, then the Germans really   
have run amuck, and among other things Natalie and her infant, unless they're out of Italy by   
now, are in grave hazard.    Mussolini apes whatever Hitler does.    But I assume they did get out;   
Slote tells me it was all set before her confinement. 
 
Rhoda, when I think about Jastrow's story my head spins and it seems to me the world I grew   
up in is dissolving.    Even if it's an exaggeration, just hearing such a story makes me think we're   
entering some new dark age.    it's all too much for me, and the worst of it is I found it hard not   
to believe Jastrow.    The man has a keen and dignified manner; not a man I mind having for a   
relative, strange as it felt to look on him as such. 
 
It's five minutes to six.    I have to wrap this up and get on to the banquet. 
 
This war has sure played hell with our family, hasn't it?    The days in Manila, with all three kids   
in school, and that house with a tennis court where I taught them all to play, seem a far-off   
dream. 
 
Those were the best days. And now here I am in Moscow. I hope you're keeping up that   
weekly doubles game with Fred Kirby and the Vances. 
 
You always feel better when you get exercise.    Give my best to Blinker and Ann, also to Fred,   
and tell him I hope Foggy Bottom isn't getting him down. 
 651 
 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
I miss you, busy as I am, but you sure wouldn't care for Soviet Russia, darling, in war or peace.   
Pamela Tudsbury says there isn't a hairdresser in MosoDw she'd go to.    She cleans her own   
suits and dresses with gasoline. 
 
You know, I've now met Hitler, Churchill, Roosevelt, and tonight I may shake hands with   
Stalin.    Considering that I'm nobody much, that's something!    My career's taken a decidedly   
freakish Turn.    For my grandsons' information (you already know this) I'd have preferred an   
entry in my record showing I'd been at sea these past two years.    But there's no changing that,   
and in a way I guess it's been an education. 
 
Only at this point I've had my bellyful, -and so help me God, I would gladly trade dinner in the   
Kremlin for one honest-to-God whiff of Navy stack gas. 
 
Till the next time, with lots of love Pug Vctor Henry had arrived with the Harriman- 
Beaverbrook mission just as the Germans were starting their autumn smash toward Moscow. 
 
The panzer armies were breaking through less than a hundred miles away, but the Russians   
wined and dined their visitors, whirled them about the city in black limousines, took them to   
the ballet,    and carried on long committee meetin s, with no hint that anything    was going   
wrong; though they did appear a bit brisk in laying on a farewell banquet less than a week after   
the guests had got there. 
 
The Americans and the British understood that the Germans had been stopped east of   
Smolensk more than a month earlier in their central push, and had been pinned down there on   
the defensive ever since. 
 
his Moscow this halting of the Nazi hordes in the center was still talked of as a great feat of   
Soviet arms, a new 'Miracle of the Maine." 
 
just as the French had stopped the Huns thirty miles from Paris in 1914 
 
and snatched away their chance of quickly winning the war, so the Red Army had halted   
Hitler's marauders, the assertion went, in their drive to seize Moscow before the winter set in.   
The Russians had even taken foreign correspondents to this central front, showing them   
recaptured villages, smashed Nazi tanks, and dead and captured Germans. 
 
Now the Germans claimed the march toward Moscow was rolling again, and the Russians were   
denying it.    The fog of war effectively hid what was really happening. 
 
Contrary to a notion popular at the time-a notion which has never quite died-the Wehrmacht   
was not a giant solid phalanx of tanks and armored cars, spitting flame and death as it clanked   
through whole nations. Hitler had a horse-drawn army. It was larger than Napoleon's, but   
mainly it advanced into Russia as the Grande Ann6e had, by animal power and the march of   
men's feet.    He also had some armored divisions, spaced on the Hanks of the three big groups   
invading the Soviet Union. 
 
The blitzkrieg worked so: the armored forces, the panzers, chugged ahead on either side of   
 652 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
each attack front, slicing into the enemy lines, counting on surprise, terror, and punch to soften   
or panic the foe.    The infantry came along between these two swathes as fast as it could, killing   
or capluring the forces which the panzer divisions had broken into or thinly encircled. 
 
These armored divisions were a big success, and no doubt Hitler would have been glad to   
employ more of them.    But he had started his war-as his generals had feebly grumbled-much   
too soon, only six years after he took power.    He had not come near arming Germany to the   
full, though he had made frightening noises exactly as if he had, and Europe had believed him.   
He was therefore very low on panzer divisions, considering the vastness of the front. 
 
In August, when his three-pronged attack had jabbed far into the Soviet Union, Hitler diverted   
the tMn armored layers of the central formation north and south, to help wrap up the war on the   
flanks by taking Kiev and investing Leningrad.    This done, the panzers were to come back on   
station and start driving again with the Center Group for the knockout blow on the capital.    It   
was a move that military writers still argue about; but in any case, with the central armor thus   
peeled away, the infantry and horse-drawn artillery in the center perforce had to halt and dig in,   
to await the return of the panzers, the steel cutting edges, from their side excursions.    This was   
the new "Miracle of the Maine." The Russians were at first surprised, then inunensely   
heartened, at this sudden stop of the huge force advancing on their capital; and disorganized   
though they were, they went over to counterattacks and won minor gains. The "Miracle"   
ceased at the end of September, when the panzer armies, back in their positions, and properly   
overhauled and gassed up, went slashing toward Moscow again, in two wide curving paths.   
That was when Harriman and Beaverbrook arrived, with the obscure Captain Henry in their   
train. 
 
I'm knot of Leslie Slote's tie came lopsided twice in his shaky hurTrying hands.    He Hung the   
tie in a corner, pulled another from his dresser, and managed a passable knot.    He put on his   
jacket and sat in a heavy brown leather armchair to calm himself with a cigarette, flinging long   
legs on the ottoman. A German correspondent had abandoned this apartment on June 15,   
making a hasty deal with him.    For Moscow, these were splendid digs: three rooms, a kitchen,   
a bathroom, solid German furniture.    Pamela Tudsbury liked the place and had cooked many a   
dinner here for Slote and some of their friends. 
 
The English-speaking embassy people and correspondents-an isolated, gossipy little band- 
assumed that the British girl and the American Foreign Service officer were having an affair.   
So did Slote's thickset Russian maid, Valya, who beamed on them and tiptoed about when   
Pamela was visiting.    Slote yearned for such an affair.    He had not gotten over the marriage of   
Natalie Jastrow, and nothing closed such an ego wound like a new romance.      But Pam   
Tudsbury, whom he remembered from Paris as the warm-blooded girlfriend of Philip Rule- 
wild in her ways, candidly sensual, freshest and gayest when the dawn came upbrushed off his   
passes.    She was in a gloomy state; she was being true, she said, to her fiance, a missing R.A.F   
pilot. Pam's skin was fair as in the Paris days, her heart-shaped face with its thin bow of a   
mouth still a flower of English prettiness.    She wore tailored wool suits, flat shoes, and glasses;   
but inside that secretarial uniform glowed the girl who had whipped off her stockings and   
splashed barefoot in the fountain on a midsummer night with Phil Rule, holding her red silk   
 653 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
dress at mid-thigh. 
 
She still owned that dress, and sometimes wore it. 
 
Slote had patiently been taking Pamela's company on her terms, biding his chances to improve   
them.    But the arrival of Captain Victor Henry deprived him of Pamela on any terms.    When he   
glimpsed Pam with Henry, Slote knew at once he was looking at a woman in love.    So much   
for fidelity to the missing airman! As for Captain Henry, this stumpy, sallow, tiredlooking   
fellow of fifty or so seemed to the Foreign Service officer almost a caricature of the   
anonymous military man: short on small talk, quick on professional matters, poker-faced, firm,   
and colorless. One couldn't even tell whether Henry liked Pamela Tudsbury. He made no   
visible return of her unguarded deep glances. 
 
Slote failed to fathom the attraction this middle-aged dullard held for the young   
Englishwoman, and he had never understood Natalie Jastrow's infatuation with the man's son,   
either. 
 
Fate had served him a strange, indigestible dish, Leslie Slote thought -to be beaten out first by   
the son and then by the father; neither of them, in his own judgment, a worthy rival.    Byron   
Henry    at least was a handsome young devil, and had    much changed Slote's ideas of the   
susceptibility of clever women to surface charms. But there was nothing charming on the   
surface of Byron's father.    The best one could say for the man was that he still had his hair,   
thick and dark, and that his waist showed an effort to stay trim.    But his age was evident in the   
weary wrinkled eyes, the gnarled hands, the seamed mouth, the deliberate movements. 
 
Slote was about to meet Admiral Standley and Captain Henry at the Hotel National; he was   
going to interpret for them at the Kremlin banquet. This privilege did not, in prospect, make   
him happy.    He was in a state of panicky foreboding. 
 
During the first weeks of the invasion, Slote's physical cowardice, which he lived with as other   
people live with hay fever or high blood pressure, had not acted up.    Slote was an admirer of   
Soviet Russia.    He beeyed the news on the loudspeakers and argued that the Germa n victory   
claims were propaganda.    Six hundred miles, more than a hundred million Russians, and above   
all the great Red Army    lay    between him and the Germans.      It was too far    even for the   
Luftwaffe to fly. 
 
The barometer of his timidity read the Moscow climate as sunny and fair. The Muscovites-a   
peaceable, good-natured, rather shabby swarm of workingmen in caps, workingwomen in   
shawls, boys and girls in scarlet Young Communist neckerchiefs, all with Hat calm Russian   
faces so much alike that they appeared to be one family of several million first cousins-placidly   
piled sandbags, taped windows, held anti-incendiary drills for air raids that didn't come, and   
otherwise went about their business as before under blue skies, in warm sparkling weather.   
Silver barrage balloons bobbed at their winches in open squares.    Snouts of anti-aircraft guns   
appeared on the roofs of hotels and museums. 
 
Strapping red-cheeked young men wearing new uniforms and fine leather boots streamed to the   
 654 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
railroad stations. 
 
Tanks, multi-wheeled trucks, and motor-driven big guns thumped and clanked along the   
boulevards day and night, all heading west.    The theatres and cinemas stayed open.    The ice   
cream of the street vendors was as rich as ever. The summer circus was playing to great   
crowds, for this year there was a dancing elephant as well as the bears.    If one could trust one's   
eyes and ears in Moscow, the Soviet Union had met the onslaught t its distant borders and dealt   
the Nazis their first big defeat, exactly as Radio Moscow claimed. 
 
Then Minsk fell, then Smolensk, then Kiev-each Russian acknowledgment lagging a week or   
more behind the German crows of victory. Air raids started; the Luftwaffe had come into   
range. Nobody else in the embassy became as alarmed as Slote, because nobody else had   
counted much on the Russians.    Moreover, nobody else had undergone the ordeal of Warsaw.   
Since May, the ambassador had been storing food, fuel, and supplies in a large house thirty   
miles from the city, to sit out the coming siege. A few of the Americans, rubbed raw by the   
Russians' difficult ways, even looked forward to seeing the Wehrmacht march into Red Square.   
At least, after a few drinks, they said so. 
 
Slote had stopped arguing, having been proved so wrong about the Red Army.    But he thought   
the complacency and indifference of the other Americans was almost insane. The air raids   
were getting worse as the Germans drew nearer.      Moscow's amazingly thick anti-aircraft   
barrage provided a comforting canopy of green, red, and yellow    fireworks, mounting past   
searchlight beams in the black night.    Yet bombs did fall. The terror of the siege guns was still   
to come. Even if he survived the siege, thought Slote, how safe would he be? By then   
Roosevelt's    blatant    help    to Nazism's    enemies    might    have provoked    a triumphant    Hitler   
to   
declare war.    If Moscow fell, the Americans might all be taken to a ravine and shot like the   
Jews in Minsk.      Then Adolf Hitler could apologize for the mistake, or deny that it had   
happened, or say the Russians had done it. 
 
Berel Jastrow's story filled Slote with horror.    He had read the books about Germany on the list   
he had given Byron Henry, and many more. 
 
The Germans, in their naive passion for obedience, their streaks of coarseness and brutality,   
their energy, their intelligence, their obsessive selfcenteredness, their eternal grievance that the   
world was against them and doing them injustice, their romantic yearnings for new extremes of   
experience-this last trait bubbling up ad nauseam in the romantic philosophers, and nailed   
down by Goethe once and for all in the Faust imagethese eighty million strangers in Europe   
seemed to Leslie Slote capable, once they abandoned their strict and docile conventions, of   
slaughtering any number of innocent people upon orders, cheerfully and with no sense of guilt,   
not in the least aware that they were "committing atrocities." 
 
There was no striking bottom in the German spirit. That was the strange and fearful thing   
about them.    They were like remote cold children, as docile and as cruel.    Hitler's dread secret   
was that he understood them. 
 
other nations at war could be counted on to observe such rules as ex-diplomats- In Slote's   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
frightened view, such changing besieged or captured diplomats could perhaps count on Hitler's   
Germans not to eat them-little more outside his window.    It The red light of the setting sun was   
fading out accompany Victor Henry to a night of sitting in the was time to go an bull's eye of   
the Moscow air target. 
 
c gly, he found Captain Henry in TudsbuWs suit.    De Not surprisin in his shirtspite the chill in   
the room, the naval officer lolled on a couch sleeves, smoking a cigar.    Pamela was sewing at a   
crumpled blue coat with gold stripes, in the light of a red-shaded lamp atop an alabaster Venus. 
 
"Hi there," Henry said. don't want them bouncing Pamela said, "Loose brass buttons. We   
water, Lesall over the Kremlin parquet floor. 
 
Have some Scotch and tap lie.    Beaverbrook gave the governor a bottle." 
 
Glancing at his wristwatch, Slote sat himself on the edge of a chair. 
 
had much, Captain.    When you start on a "No thanks.    I hope you haven't Russian dinner, the   
last thing you want in your system is alcohol." 
 
Henry grunted.    "You're telling me!    I haven't touched it." 
 
Pamela sewed, Victor Henry smoked, and the Foreign Service man felt he was very   
superfluous in the room.    He looked at his watch once, twice and coughed.    "I said I'd meet the   
admiral in the lobby at six. 
 
It's ten of.    Suppose I look for him now.    You'll join us, Captain?" 
 
"Sure," Henry said. 
 
"You seem so calm, Les., " Pam said. "If I were actually going into the Kremlin, I'd be   
vibrating." 
 
"Captain Henry seems pretty calm," Slote said. 
 
'Oh, him," Pamela said.    "He's a robot.    A mechanical man. 
 
Chugchug!    Choomp-choomp!    Clank!"    "I need new batteries," Henry said. 
 
"And possibly a valve job." 
 
The intimate teasing made Slote feel even more superfluous. 
 
"Well, in ten minutes then," he said. 
 
Pamela said, "Just two more buttons. Damn! That's twice I've pricked my finger. I never   
could sew." 
 
Clumsy black limousines clustered before the hotel, a rare sight. 
 
Since the start of the war, the sparse auto traffic on Moscow's wide boulevards and squares had   
 656 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
been dwindling to nothing. Muscovites, taking evening strolls in their usual large numbers,   
glanced inquisitively at the machines, but did not stop to gawk. Chauffeurs and escorts in   
black caps and black leather jackets stood by the cars. 
 
The Americans called them the,Y.M.C.A boys'; they were secret police, and the people seemed   
loath to linger near them.    But as the cars began to fill with well-dressed foreigners thronging   
out of the National's narrow entrance, the pedestrians did form lines of quiet onlookers, peering   
with round friendly eyes at the clothes, faces and shoes. 
 
"How did you make out on those harbor charts?"    said Admiral Standley to Henry, settling into   
the back seat and adjusting his hearing aid. 
 
He had once been Chief of Naval Operations, and the President had called him out of   
retirement for this mission.    Slote could never make this shrivelled, leathery, bespectacled man,   
whose uniform displayed four rows of campaign ribbons, stop talking near NKVD agents, who   
undoubtedly knew English, though they never spoke it. 
 
"I got nowhere," Henry said.    "As for operating codes and signals, forget it.    Their fellow told   
me with a straight face that they had no such things, that they just communicated by Morse or   
flashing light, in plain language." 
 
"What tripe!    Did you give them our stuff?" 
 
"Well, I showed them our General Signal Book, and a few strip ciphers- I almost got into a   
wrestling match with this rear admiral, the small fat one.    He started to put them away in his   
briefcase, but I retrieved them. 
 
I said no tickee no shirtee." 
 
"No!    Did you really?"    said the admiral.    'Why, you may hang for that, Pug.    We're supposed   
to give, give, give, here.    Why, you should just have handed over all our Navy's code channels,   
and shaken hands, and toasted eternal brotherhood in vodka. I'm ashamed of you, Captain   
Henry, and goddamn glad you're along." 
 
"We're getting a quid pro quo for all we're giving the Soviets," Slote said. "They're killing   
Germans for us." 
 
"They're killing Germans so as not to get killed by Germans," said the admiral.    "They're not   
doing it for us." 
 
Pug said to Slote, "Look here, Leslie, if we're going to Plan for convoys to Murmansk and   
Archangel, and for possible joint operations, we've got to swap hydrographic dope and   
operational codes.    Hell, we're not asking for secret combat channels.    This is the stuff we need   
for seamanship and piloting." 
 
"Russians are obsessed with secrecy," Slote said.    "Be persistent and patient." 
 
The cars, having made a wide circuit of streets around the Kremlin, were stopping at a tall   
 657 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
gateway under a red stone tower topped by a star. 
 
"That won't help," said the admiral.    "I think these birds just haven't gotten the green light from   
Mr.    Big, and until they do, no dice."    At this stream of slang, the NKVD escort turned and   
squinted narrow Tartar eyes at the admiral, before saying to Slote in Russian, with a polite   
smile, that they would stay in the car on passing through the gate. 
 
0 The limousines, checked one at a time by big, fierce-looking, gun-bearing sentries in faultless   
uniform, drove into the citadel, stopped at an inner gate for another check, then passed among   
bizarre old churches to a long building with a majestic stone facade. 
 
The visitors, with Russian officers mingling among them, left the cars, mounted the steps, and   
stood talking outside the great closed doors, their breaths smoking in the chilly air. A light   
blue sky, puffy with pink sunset clouds, arched from wall to wall of the fortress.    Suddenly the   
palace doors opened, and the foreigners were blinking at dazzling light from globed   
chandeliers in a very long high-ceilinged hall, ending in a cascade of vermilion carpet on a far- 
off white marble staircase. As they walked in, warm air enveloped them, a novelty in Moscow,   
where all building heat had been forbidden until mid-October. Inside, a musty smell of old   
stone walls and old furnishings was mixed with an almost flowery odor. 
 
White-gloved attendants in military livery helped the visitors off with their coats and hats.   
Along the mirrored walls, on dark tables, dozens of combs and brushes were neatly laid out. 
 
"noughtful touch, this," Victor Henry said to Slote, as they stood side by side, brushing their   
hair.    'Say, what did the ambassador think of that stuff from Minsk?    Did you get it to him?"   
Slote nodded at Pug's mirror image.    "I wanted it to go to Secretary Hull, high priority.    The   
ambassador quashed that.    The stuffs to be forwarded through channels to our east European   
desk."    Pug wrinkled his nose. 
 
"That'll be the end of it.    Your department always drags its feet on the Jews.    Better show the   
papers to some American newspaperman here." 
 
"The boss directly ordered me    not to, in case it's evaluated    as    fake atrocity propaganda."   
Young army officers, handsome clear-eyed giants in brown uniforms with scarlet collar tabs,   
appeared through side doors, and began she herding the visitors toward the staircase. 
 
Walking beside    Slote,    Pug said,    "Suppose    you have    Fred    Fearing    up    for a    drink,    and   
he   
accidentally on purpose reads the material?    A reporter will steal a scoop from his old blind   
grandmother, you know." 
 
"Are you suggesting that I disobey orders?" 
 
'I don't think that story should get buried."    The admiral came and hooked elbows with them on   
the    staircase, cackling, "Say,    how's this for socialist austerity?    Can't    you    just    see    ghosts   
of.Czarist nobles and their beautiful, ladies on this red carpet?    This is right out of the movies." 
 
The company passed through a bleak modernist room fun of desks with microphones, and the   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
army officers explained that here the Supreme Soviet met.    They straggled through one vast   
room    after    another, apparently    unaltered since    Czarist    days,    richly    furnished    in French   
or   
Italian or English styles, crammed with paintings and statuary, with no visible purpose except   
to overawe. The effect mounted    of wasteful magnificence    displayed    helter-skelter    with a   
heavy hand.    In one room grander and richer than the rest, pillared in marble, with a vaulted   
gilt ceiling and red damask-covered walls, the company of about eighty men baited. The   
chamber seemed not at all crowded by them. 
 
Mirrored doors opened and a parry of Russian civilians came in, wearing unpressed flopping   
trousers and ill-fitting &uble-breasted jackets. Slote at once recognized several faces that lined   
Lenin's tomb at the May Day parades: Molotov, Kaganovitch, Suslov, Mikoyan. 
 
"Look at those guys come on, will you?"    Victor Henry said.    "They make you fee l like the   
revolution happened last week." 
 
Slote gave him a quick glance. The apparition of these inelegant Communist bosses in the   
gorgeous Grand Palace had jarred him too, and the Navy man had crystallized this feeling in   
one sentence.    Henry was sizing up the approaching Communists through half-dosed eyes, as   
though he were peering at a horizon. 
 
"That's the Politburo, Captain," Slote said.    "Very big cheeses." 
 
Henry nodded.    "They don't look like big cheeses, do they?" 
 
"Well, it's those terrible clothes," Slote said. 
 
Introductions began.    Liveried waiters passed with trays of vodka in little tulip-shaped glasses   
and plates of pastry sticks.    Slote ate a stick, for research purposes; it was far too sugary.    A   
little man walked alone into the room, smoking a cigarette. No ceremony was made of it,   
nobody stopped conversing, but the grand state chamber and all the people in it polarized   
toward this man, for he was Stalin. It was a matter of sideglances, of shoulders and faces   
turned, of small moves in the crowd, of a rounding of eyes.    So Leslie Slote saw for the first   
time in the flesh the man whose busts, photographs, statues, and paintings filled the Soviet   
Union like images of Christ in a Catholic land. 
 
The Communist dictator, a surprisingly short man with a small paunch, moved through the   
room shaking hands and chatting. The subtle focus travelled with him like a spotlight. He   
came to the two American naval officers, put out his hand to the admiral, and said, "Stalyin." 
 
He looked like his pictures, except that his pallid skin was very coarse and pitted, as though he   
had once had bad acne.    His slanted eyes, thick backswept grizzled hair, and arching mustache   
and eyebrows, gave him a genial leonine look. Unlike the other Communists, he wore a   
uniform of simple beige cloth superbly tailored, with sharply creased trousers tucked into soft   
gleaming brown boots. 
 
Leslie Slote made introductions. Captain Henry said in slow Russian, with a bad American   
accent, "Sir, I will tell this story to my grandchildren."    Raising a thick eyebrow, Stalin said in   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a low pleasant voice, "Yes? 
 
Do you have any?" 
 
"Two boys." 
 
"And your children?    Do you have sons?"    The dictator appeared diverted by Victor Henry's   
slow, carefully drilled, mechanical speech. 
 
"I have two, Mr. Chairman. My older son flies for the Navy. My younger one is in a   
submarine." 
 
Stalin looked at Victor Henry through cigarette smoke with vague interest. 
 
Pug said, "Forgive my poor Russian.    I had Russian playmates once. 
 
But that was long ago." 
 
"Where did you have Russian playmates?"    'I was born near the Russian River, in California.   
Some of those early families still remain there." Stalin smiled a real smile, showing tobacco- 
stained teeth. "Ah, yes, yes. Fort Ross. Not many people know that we Russians settled   
California before you did.    Maybe it's time we claimed California back." "They say your policy   
is to fight on one front at a time, Comrade Chairman."    With a mfling grunt, Stalin said, 'Hat   
Ochen horoshol" ("Very good"), struck Henry lightly on his shoulder, and walked on. 
 
'Now what the hell was all that about California, Pug?"    The admiral had been listening with a   
baffled look. "By thunder, you've really picked up that lingo." Victor Henry recounted the   
chat, and the admiral laughed out loud. 
 
'By God, write down every word of that, Pug.    You hear?    I intend to put it in my report.    One   
fighting front at a time!    Well done."    'I must compliment you," Slote said.    "You spoke with   
presence of mind, and he enjoyed it." 
 
'He puts you at your ease," Pug said.    "I knew I was murdering the grammar, but he never let   
on.    Did you see his hands?    Beautifully manicured." 
 
'Say, I didn't notice that," said the admiral.    "How about that, Slote? 
 
Lots of us decadent capitalists don't bother with manicures, but the Head Red does.    Makes you   
stop and think, hey?" 
 
Slote hadn't noticed the manicure, and was vexed at having missed the detail. 
 
Soon the large company was moving again, this time into a stupendous banquet hall of white   
marble, red tapestries, and shiny parquet, where silver, gold, and glass glittered on the white   
cloths of many tables set amid green stone columns.    One table on a dais stretched the length of   
the room, perhaps a hundred feet; the others stood perpendicular to the dais. Light flooded   
from the myriad frosted globes of two gigantic baroque gilt chandeliers, hanging from a high   
ceiling of vermilion and gold.    More light blazed on the walls, in ornate gold sconces. 
 660 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'Wow!"    Pug said. 
 
Leslie Slote stared around at the walls and ceiling.    "It's the Catherine the Great Room.    I've   
seen it in paintings.    There's her crest, in those big medallions.    She got some French or Italian   
architect in to gut this part of the palace, I believe, and do it over. 
 
It was her throne room." 
 
"Well, if this is their style of living, by God," said the admiral, 'they'll make a Communist of   
me yet." 
 
"I wouldn't be too surprised," Slote replied, "if this is the first time the room has been used   
since the revolution." 
 
The menu, printed in Russian and English on thick creamy paper with a hammer and sickle   
gold crest, listed fish, soups, game, fowls, and roast meats, do*n the entire long page.   
Attendants began to bring the courses, while more attendants stood around with bottles of wine   
and vodka, springing to pour. The splendid great room, the massive array of brilliantly set   
tables, the multicolored uniforms of generals and admirals of thee countries, the line of   
powerful men on the dais, with Stalin at a sharp focus even here, chatting left and right with   
Beaverbrook and Harriman, the lavish service, the river of wine, the gobs of caviar, the parade   
of rich fat foods on Czarist gold plate-all this overwhelmed Victor Henry with a reassuring   
sense of Russian'resources, Russian strength, Russian largesse, Russian hospitality, and   
Russian self-confidence. 
 
Slote had a different reaction.    No doubt the Communist leaders were enjoying themselves and   
being hospitable, but in this vulgar outpouring, this choke of luxury, he sensed a note of crude   
Slav irony. 
 
Silent, unspoken, yet almost thunderous, was this message-'Very well, you of the West, these   
are the things that seem to make you happy, opulence and pleasure sweated out of otlws.    See   
how well we do it too, if we choose! 
 
See how our old Russian regime did it, before we kicked them out! 
 
Can you match them? Tonwrrow we'll go back to the simple life we prefer, but since you   
come from    the decadent West, fine, let's all get drunk    together and gorge    and sial.      We   
Russians know how to live as well as you, and for the fun of it, we'll even go you one better   
tonight. 
 
Let's see who slides under the table first.    vAsHE ZDORovW" Vashe zdorovyel Toasts kept   
flaring up.    Anybody appoirently had the license to stand, hammer at a glass with 1-us knife for   
attention, and bawl a toast.    Men would leave their seats and cross the room to clink glasses   
when a toast complimented or pleased them.    Stalin kept trotting here and there, glass in hand.   
It was all Marvelously interesting to Slote but it was rushing by too fast, and he was missing   
too much, interpreting between the American admiral and the short fat Russian admiral who   
had tried to keep the Navy codes.    Sweat shining on his bright red face, the old Russian kept   
 661 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
groaning, as he tossed down vodka and wine, that he was a very sick man, had not much time   
to live, and might as well enjoy himself.    The American admiral said at one point, "What the   
hell, Slote, tell him he looks a lot better than I do, he looks fine."    -Ah, but you see, tell him I   
am like the capitalistic system," groaned the little admiral. 'Healthy on the outside, rotten   
inside."      Slote enjoyed translating this remark; but most of the admirals' talk was vague   
maundering about their families. He envied Victor Henry, quietly observing the scene and   
using all the tricks not to drink much. 
 
Slote's ears began to hurt from the shouting of the two admirals over the rising noise of the   
feast. He was trying to eat a succulent roast quail in sour cream, served with a fine cold   
Crimean    white    wine, but the sharpening exchange kept him too busy.    Why,    the Russian   
insisted, why wouldn't the mighty American Navy at least convoy Lend-Lease goods to   
England?    Were they afraid of a few tin-plated U-boats?    It was idiotic-his slamming fist made   
glasses jump-idiotic to manufacture war goods and ship them out just as target practice for   
Hitler's torpedoes. 
 
"Tell him we'll be convoying any day," snapped the American, "but unless he loosens up with   
some harbor data and operation signals, hell will freeze over before we convoy to Murmansk."   
The old Russian glared at the old American as Slote translated.    Both officers gulped glasses of   
vodka and stopped talking.    This respite allowed Slote to look around at the banquet, which   
was becoming very convivial indeed, with several heads down on tables, and one bald Russian   
general staggering out, held up at the elbows by two attendants.    The cessation of the shouts in   
his ears enabled him to hear another noise: muffled harsh thumps in an irregular pattern.    Ba   
brompl Bromp, brompf His stomach suddenly felt cold.    His eyes met Victor Henry's. 
 
"Gunfire," he started to say, but the word stuck in his throat. 
 
He coughed.    "Gunfire.    Air raid." 
 
Henry nodded.    "I'll bet they have the heaviest A.A. in the world right on these grounds.    listen   
to that, through all those thick walls! 
 
Unreconstructed heh's breaking loose." 
 
"The Germans would do very well," Slote said with a little laugh, "if they scored a bomb bit   
here tonight." 
 
The thump of the guns came louder and thicker, and some banqueters were szlancing uneasily   
at the walls.    The old Russian admiral, slumped in his seat, scarlet face resting on his chest,   
was shooting ill-natured glances at the Americans.    Now he pushed himself to his feet, clinked   
furiously at a water glass until he got some attention, then held up a brimming glass of yellow   
vodka.    "If you please!    I am sitting with representatives of the United States Navy, the most   
powerful Navy in the world.    These brave men must be very unhappy that while all humanity is   
in mortal danger their ships ride at anchor gathering barnacles"-he turned to the American   
admiral with a sarcastic grin-'so I drink to the day when this strong Navy will get in the scrap   
and help destroy the Hitlerite rats, the common enemy of mankind." 
 662 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The toast left a silence.    Slote translated it in a low rapid mutter. 
 
Military    and    civilian    Russians    at    nearby tables shook    their    heads and    exchanged   
troubled   
looks.    The old man dropped heavily in his seat, glaring around with self-satisfaction. 
 
The American admiral's voice shook as he said to Slote, "If I repIN, you'll have an   
international incident on your hands." 
 
Victor Henry said at once, "Admiral, shall I give it a try, with m)" lousy Russian?" 
 
"It's all yours, Pug." 
 
Leslie Slote reached to touch Henry's arm.    "See here, the other Russians didn't like what he   
said, either-just a drop of vodka too much-" 
 
"Okay."    Victor Henry rose, glass in hand.    The subdued talk in the room faded down.    The   
whumping of the anti-aircraft guns sounded louder, and glasses vibrated and tinkled with the   
concussions.      The men at the head table, including Stalin, fastened intent eyes on the   
American.      Henry brought out his response in slow, stumbling, painful phrases, in bad   
grammar: "My chief tells me to respond for the United States Navy. It is true we are not   
fighting.    I drink first to the wise peace policy of Marshal Stalin, who did not lead your country   
into the great war before you were attacked, and so gained time to prepare." 
 
Slote was startled by the barbed aptness of the retort. "The wise peace policy of Comrade   
Stalin" was the Communist cliche for Stalin's deal with Hitler.    Henry went on, with groping   
pauses for words that left tense silence in the vast hall: "That is the policy of our President. If   
we are attacked we will fight. I hope as well as your people are fighting. Now as for"-he   
stopped to ask Slote for the Russian word-"barnacles. Any barnacles that get on our ships   
nowadays    are barnacles    that    can swim very fast. Our ships are on the move.    We don't   
announce everything we do.    Secrecy is another wise policy of both our countries.    But let's not   
keep so many secrets from each other that we can't work together." "Now, our Navy needs   
some"-again Henry asked Slote for a wold -"some harbor data, weather codes, and so forth   
from you.    We need them before we leave. Since this is a farewell banquet, I also drink to   
some fast action.    Finally, I was a naval attache in Berlin.    I have now travelled from Hitler's   
chancellery to the inside of the Kremlin.    That is something Hitler will never do, and above all   
I drink to that." 
 
There was loud applause, a general    raising    of    glasses,    and    shouts of "Your    health!      Fast   
action!"    Slote reached up to stop Pug from drinking, and pointed.    Josef Stalin, glass in hand,   
was leaving his seat. 
 
"Holy smoke, what's the etiquette on this?"    Henry said. 
 
'I don't know," Slote said. "Don't drink yet. By God, Captain Henry, that was rising to an   
occasion."    Pug strode toward Stalin, with Slote hurrying behind him.    The dictator said with   
an amiable grin, as they met near the dais and clinked glasses amid smiles a nd handclapping, "I   
thank you for that fine toast, and in response, you can keep California." "Thank you, Mr.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chairman," Pug said, and they both drank. 
 
"That's a good start, and can you do anything else for us?" 
 
'Certainly. 
 
Fast action," said Stalin, linking his ami in Pug's.    They were so close that Pug caught an odor   
of fish on Stalin's breath.    'American style. We Russians can sometimes do it too."    He walked   
toward the two admirals, and the old red-faced Russian stumbled to his feet and stood very   
erect. Stalin spoke to him in low rapid sentences.    Slote, behind Victor Henry, caught only a   
few words, but the pop-eyed look of the admiral and Stalin's tones were self-translating.    The   
dictator turned to Victor Henry, beaming again.    "Well, it is arranged about the weather codes   
and so forth.    Tell your chief that we Russians do not intentionally embarrass our guests.    Tell   
him I feel the American Navy will do historic things in this struggle, and will rule the ocean   
when peace comes."    As Slote quickly translated, Admiral Standley stood, Iris thin withered   
lips quivering, and grasped the dictator's hand. 
 
Stalin went back to the head table.    The incident seemed to stay in his mind, because when he   
rose to make the last toast of the evening, to President Roosevelt, He returned to the theme.   
The interpreter was Oumansky, the ambassador to the United States, whose well-cut blue suit   
marked him off from the other Russians.    His English was extremely smooth.    "Comrade Stalin   
says President Roosevelt has the very difficult task of leading a country which is   
nonbelligerent, yet wants to do all it can to help the two great democracies of Europe in their   
fight against Fascism.    Comrade Stalin says"-Oumansky paused and looked all around the wide   
room, in a silence no longer marred by gunfire-"may God help him in his just difficult task." 
 
This religious phrase brought a surprised stillness, then a surge of all the banqueters, glasses in   
hand, to their feet, cheering, drinking, and applauding.    Harriman heartily shook Stalin's hand;   
the plethoric little Russian admiral grasped the hands of Slote, Henry, and Standley; and all   
over the room the banquet dissolved in great handshaking, backslapping, and embracing. 
 
But the evening was not over.      The Russians marched their guests through more empty   
splendid rooms to a movie theatre with about fifty soft low armchairs, each with a small table   
where attendants served cakes, fruits, sweets, and champagne.    Here they showed a war movie   
and then a long musical, and Slote did something he would never have believed possible: in the   
heart of the Kremlin, he fell asleep.    A swelling of finale music woke him seconds before the   
lights came on. 
 
He saw others starting awake in the glare, furtively rubbing their eyes. Stalin walked out   
springily with Beaverbrook and Harriman, both of whom had red eyes and suffering   
expressions.    In a grand hall, under a vast painting of a battle in snow, he shook hands with all   
the guests, one by one. 
 
Outside the Grand Palace the night was black, without stars, and the wind was cold and biting.   
The NKVD agents, leather collars turned up to their ears, blue HasWights in hand, looked   
sleepy, chilled, and bored, sorting the guests into their limousines. 
 664 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'Say, how the devil can he drive so fast in this blackout?"    the admiral protested, as their car   
passed through the outer gate and speeded into an inky void. 'Can Russians see like cats?"   
The car stopped in blackness, the escort guided the three Americans to a doorway, they passed   
inside, and found themselves in the small cold foyer of the Hotel National, where one dim   
lamp burned at the reception desk.    The porter who had opened the door was muffled in a fur   
coat. 
 
The elevator stood open, dark and abandoned.    The admiral bade them good-night and plodded   
to the staircase. 
 
"Come up for a minute," Henry said to Leslie Slote. 
 
'No thanks.    I'll grope my way to my apartment.    It's not far." 
 
Pug insisted, and Slote followed Henry up the gloomy staircase to his squalid little room on an   
areaway.    "I don't rate like Tudsbury," he said. 
 
"Tudsbury's about the best propagandist the Soviet Union's got," Slote said, "and I guess they   
know it." 
 
Pug unlocked a suitcase, took a narrow dispatch case out, unlocked that, and glanced through   
papers. 
 
"I hope you understand," Slote said, "that those locks are meaningless. All the contents of that   
case have been photographed." 
 
"Yes," Victor Henry said absently.    He slipped a letter into his pocket. 
 
'Would you like a snooze?    Please stick around for a while. 
 
Something may be doing." 
 
'Oh?"    Out of his new and growing respect for Henry, Slote asked no questions, but stretched   
out on the hard narrow bed to a twang and squeak of springs.    His head still reeled from the   
champagne that shadowy attendants    had kept pouring at the movie. Next thing he knew,   
knocking woke him.    Victor Henry was talking at the door to a man in a black leather coat.   
'Horosho, my gotovy," he said in his atrocious accent. 
 
"Odnu minutu."    He closed the door.    'Want to wash up or anything, Leslie?    I'd like you to   
come with me." 
 
"Where to?" 
 
"Back to the Kremlin.    I have a letter from Harry Hopkins for the big cheese.    I didn't think I   
was going to get to hand it over in person, but maybe I am."    "Good lord, does the ambassador   
know about this?" 
 
"Yes. Admiral Standley brought him a note about it from the President. I gather he was   
annoyed, but he knows."    Slote sat up. 
 
  805 
 
   
 665 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Annoyed!    I should think so.    Mr. Hopkins has a way of doing these things.    This is very   
outlandish, Captain Henry.      Nobody should ever, ever see a head of state without going   
directly through the ambassador. 
 
How have you arranged this?" 
 
I had nothing to do with it. I'm an errand boy. Hopkins wanted this letter to go to Stalin   
informally and privately or not at all. In my place you don't argue with Harry Hopkins. I   
understand he talked to Oumansky.    If it puts you in a false position, I guess I'll go alone. 
 
There'll be an interpreter." 
 
Calculating the angles in this astonishing business-mainly the angle of his own professional   
self-preservation-Slote began combing his hair at a yellowed wall mirror.    "I'll have to file a   
written report with the ambassador." 
 
Sure."    in a long, high-ceilinged, bleakly lit room lined with wall maps, Stalin sat at one end of   
a polished conference table, with many papers piled on a strip of green cloth before him.    A   
stone ashtray at the dictator's elbow brimmed with cigarette butts, suggesting that he had been   
steadily at work since the departure al the banquet guests. 
 
He now wore a rough khaki uniform which sagged and bulged, and he looked very weary.   
Pavlov, his usual English interpreter, sat beside him, a thin, pale, dark-haired young man with a   
clever, anxiously servile expression.      There was nobody else in the big room.      As the   
uniformed protocol officer ushered in the two Americans, Stalin rose, shook hands, with a   
silent gracious gesture waved them to chairs, and then sat down with an inquiring look at   
Captain Henry. 
 
Henry handed him the letter and a round box wrapped in shiny blue paper. 'Mr.    Chairman, I'd   
better not inflict my bad Russian on you any longer," he said in English, as Stalin carefully   
opened the White House envelope with a paper knife. Slote translated and Stalin replied in   
Russian, slightly inclining his head, "As you Wish."      He passed to Pavlov the single   
handwritten pale green sheet, on which nm w iiousf was printed in an upper corner.  
 
Pug said, as Stalin unwrapped the box, "And that is the special Virginia pipe tobacco Mr.   
Hopkins told you about, that his son likes so much." 
 
Pavlov translattd this, and everything the American captain said thereafter, sometimes   
conveying Henry's tone as well as a quick exact version of his words.    Slote sat silent, nodding   
from time to time. 
 
Stalin turned the round blue tin in his hands.    'Mr.    Hopkins is very thoughtful to remember our   
casual chat about pipe tobacco.    Of course, we have plenty of good pipe tobacco in the Soviet   
Union."      He twisted open the tin %with a quick wrench of strong hands and curiously   
inspected the heavy lead foil seal, before slashing it with a polished thumbnail and pulling a   
pipe from his pocket.    "Now you can tell Mr. 
 666 
 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hopkins that I tried his son's tobacco."    Pug understood Stalin's Russian in this small talk, but   
could not follow him after that. 
 
Stalin stuffed the pipe, put a thick wooden match to it, and puffed fragrant blue smoke while   
Pavlov translated Hopkins's letter aloud. After a meditative silence, the dictator turned veiled   
cold eyes on Victor Henry and proceeded to speak, pausing to let Pavlov catch up in English   
after three or four sentences.    "That is a strange letter from Mr.    Hopkins.    We all know the   
United States manufactures millions of automobiles per year of many different models and   
types, including big, luxurious, complicated machines such as Cadillacs and so forth. 
 
"What is the problem with landing craft, then?    Landing craft are armored lighters with small   
simple engines. Surely you can produce as many as you want to. Surely the British have   
plenty already.    I cannot see this as a real obstacle to :i second front in Europe now, as Mr.  
 
Hopkins states." Pug Henry pulled from his disatch case sketches and production tables of   
landing craft.      "Different types must he designed from scratch and manufactured, Mr.   
Chairman, to land against a solidly fortified coast. 
 
We expect mass production in mid-1942, at the latest.    These papers may be of interest." 
 
Unexpectedly, in midrtranslation, Stalin uttered a short harsh laugh and began to talk fast in   
Russian, straight at Victor Henry. 
 
Slote and Pavlov made quick notes, and when the dictator paused, Pavlov took over and spoke   
with much of Stalin's hard sarcastic tone. 
 
"That is very fine. 
 
Mid-1942.    Unfortunately, this is October 1941- If Mr.    Hitler would only halt operations until   
mid-1942!    But perhaps we cannot count on that. 
 
And what will happen meantime?    I regard Mr.    Harry Hopkins"-Stalin said Gospodin Garry   
Gopkins-"as a friend and a clever man.    Doesn't he know that any operation that the British can   
mount now-just a reconnaissance in force of a few divisions, if they can do no better-might   
decide the course of this war?    The Germans have only very weak reserves, mere token forces,   
on the French coast.    They are throwing everything into the battle on our front.    Any action in   
the west might make them pause, and draw off just the decisive margin of strength here." 
 
Stalin doodled in red ink on a gray unlined pad during the interpretation, drawing a wolf. 
 
Victor Henry said, "Mr.    Chairman, I am instructed to answer any questions about the landing   
craft problem."    Stalin used the back of his hand to shove aside the papers Pug Henry had laid   
before him. 
 
"Landing craft?    But it is a question of will, not of landing craft. 
 
However, we will study the matter of landing craft.    Of course, we have such machines too, for   
landing on defended coasts.    Perhaps we can lend-lease some to the British.    In 1915, when war   
 667 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
equipment was more primitive than today, Mr.    Churchill managed to put a big force ashore in   
Gallipoli, thousands of miles from England.    Possibly he found the experience discouraging.   
But the Japanese have in recent years put ashore more than a million soldiers in China.    Those   
men surely did not swim across, in such cold waters.    So it is obviously a question of will, not   
of landing craft.    I hope Mr.    Harry Hopkins will use his great influence to establish a second   
front now in Europe, because the outcome of the war against the Hitlerites may turn on that.    I   
can say no more." 
 
The dictator finished the wolf in rapid strokes during the translation, and started another with   
bared fangs and a hanging tongue. 
 
He looked up at Henry with the oddly genial expression common in his photographs, and   
changed his tone.    "Have you enjoyed your stay? 
 
Is there anything we can do for you?" 
 
Victor Henry said, "Mr.    Chairman, I have been a wartime military observer in Germany and in   
England.    Mr.    Hopkins asked me to go to the front here, if an opportunity arose, so as to bring   
him an eyewitness report." 
 
At the word 'front," Stalin shook his head.    "No, no.    We are obliged to guarantee the safety of   
our guests. That we cannot do, in the present stage of fighting. Mr. Hopkins would not   
forgive us if some misfortune befell you." 
 
"Mr.    Hopkins has been unsparing of his own health, sir.    It is wartime." 
 
An opaque wild look, almost the look in a gorilla's eyes, came into Stalin's gaze.    "Well, you   
should understand that things are bad at the front.    The Germans are breaking through again in   
force.    We may soon see the worst hours for Russia since 1812.    You will hear all the news   
tomorrow. That is why a second front now would earn for England the friendship of my   
people until the end of time."    He went back to work on the wolf. 
 
Pug said soberly, "In view of this news, Mr.    Chairman, I admire your cheerfulness of spirit at   
the banquet tonight. 
 
Stalin shrugged his broad sagging shoulders.      "Wars are not won by    gloom, nor by bad   
hospitality.    Well, if Mr.    Hopkins wants you at the front, he must have good reasons.    We will   
see what we can do.    Give him my thanks for the letter and the tobacco.    It is not bad tobacco,   
though I am used to my Russian tobacco.    Please tell him my feelings about the second front.   
Perhaps your trip to our front could bring home the urgency.    Mr.    Hopkins is a good adviser to   
your great President, and as you are an emissary from him, I wish you well." 
 
Leaving the Kremlin and driving through the blackout, the two Americans said not a word.   
When the car stopped, Pug Henry spoke: "Well, I'll talk to you    tomorrow. I guess these   
fellows will take you home." 
 
"No, I'll get out."    On the sidewalk, Slote touched Pug's arm as the limousine drove off.    "Let's   
 668 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
talk here.    I was utterly shocked by this business of going to the front.    If Mr.    Hopkins knew of   
the catastrophic situation Stalin just admitted to"-the diplomat's voice wavered and he cleared   
his throat-"he would surely withdraw those instructions." 
 
The night was ending, and though the icy -street was still black, Pug could just see Slote's pale   
face under his fur hat. 
 
"I don't agree with you on that.    He's a pretty tough customer, Hopkins." 
 
Slote persisted, "You won't really get to the front, you know. 
 
They've just given some correspondents a tour.    They kept them far behind the lines, feeding   
them caviar, quails, and.    champagne.    Still, the Luftwaffe pulled an air raid on a village and   
almost nailed them." 
 
"Right, but that could happen to us here in Moscow, too." 
 
"But why go, for God's sake?"    Slote broke out in a ragged shrill tone. 
 
He lowered his voice. "At best you'll see one liny sector for a few hours. It's foolhardy   
sightseeing.    It'll create endless trouble at the embassy, as well as for the Russians." 
 
Victor Henry chain-lit a cigarette.    "Listen, if you can watch ten men under fire, you'll learn a   
lot about an army's moral in a few hours. 
 
Mr.    Hopkins likes to call himself a glorified messenger boy. 
 
That's an exaggeration, but I'm an unglorified one.    Doing this job might give me the illusion   
that I'm earning my salary.    Come upstairs for a nightcap.    I have some good Scotch." 
 
"No, thank you.    I'm going to write my report, and then try to get an hour's sleep." 
 
"Well, cheer up, My own impression was that the big cheese was being affable, but that I won't   
get to go." 
 
"That's what I hope.    No foreign military attache has yet gone to the front, or near it.    Good   
morning." 
 
During the talk the sky had turned violet, and Slote could see his way on the dead quiet streets.   
This was a relief, for he had more than once banged into lamp posts and fallen off curbs in the   
Moscow blackout.    He had also been challenged at pistol-point by patrolmen. 
 
One walked toward him now in the gray dawn and gave him a suspicious squint, then passed   
on without a word. 
 
In his flat Slote brewed coffee on the gas ring, and rapidly typed a long account of the banquet   
and the meeting with Stalin.    When he had finished, he threw back the blackout curtains.    The   
sun was shining. 
 
Staggeeing, bleary, he took a loose-leaf diary from a drawer and wrote briefly in it, ending with   
 669 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
these words: But the official report which I've just rattled off describes the meeting with Stalin   
in sufficient detail; and I'll keep a copy in my files. 
 
As for the Henrys, father and son, the puzzle is simply enough resolved after all.    I saw the   
answer in die past few hours.    They both have an instinct for action, and the presence of mind   
that goes with it. Byron displayed these traits in moments of physical danger. His father   
probably would too. But I've just seen him act in more sophisticated and subtle situations,   
requiring quick thinking, hardihood, and tact. It is not easy to keep one's head in confronting a   
personage like Stalin, who has an aura like a large lump of radium, powerful, invisible, and   
poisonous.    Victor Henry managed. 
 
On reflection, I can understand why the ladies like such men. The man of action protects,   
feeds-and presumably fecundates, QED-more vigorously and reliably dian the man of thought. 
 
Possibly one can't change one's nature.    Still one can perhaps learn and grow.    Captain Henry   
suggested that I disregard orders and expose the Minsk documents to Fred Fearing or some   
newspaperman. Such an act goes entirely against my grain; and entirely for that reason, I   
intend to do it. 
 
Talky Tudsbury was having five o'clock tea alone in his hotel suite Tthat day, with some light   
refreshment of sprats, cheese, sturgeon, black bread, and honey cakes, when Victor Henry   
came in and told him that he was going to the front.    The correspondent got so excited that he   
stopped eating.    "Good God, man, you are?    With the Germans swarming in all over the place?   
it's impossible.    It's just talk.    Dear Christ, these Russians are good at putting you off with talk.   
You'll never go." He brushed up his moustaches and reached for more food. 
 
"Well, maybe," Pug said, sinking into a chair, and laying on his lap the briefcase stuffed with   
codes and harbor charts, which he had just collected at the navy ministry.    He had had five or   
six hours' broken sleep in four days.    The room was jerking back and forth in his vision as he   
strove to stay awake.    "But my clearance has just come in from pretty high up. 
 
Tudsbury was putting a chunk of bread heaped with mr&nes w His mouth. The morsel stopped   
in midair. He peered at Henry through his bottle-glass spectacles, and spoke in low quiet   
tones.    'I'll go with you." 
 
"The hell you will." 
 
"Victor, the correspondents went to the central front two weeks ago, when the Russians were   
counterattacking. The day they left, I had flu, with a rising temperature." Tudsbury threw   
down the food, seized his cane, limped rapidly across the room, and began to put on a fur-lined   
coat and a fur hat. "Who's handling this, Lozovsky? Can't I just tell him you said I could   
come?    I know them all and they love me. 
 
It's up to you." 
 
i4 Victor Henry did not want Tudsbury along, but he was exhausted and he was sure the   
Russians would refuse.    "Okay." 
 670 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"God bless you, dear fellow.    Stay and finish my tea.    Tell Pam I'll be back before six, and she's   
to retype my broadcast." 
 
"Where is she?" 
 
"A letter came for her in the Foreign Office pouch.    She went to get it."    Pug fell asleep in the   
armchair where he sat. 
 
Cold fingers brushing his cheek woke him.    "Hello there.    Wouldn't you rather lie down?"    Pam   
stood over him, her face rosy from the frost, her eyes shining, wisps of brown hair showing   
under her gray lambskin hat. 
 
"What?    Oh!"    He blinked and stretched.    "What am I doing here?    I guess I walked in and   
collapsed." 
 
"Where's Talky?"    She was taking off her hat and gloves.    "Why did he leave his tea?    That's   
not like him." Sleep cleared from his brain like fog; he remembered his conversation with   
Tudsbury, and told her. 
 
Her face went stiff and strained.    "The front?    They'll never let him go, but you?    Victor, are   
you serious?    Have you heard the BBC, or the Swedish Radio?" 
 
"Yes."    "Well, I know better than to argue, but-I can tell you this, our embassy's getting ready   
to be moved to the Urals or somewhere.    By the bye, Ded's all right."    She went to the desk,   
still in her fur coat, and picked UP typed yellow sheets. "Oh, drat, another revision. Such   
niggling!" 
 
By now Pug was used to her casual bombshells, but she dropped this one so swiftly that he   
wasn't sure he had heard aright.    "Pamela, what's this?    What about Ted?" 
 
"He's fine.    Or safe, anyhow." 
 
"But where is he?" 
 
"Oh, back in Blighty.    Hardly the worse for wear, according to him. 
 
it seems he finally managed to escape-he and four French aviators-from a prison camp outside   
Strasbourg. He did have quite a few adventures in France and Belgium, straight out of the   
films.    But he made it.    I rather thought he would, sooner or later."    She sat down and took the   
cover off the typewriter. 
 
"Good God, girl, that's tremendous news." 
 
"Yes, isn't it?    You must read his letter.    Seven pages, written on both sides, and quite amusing.   
He's lost three stone, and he still has a bullet in his thigh-or, more accurately, in his behind.   
He's quite chastened, he'll take the desk job now-as soon as he can sit at a desk, he adds rather   
ruefully!    And that means I'm to come straight home and marry him, of course."    Pamela broke   
her offhand manner with a long glance at Victor Henry.    She put on black-rimmed glasses.    "I'd   
better get at this.    And you obviously need some sleep." 
 671 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"No use.    The mission's leaving soon.    I have to see them off. 
 
Pam, that's splendid about Ted.    I'm very glad and relieved." 
 
Rubbing her hands and blowing on them, she said, "Lord, it would be a relief at that, wouldn't   
it?    I mean to get away from Talky's handwriting, and his optimistic drivel." 
 
Tudsbury burst in on them a little later, his face aflame, his nose empurpled by the cold, just as   
Henry was putting on his bridge coat "Moiet byt!    Qualified yes, by God!    They'll confirm it   
tomorrow, but Victor, I believe I'm going with you!-Pam, have you finished yet? 
 
It's getting near that time.-The Narkomindel's in mad confusion, Victor, the news from the   
front must be really bad, but God Almighty, that clearance you've got, whatever it is, certainly   
is the secret password! Of course they adore me, and they know I'm entitled to a trip, but the   
look that came over Lozovsky's face, when I said you insisted that I accompany you!" 
 
"Oh, Talky!" Pamela stopped typing, and glared at him. "Victor didn't insist at all. He   
couldn't have." 
 
"Pam, one has to bludgeon these people."    Tudsbury's face creased in a tricky grin.    "I said you   
two were old friends, in fact, and that Victor rather liked you and wanted to oblige me.    So   
please back my story if occasion arises." 
 
'You unscrupulous old horror," Pamela said, her face mantling pink. 
 
"Well, that's true enough, as far as it goes," Victor Henry said. 
 
"I have to get on to the airport now.    Pamela's got some great news, Talky." 
 
The intrusion of Tudsbury snagged the trip.    The Narkomindel, the Foreign Office, hemmed,   
hawed, and stalled.    Days went by.    Pug remained stuck in Moscow with nothing to do.    The   
ambassador and the attaches acted cool and distant, for Victor Henry was that plague of the   
Foreign Service, an interloper from Washington. Once he dropped in on Slote's office and   
found the diplomat pale, harassed, and given to pointless giggling. 
 
"Say, what's my daughter-in-law doing on your desk?"    Pug said. 
 
Natalie smiled from a silver frame, looking younger and fatter, with her hair in an unbecoming   
knot. 
 
"Oh!    Yes, that's Natalie."    Slote laughed.    "D'you suppose Byron would mind?    She gave  it to   
me ages ago, and I'm still fond of her. 
 
What's happened to your trip?    You won't have far to go, at the rate the Germans are coming   
on, bee bee." 
 
"God knows," Pug said, thinking that this man was in bad shape. 
 
"Maybe it's all off." 
 672 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The main trouble, it turned out, was Pamela.    Her father had asked to bring her along, claiming   
helplessness without her.    He had since withdrawn the request.    But the Narkomindel had fed   
the three names into the great obscure machine that handled the matter, and there was no   
starting over.    Lozovsky began to lose his enial humor when Pug appeared or telephoned.    "My   
dear Captain Henry,    you    will hear when you    will hear. There are other equally pressing   
problems in the Soviet Union just now."    So Pug wandered the streets, observing the changes   
in Moscow.      New red-and-black posters blazed appeals for volunteers, in the crude bold   
socialist imagery of muscular young workmen and peasant women brandishing bayonets at   
spiders, snakes, or hyenas with Hitler faces. Labor battalions shouldering spades and picks   
marched raggedly here and there; big trucks crammed with children crisscrossed the city; long   
queues stood at food shops, despite the heavy rain that persisted day after day.    Soldiers and   
horse-drawn carts vanished from the streets. Under the sodden caps and wet shawls of street   
crowds, the swarm of white high-cheekboned faces wore a different look.    The Slavic phlegm   
was giving way to knotted brows, inquiring glances, and a hurrying pace; Victor Henry thought   
that the approach of the Germans made the Muscovites look more like New Yorkers. 
 
Lozovsky finally telephoned him at the hotel, his voice ringing cheerily- "Well, Captain, will   
tomorrow at dawn suit you? Kindly come here to the Narkomindel, wear warm clothing, a   
raincoat, and good boots, and be prepared to be out three or four days." 
 
"Right.    Is the girl coming too?" 
 
" Of course."    The Russian sounded surprised and a bit offended. 
 
"That was the problem.    Really it was not easy to clear, though we wanted to make the exact   
arrangements you desired.    Our Russian girl face combat conditions as a matter of course, but   
we know that foreign ladies are much less hardy. Still we all know Miss Tudsbury, she is   
attractive,    and one understands such a devoted friendship. It is arranged." Victor Henry   
decided to ignore the jollying, even ribald tone, and not to try to rewrite this record. "I'm   
grateful, and I'll be there."    They drove southward from Moscow in the rain, and all morning   
ground along in a thunderous parade of army trucks, stopping only for a visit to an amazingly   
well camouflaged airfield for interceptors, in the woods just outside the capital. The little   
black automobile, a Russian M-i that looked and sounded    much like a 1930    Ford,    made   
cramped quarters, especially with unexplained packages and boxes lining the floor.    When they   
had gone about a hundred miles, their guide, a mild-faced, bespectacled tank colonel, with the   
odd name of Porphyry Amphiteatrov, suggested that they stop to eat lunch and stretch their   
legs.    That was when they first heard the German guns. 
 
The driver, a burly silent soldier with a close-trimmed red beard, turned off to a side road lined   
with old trees. They wound among cleared fields and copses of birch, glimpsing two large   
white country houses in the distance, and entered a gloomy lane that came to a dead end in   
wild woods.    Here they got out, and the colonel led them along a footpath to a small grassy   
mound under the trees where garlands of fresh flowers lay. 
 
"Well, this was Tolstoy's country estate, you know," said Amphiteatrov. "It is called Yasnaya   
Polyana, and there is his grave. 
 673 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Since it was on the way, I thought you might be interested." 
 
Tudsbury stared at the low mound and spoke in a hushed way not usual to him.    "The grave of   
Tolstoy?    No tomb?    No stone?" 
 
'He ordered it so.    'Put me in the earth," he said, 'in the woods where I played Green Stick with   
my brother Nicholas when we were boys. 
 
.."' Amphiteatrov's bass voice sounded coarse and loud over the dripping of water through the   
yellow leaves. 
 
Victor Henry cocked his head and glanced at the colonel, for he heard a new noise: soft   
irregular thumps, faint as the plop of the rain on the grass.    The colonel nodded.    "Well, when   
the wind is right, the sound carries quite far." 
 
"Ah, guns?"    said Tudsbury, with a show of great calm. 
 
"Yes, guns.    Well, shall we have a bite?    The house where he worked is interesting, but it is not   
open nowadays." 
 
The bearded driver brought the lunch to benches out of sight of the burial spot.    They ate black   
bread, very garlicky sausages, and raw cucumbers, washed down with warm beer. Nobody   
spoke. The rain dripped, the army trucks murmured on the highway, and the distant guns   
thumped faintly.    Pamela broke the silence.    "Who put the flowers there?" 
 
"The caretakers, I suppose," said the colonel. 
 
"The Germans must never get this far," she said. 
 
"Well, that's a spiritual thought," the colonel said.    'I don't think they will, but Yasnaya Polyana   
is not a strong point, and so the great Tolstoy must now take his chances with the rest of the   
Russians." 
 
He smiled, suddenly showing red gums, and not looking mild at all. 
 
"Anyway, the Germans can't lull him." Tudsbury said, "They should have read him a little   
more carefully." 
 
"We still have to prove that.    But we win." 
 
The sun momentarily broke through and birds began to sing.      Victor Henry and Pamela   
Tudsbury sat together on a bench, and light shafted theatrically through the yellow leaves, full   
on the girl.    She wore gray slacks tucked into white fur snowboots, and a gray lamb coat and   
hat. 
 
"Why are you staring at me, Victor?" 
 
"Pam, I've never visited Tolstoy's grave before, certainly not with you, but I swear I remember   
all this, and most of all the nice way you've got that hat tilted."    As her hand went up to her hat   
 674 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
he added, "And I could have told you you'd lift that hand, and the sun would make your ring   
sparkle." 
 
She held out her fingers stiffly, looking at the diamond.    "Ted and I had a bit of a spat about   
that.    When he produced it, I wasn't quite ready to wear it." 
 
The colonel called, "Well, Captain, I think we go on?" 
 
Edging into the thickening traffic stream on the main road, the little black automobile rolled in   
the direction of the gunfire.    Trucks filled the highway, one line moving toward the front, one   
returning. 
 
Whiskered men    and stout sunburned women, working in fields between stretches    of birch   
forest paid no attention to the traffic. Children playing near the highway ignored the war   
vehicles too.    In tiny villages, washing hung outside the log cabins and the wooden houses with   
gaily painted window frames.    One odd observation forced itself on Victor Henry: the further   
one got from Moscow, the nearer to the front, the more normal and peaceful Russia appeared.   
The capital behind them was one vast apprehensive scurry.    Directly outside it, battalions of   
women, boys, and scrawny men With glasses clerks, journalists, and schoolteachers-had been   
frantically digging antitank ditches and planting concrete and steel obstacles in myriads.   
Beyond that belt of defense began tranquil forests and fields, with fall colors splashing the   
stretches of green conifer. Mainly the air raid shelters for trucks along the highway-cleared   
spaces in the woods, masked with cut evergreen boughs-showed there was an invasion on. 
 
Toward evening the car rolled into a small town and stopped at a yellow frame house on a   
muddy square. Here red-cheeked children lined up at a pump with pails; smoke was rising   
from chimneys; other children were driving in goats and cows from broad fields, stretching far   
and Hat under a purpling cloudy sky; and three burly old men were hammering and sawing at   
the raw frame of a new unfinished house.    This was the strangest thing Pug saw all that day- 
these Russian ancients, building a house in the twilight, within earshot of German artillery,   
much louder here than at the Tolstoy estate, with yellow Hashes flickering like summer   
lightning on the western horizon. 
 
"Then this is their home," the tank colonel replied, when Victor Henry remarked on the sight,   
as they climbed stiffly out of the car. 
 
"Where should they go? We have the Germans stopped here. of course, we took out the   
pregnant women and the mothers with babies long ago.". 
 
t headIn the warm little dining room of the house, now a regimen quarters, the visitors crowded   
around the tabi, with the tank colonel, four officers of the regiment, and a General Yevlenko,   
who wore three khaki stars on his thick wide shoulders.    He was the chief of staff of the army   
group in that sector, and Colonel Amphiteatrov Cold Victor Henry that he had just happened to   
be passing through the town.    This huge man with and big smooth pink jaws, appeared to fair   
hair, a bulbous peasant nose oky room.    Much taken With Pamela, fill one end of the narrow   
sen ts urging food and drink on Yevlenko kept passing gallant compliment and stony, deeply   
 675 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
her.    His fleshy face at moments settled into an abstracted, sad and tired look; then it would   
kindle with jollity, though the eyes remained filmed by fatigue in sunken purple sockets. 
 
A feast almost in Kremlin style appeared, on the rough yellow cloth, course by course, brought   
by soldiers: champagne, caviar, soup, fowls, smoked fish, steaks and cream cakes.      The   
mystery of this magnificent stunt was cleared up when Pug Henry glanced into the kitchen as   
one of the soldier-waiters opened and closed the door. The red-bearded driver of the M-i   
automobile was sweating over the stove in a white apron. Pug had from the car into the house.   
Evidently he was seen him carrying boxes really a cook, and a superb one. 
 
The general talked freely about the war, and the colonel translated. 
 
r and had far fewer tanks His army group was outnumbered in this sects and guns than the   
Nazis.    Still, they might yet surprise Fritz. 
 
They had to hold a line much too long for their strength, according to doctrine; but a good   
doctrine, like a good regiment, sometimes had to stretch. The Germans were taking fearful   
losses.    He reeled off many figures of tanks destroyed, guns captured, men killed. 
 
Any army could advance if its commanders were willing to leave blood smeared on each yard   
of earth gained. 
 
The Germans were getting white as turnips with the bloodletting. 
 
This drive was their last big effort to win the war before winter came. 
 
"Will they take Moscow?"    Tudsbury asked. 
 
"Not from this direction Pug, retorted the general, "nor do I think they will from any other.    But   
if they like to do it, over land. 
 
We are going to beat them.    well, we'll drive them out of Moscow, and then we'll drive them   
out of The Germans have no strategic policy. 
 
Their idea of a strategic policy is to kill, to loot, and to take slaves.    In this day and age that is   
not a strategic policy. 
 
Furthermore, their resources are basically inferior to ours. 
 
Germany is a poor country. Finally, they overestimated themselves and they underrated us.   
According to V. I. Lenin, that is a very dangerous mistake in war.    It is very dangerous in war,   
Lenin said, to think too much of yourself and too little of your opponent.    The result can only   
be inaccurate plans and very unpleasant surprises, as, for example, defeat." 
 
Pamela said, "Still, they have come so far." 
 
The general turned a suddenly menacing, brutally tough, piteously exhausted, angry big face to   
her.    His expression dissolved into a flirtatious smirk- 'Yes, my dear girl, and I see that you   
mean that remark well and do not like what has happened any more than we do. 
 676 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Yes, the Nazis, through unparalleled perfidy, did achieve surprise. 
 
And there is another thing. 
 
They are cocky.    Their tails are up.    They are professional winners, having already won several   
campaigns, and driven the indomitable British into the sea, and so forth.    They believe they are   
unbeatable. However, as they watch their comrades die like flies in Russia, I think they are   
starting to wonder.      At first they would advance in colu= down our highways, not even   
bothering to guard their flanks.    Lately they've grown more careful. 
 
Yes, Hitler trained them to maraud, kill, and loot, and those are old Teutonic customs, so they   
are good at it. We are a peace-loving people, and I suppose in ament n we were al se se e   
caught unprepared. 
 
So, as you say, they have come far.    Now we have two jobs: to keep them from coming farther,   
and then to send them back where they came from, the ones we haven't squashed into our   
mud."    He turned to Henry and Tudsbury.    "We will do the job faster, naturally, if you help us   
with supplies, for we have lost a lot.    But most of all, the opening of a front in western Europe   
can lead to the quick destruction of these rats. 
 
The English might be surprised to find they could march straight to Berlin once they set foot in   
France.    I believe every German who can shoot a gun straight has been shipped here for this   
attack." 
 
"I never broadcast without advocating a second front now," Tudsbury said. 
 
The general nodded.    "You are well known and esteemed as a friend of the Soviet people.- He   
glanced at Victor Henry.      "Well, and what are you interested in seeing, Captain?   
Unfortunately, this far inland, we cannot show you very good naval maneuvers." 
 
pose-0 from the fairy tales." 
 
"General,    sup of course this    is    absurd, but-suppose my Presifr Ties," Yevlenko said, "but   
unfortunately no such dent "cowueldhvaivsiet syuocuhr stoont, in a cloak of invisibility   
cloaks." 
 
'What would you like him to see?" 
 
The general glanced at the four officers sitting elbow to elbow at the table across from the   
visitors, smoking continuously, four kinky-haired pale Russians with shrewd weary eyes, who   
looked like quadruplets in their identical brown tunics. None of them had as yet uttered a   
word. Now he addressed them, and a colloquy in rapid Russian broke out.    He turned back to   
Henry.    "You put that well.    It will be arranged.    As the situation is a bit fluid, I suggest you   
make a start at dawn."    He said to Pamela, gesturing upward, "A bedroom has been cleared for   
you.    The gentlemen will bunk with these officers." 
 
'Good heavens, a bedroom?    I counted on sleeping on the floor or on the ground in my clothes,"   
Pamela said.    "Anyway, I'm not at all sleepy yet."    As the colonel translated, Yevlenko's face lit   
 677 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
up.    "So? 
 
You talk like one of our Russian girls, not like a delicate Englishwoman." Offering her his   
arm, he led them into the next room, where worn, inked-over maps hung on the walls, and the   
fusty house furniture was jumbled in with desks, stools, typewriters, and black twisting   
telephone cables.    Soldiers pushed furniture, screeching here and there to clear a space around   
a shabby upright piano with bare wooden keys. An officer sat, cigarette dangling from his   
mouth, and thumped out "There'll Always Be an England."      Pamela laughed when she   
recognized the tune, and stood and sang it. The general led applause and called for more   
champagne.    The pianist began stumbling through "Alexander's Ragtime Band." With an   
elegant low bow, General Yevlenko invited Pamela to dance.    He towered head and shoulders   
above her, so they made a grotesque pair, two-stepping stiffly round and round the narrow   
clear space in heavy muddy boots, but his face shone with enjoyment.    She danced with other   
officers, then with the general again, as the pianist ran through the few American tunes he   
knew and started over on "Alexander's Ragtime Band."    Everybody in the room quaffed much   
champagne and vodka.    In the doorway soldiers crowded, watching with round gay eyes the   
foreign lady in gray pants dancing and drinking with the officers.    Pug knew that she hated to   
dance, especially with strangers; he recalled almost the first words he had heard Pamela utter,   
on the Breimn in the dim far past of peacetime: 'I shall get myself a cane and a white wig."    But   
she made a game show. 
 
The pianist began playing Russian music-which he did much better-and Pamela sank into a   
chair while the officers danced alone or with each other.    The laughing and the handclapping   
grew louder.    One handsome young soldier with a weeles growth of beard burst into the room   
and did a bravura solo, bounding, squatting, pirouetting, then acknowledging applause with the   
bow of a professional ballet artist. 
 
The general lumbered to his feet and began to dance by himself; he too twirled, jumped, then   
folded his arms and squatted, kicking his feet and hoarsely shouting, 'Skoreyel Skoreyel Faster!   
Faster!"    His heavy steps shook the floor.    The soldiers broke into the room to ring him and to   
cheer; the room reeked of men's dirty bodies, of smoke, of alcohol, yet pressed beside, Pamela,   
Victor Henry could faintly smell her carnation perfume too. 
 
When General Yevlenko finished with a shout and jumped up panting, the men roared and   
clapped, and Pamela came and kissed his perspiring big red face, and he heartily kissed her   
mouth, causing laughter and more roars; and that was the end.    The general left.    The soldiers   
pushed the furniture back as it had been.    The visitors went to sleep. 
 
dawn, it was raining hard.    Children and animals floundered in the ATdim violet light all over   
the square, and trucks splashed, skidded, and spun their wheels, throwing up curtains of muck.   
The back seat of the car was roomier, since many of the packages had been eaten or drunk up.   
Victor Henry thought of complimenting the master chef at the wheel, but decided against it.   
Pamela, squeezed between her father and Pug, had managed a touch of lipstick and eye   
makeup.    In these surroundings she looked like a movie star visiting the troops, Pug thought. 
 
"Well, we go," said Colonel Amphiteatrov.    "In this weather we will go slower, and not so far."   
 678 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The car bumped and slid about a hundred yards, then sank and stalled. 
 
"Well, I hope we will go farther than this," said the colonel. 
 
Soldiers in greatcoats surrounded the car.    With shouting and shoving they got it to move.    The   
wheels hit soldier ground, and the car went splashing, rocking, and stewing out of the town.   
After a run on asphalted highway through the fields, they took a narrow mud road into a forest.   
The chef drove well (or the chauffeur cooked well-Pug never did find out the truth), and he   
kept the car going through terrible ruts, mounds, and holes, for perhaps twenty minutes.    Then   
the car stopped dead.    Pug got out with the driver and the colonel.    The hubs of the rear wheels   
were buried in ropy red mud.    It was still raining heavily. They were stuck in wild woods, so   
quiet that rain hitting the hot hood made a hiss. 
 
"I suppose he has a shovel," Pug said. 
 
"Yes, I suppose so."    The colonel was looking around.    He walked off into the woods some   
yards ahead-to relieve himself, Pug imagined, before getting to work.    Pug heard voices, then   
hoarse engine snorts. 
 
The bushes began to move.    Out of the shrubbery a light tank appeared, covered with boughs,   
its cannon pointed at Pug.    Behind it walked the colonel and three muddy men in greatcoats.   
The American    had been looking straight at the mottled,    camouflaged    cannon, yet    had not   
noticed it until it started toward him.    The tank chugged out of the trees, swerved, and backed   
on the road.    Soldiers quickly attached a chain and the car was pulled loose in a moment, with   
the passengers inside.    Then the bough-festooned turret opened, and two bristly, boyish Slav   
heads poked out. 
 
Pamela jumped from the car, smiled and stumbled to the tank, and kissed the tankists, to their   
embarrassed pleasure.    The turret closed, the tank backed into the wood to its former place, and   
the black automobile went lurching on into the forest. Thus they were bogged and rescued   
several times, and so discovered that the wet silent forest was swarming with the Red Army. 
 
They arrived at a washout that severed the road like a creek in flood. 
 
The ully's sides bore gouge marks of caterpillar treads and thick truck tires, 9 but obviously the   
auto could not struggle across. Here soldiers emerged from the woods and laid split logs   
across the gash, smooth side up, lashing them together into a shaky but adequate bridge.  
 
This was a sizable crew, and their leader, a fat squinting lieutenant, invited the party to stop   
and refresh themselves.    There was no way of telling him from his men, except that he gave the   
orders and they obeyed.    They were all dressed alike and they were all a red earth color.    He   
led the visitors through the trees and down into an icy, mucky dugout roofed with timbers, and   
so masked by brush and shrubs that Victor Henry did not see an entrance until the ofncer began   
to sink into the earth.    The dugout was ari underground cabin of tarred logs, crisscrossed with   
telephone cables, lit by an oil lamp and heated by an old open iron stove burning chopped   
branches.    The' officer, squinting proudly at a brass samovar on the raw plank table, offered   
them tea. While water boiled, a soldier conducted the men to a latrine so primitive and foul- 
 679 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
though Tudsbury and the Russians happily used it-that Pug went stumbling off into the trees,   
only to be halted by a sentry who appeared like a forest spirit.    While the American attended to   
nature, the soldier stood guard, observing with some interest how a foreigner did it.    Returning   
to the dugout, Pug encountered three big blank-faced Russians, marching with fixed bayonets   
around Pamela, who looked vaguely embarrassed and amused. 
 
Before they left, the lieutenant showed Pug and Tudsbury through the soldiers' dugouts,   
obviously proud of his men's workmanship.    These freshly dug puddle-filled holes in the damp   
earth, smelling like graves, did have heavy timbered roofs that might survive a shell hit, and   
the mudcaked, unshaven soldiers, crouched in their greatcoats in the gloom, appeared content   
enough to smoke and talk and wait for orders here.    Pug saw some feeding themselves with   
torn chunks of gray bread and dollops of stew from a muddy tureen lugged by two muddy   
soldiers.    Munching on their bread, dragging at their cigarettes, these men placidly stared at the   
visitors, and slowly moved their heads to watch them walk through the trenches. Healthy- 
looking, well-nourished, they seemed as much at home in the red earth as earthworms, and   
they seemed almost as tough, abundant, and simple a form of life.    Here Victor Henry first got   
an ineradicable feeling that Yevlenko had told the truth: that the Germans    might gain the   
biggest victories, but that the Red Army would in time drive them out. 
 
"Ye gods," Tudsbury managed to mutter on the way back to the car, "Belgium in 1915 was   
nothing like this.    They live like animals." 
 
"They can," Henry replied, and said no more, for Amphiteatrov's eye was on them in these   
brief asides. 
 
"Well, we are not really far from our destination," the Russian said, wiping rain from his face   
and helping Pamela into the back seat. 
 
"If not for the mud, we would have been there now." 
 
The car bumped and skipped out of the woods.    Cleared fields stretched for miles ahead, flat as   
a table, under gray low clouds. 
 
"There's where we're going."    Amphiteatrov pointed straight ahead to a distant line of forest.   
They came to a crossroads of mud churned up like water at a boil, and though the road ahead   
looked good, the driver slithered the car sharp right. 
 
"Why don't we drive straight on?"    Pamela said.    "Doesn't the road go through?" 
 
"Oh, yes.    It goes through.    it's mined.    This whole area"-the colonel's arm swept around the   
quiet stubbly fields-"is mined." 
 
Pug said, somewhat chilled, "Nice to know these things when you start out." 
 
Amphiteatrov gave him his infrequent, wolfish, red-gummed smile, and wiped a dear drop   
from his thin bluish nose.    "Well, yes, Captain. 
 
Your Intourist guide in these parts should really know what is what. 
 680 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Otherwise your health could be affected."    I They jolted along the soupy track in rain that made   
it soupier, but in time the car sank with all four wheels into the mire, and halted amid long   
rows of yellow stubble stretching out of sight. No rescuers appeared; they could not have,   
without rising from the earth, but Pug half thought they might. 
 
The driver shovelled the wheels clear and laid planks to the back tires. When the passengers   
got out to lighten the car, Amphiteatrov warned them to stay in the road, for mines were   
planted everywhere under the stubble. Showering muck and splinters all over them, the car   
lurched free.    On they went. 
 
Pug gave up trying to guess the direction.    They never passed a road marker or signpost.    The   
low gray clouds showed no sun patch. In the forest of the earthworm sol(tiers, the artillery   
thumps had been fainter than in the village.    Here they were considerably louder.    But zigzags   
in the front line could cause that.    Obviously they had stopped going west, because westward   
were the Germans.    The car appeared to be meandering five miles or so behind the fire zone. 
 
"Here we will go a bit out of the way," the tank colonel said at another crossroads, "but you   
Will See something interesting.yp They entered fields where tall Yellow-green stalks of grain   
stood unharvested and rotting.      After a mile or so Amphiteatrov told the driver to stop.   
"Perhaps you won't mind stretching your legs," he said.    "You all have nice thick boots." 
 
He gave Pamela an odd look.    "But you might find this walk boring. 
 
Perhaps you will stay with the driver here?" 
 
"I'll come, unless you tell me to stay."    "Very well.    Come." 
 
They went pushing in among the stalks.    The wet quiet field of overripe grain smelled sweet,   
almost like an orchard.    But the visitors, squelching along behind Amphiteatrov in a file, soon   
glanced at each other in revulsion as a rotten stench hit their noses.    They broke into a clear   
space and saw why.    They were looking at a battlefield. 
 
In every direction, the grain was crushed Hat in great crisscrossing swathes of brovm muck.   
Random patches of stalks still stood; and amid the long brown slashes and the green-yellow   
clumps, damaged tanks lay scattered on their sides, or turned clear over, or canted, their camou   
age fl paint blistered and burned black, their caterpillar tracks torn, their armor plate blown   
open.    Seven of the tanks bore German markings; two were light Russian T-z6 tanks, such as   
Pug had often seen moving through Moscow.    The stink rose from German corpses, sprawled   
in green uniforms here and there on the ground, and others slumped in blown-open tanks. 
 
Their dead purple faces were bloated disgustingly and covered %with fat black flies, but one   
could see they had been youngsters. 
 
Pamela turned pale and clapped a handkerchief to her face. 
 
"Well, I am sorry,- said the colonel, an ugly gleam lighting his face. 
 
"This happened only day before yesterday- These Fritzes were probing and got caught.    Their   
 681 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
comrades went away from here and wouldn't stop to dig proper graves, being in a slight hurry." 
 
Helmets, papers, and broken bottles were littered among the tanks and the corpses, and the   
oddest sight was a mess of women's underwear pink, blue, and white drawers and petticoats- 
heaped soiled and sodden in the mud near an overturned tank.    Pamela, eyebrows rising over   
the handkerchief, pointed to these. 
 
"Well, funny, isn't it?    I suppose Fritz stole those from a village. The Germans steal everything   
they can lay their hands on. 
 
That is why they have come into our country, after all-to steal. 
 
We had a tough tank fight around Vyazma a month ago.    One tank we blew up had a large fine   
marble clock in it, and also a dead pig.    The fire ruined that pig.    That was a pity.    It was a very   
good pig.    Well, I thought this might interest you." 
 
Pictures of knocked-out panzers were common in Moscow, but before this Victor Henry had   
seen actual German tanks only in Berlin, clanking down boulevards lined with red swastika   
flags, to the blare of brass-band marches over the loudspeakers and the hurrahs of crowds   
giving Nazi salutes; or else massed factory-fresh on trains of flat cars, chugging to the front.   
Seeing a few broken and overturned in a desolate Russian cornfield two thousand miles from   
Berlin, with their crewmen rotting beside them in the mud, was a hard jolt.    He said to the tank   
colonel, "Aren't these Mark Threes?    Haw could your T-26's knock them out?    They don't fire a   
shell that can penetrate the Mark Three." 
 
Amphiteatrov grinned.    "Well, very good.    For a seaman you know a bit about tank warfa re.   
But you had better ask the battalion commander who won this battle, so let us be on our way." 
 
They backtracked to the crossroads, headed toward the forest, and arrived at what looked like   
an open-air machine shop for tank repairs, in a village of a dozen or so thatched log cabins   
straggling along the road through wild woods.    Detached caterpillar tracks stretched long and   
straight on the ground under the trees; bogie wheels were off; guns were off; and on every side   
men in black or blue coveralls hammered, filed, greased, and welded, shouting in Russian and   
laughing at each other. 
 
Strolling down the street in an olive-colored greatcoat too large for him, a short, hook-nosed,   
swarthy officer broke into a trot when he saw the black automobile.    He saluted the colonel,   
then the two embraced and kissed. 
 
Introducing the visitors, Amphiteatrov said, "Major Kaplan, I showed our friends those busted   
German tanks out there.    Our American Navy friend asked a real tankist's question.    He asked,   
how could T-26's knock out Panzer Mark Threes?" 
 
The battalion commander grinned from ear to ear, clapped Victor Henry on the back, and said   
in Russian, 'Good, come this way."    Beyond the last cabin, he led them into the woods, past   
two lines of light tanks ranged under the trees and draped with camouflage netting over their   
own green-and-sand blotches.    'Here we are," he said proudly. 
 682 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'This is how we knocked out the Mark Threes." 
 
Dispersed in the thickets, all but invisible under branches and nets, five armored monsters   
thrust heavy square turrets with giant guns high in the air.    Tudsbury's mouth fell open, as he   
stared up at them. 
 
He ner -A vously brushed his moustaches with a knuckle.    "My God! 
 
What are these things?" 
 
"Our newest Russian tank," said Amphiteatrov.    "C'eneral Ycvlenko thought it might interest   
President Roosevelt." 
 
"Fantastic!"    said Talky.    "Why, I'd heard you had these monsters, butWhat do they weigh?    A   
hundred tons?    Look at that gun!" 
 
The Russians smiled at each other.    Amphiteatrov said, "It's a good tank."    Tudsbury asked if   
they might climb inside one and to Pug's surprise the colonel agreed.    Young tankists helped   
the lame fat Englishman to the batch, as Pug scrambled up.    Inside the command turret, despite   
the clutter of machinery and instruments and the bulky gun breech, there was a lot of   
elbowroom.    The machine smelled startlingly like a new car; Pug guessed this came from the   
heavy leather seats for the gunner and the commander.    He knew very little about tanks, but the   
workmanship of the raw metal interior seemed good, despite some crude instrument brackets   
and wiring.    The dials, valves, and controls had an old-fashioned German look. 
 
"Great God, Henry, it's a land battleship," Tudsbury said.    "When I think of the tiny tin cans we   
rode in!    Why, the best German tanks today are eggshells to this.    Bloody eggshells!    What a   
surprise!" 
 
When they climbed out, soldiers were clustering around the tank, perhaps a hundred or more,   
with others coming through the trees.    On the flat hull stood'Pamela, embarrassed and amused   
under the male stares. 
 
Bundled in mud-caked lambskin, Pamela was not a glamorous object, but her presence seemed   
to thrill and hypnotize the tankists. A pale moonfaced officer with glasses and long yellow   
teeth stood beside her. 
 
Major Kaplan introduced him as the political officer.    "The commissar would like to present all   
of you to the troops," said Amphiteatrov to Victor Henry, "as he feels this visit is a serious   
occasion that can be used to bolster their fighting spirit." 
 
"By all means," Victor Henry said. 
 
He could understand only fragments of the strident, quick-tumbling harangue of the moonfaced   
commissar, but the earnest tones, the waving fist, the Communist slogans, the innocent,   
attentive faces of the handsome young tankists, made a clear enough picture.    The commissar's   
speech was half a revivalist sermon and half a football coach's pep talk.    Suddenly the soldiers   
applauded, and Amphiteatrov began to translate, in bursts o'f three or four sentences at a time,   
 683 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
during which the moon face beamed at him: "In the name of the Red Army, I now welcome the   
American naval captain, Genry, the British war correspondent, Tudsbury, and especially the   
brave English newspaperwoman, Pamela, to our front.    It is always good for a fighting man's   
morale to see a pretty face."    (Laughter among the men.) "But we have no evil thoughts, Miss   
Tudsbury, we think only of our own little sweethearts back home, naturally. Besides, your   
father has    wisely    come    along    to    protect you    from    the    romantic    and    virile young   
Russian   
tankists." (Laughter and handclaps.) "You have showed us that the British and American   
peoples have not forgotten us in our struggle against. 
 
the Fascist hyenas. 
 
"Comrade Stalin has said that the side which has more petroleum engines will win this war.   
Why is the petroleum engine so important? 
 
Because petroleum is the biggest source of energy today, and energy wins wars.    We tankists   
know that!    Hitler and the Germans thought they would make a lot of petroleum engines in a   
hurry, put them in tanks and aircraft, and steal a march on the world.    Hitler even hoped that   
certain ruling circles in America and England would help him once he decided to attack the   
peaceful Soviet people.    Well, he miscalculated. 
 
These two great nations have formed an unshakable front with the Soviet peoples.    That is what   
the presence of our visitors shows us. 
 
We three countries possess many more petroleum engines than the Germans, and since we can   
manufacture still more engines faster than they can, because we have much larger industries,   
we will win this war. 
 
"We will win it faster if our friends wig hasten to send us plenum war supplies, because the   
Nazi bandits will not quit until we have killed a great many of them.    Above all, we will win   
much faster if our British allies will open a second front at once and kill some German soldiers   
too. 
 
Certain people think it is impossible to beat Germans.    So let me ask this battalion: have you   
fought Germans?" 
 
Twilight had fallen during the harangue, and Pug could barely see the nearest soldiers' faces.   
A roar came from the darkness: 'DAI' "Have you beaten them?" 
 
'(DAd) "Are you afraid of Germans?" 
 
'NYETI'-and barking male laughter. 
 
"Do you think the British should be afraid to open a second front against them?" 
 
"NYETI'-and more laughter, and another bellow, like a college cheer, in Russian, "Second   
front now!    Second front now!' "Thank you, my comrades. And now to dinner, and then back   
to    our    tanks, in    which    we have    won    many    victories    and    will    win    more, for our   
socialist   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stalin!" 
 
A tremendous college cheer in the gloom: "WE SERVE THE SOVIET UNION!" "The   
meeting is over," hoarsely cried the commissar, as the moon rose over the trees. 
 
Pug came awake from restless sleep on a straw pallet, on the dirt floor of a log cabin.    Beside   
him in blackness Talky Tudsbury liquidly snored. 
 
Groping for a cigarette and lighting it, he saw Pamela as the match flared upright on the only   
bed, her back to the plastered log wall, her eyes glittaring.    "Pam?"    "Hello there.    I still feel as   
though we're bumping and sliding in mud. 
 
"Do you suppose if I stepped outside, a sentry would shoot me?" 
 
'Let's try.    I'll step out first.    If I get shot, you go back to bed." 
 
"Oh, that's a fine plan.    Thank you." 
 
Pug pulled on the cigarette, and in the red glow Pamela came over and clasped hands.    Moving   
along the rough wall, Pug found the door and opened a blue rectangle in the dark. "I'll be   
damned.    Moon.    Stars." 
 
A high moon, pa y veiled b rtl y swift-rolling clouds, dusted the thatched huts and the rutted   
empty    road    blue-gray.    Across the    road    in the    woods,    soldiers, were    sadly    singing to   
an   
accordion. Victor Henry and Pamela Tudsbury sat down on a rough bench, hands clasped,   
huddling close in the frigid wind which blew straight up the road. Underfoot the mud was   
ridged hard. 
 
"Dear God," Pamela said, it's a long long way to Tipperary, isn't it?" 
 
'Washington, D.C."s even further.anks for bringing me out, Victor. I was sitting there not   
daring to move.    I love the smell of this countryside, but lord, that wind cuts you!" 
 
Yellow flashes ran along the sky and loud thumps followed fast. 
 
Pamela winced against him, with a little gasp.    "Oh, oh!    Look at that. Talky was a pig to drag   
me out here, wasn't he?    Of course it suits him. He dictated two hours by candlelight tonight,   
and he Couldn't have written a line himself.    It's quite a story, I'll say that.    Are those tanks as   
startling as he claims?    He says in his last sentence that if the Soviet Union can massproduce   
them, the war's as good as over." 
 
"Well,    that's    journalism.    Size isn't everything.    Any tank, no matter    how    big, can be an   
incinerator for crews if it's built wrong. 
 
How maneuverable is it?    How vulnerable is it?    The germans'll find the weak spots.  
 
They'll rush out a new gun that can penetrate these things. 
 
They're good at that.    Still, it's quite a tank." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Count on you!"    Pamela laughed.    "I think that was why I couldn't sleep.    I had this vision of   
the war coming to a sudden end.    It was such a weird, dazzling idea!    The Germans beaten,   
Hitler dead or locked up, the lights going on again in London, the big cleanup, and then life   
continuing the way it used to be!    All because of these monster tanks rolling by the thousands   
to Berlin-my God, those guns do sound dose." 
 
'It's a pipe dream," Victor Henry said.    "The Germans are winning'. 
 
We're pretty close to Moscow here, Pam." 
 
After a silence she said, looking up at the moon and stars and then at Pug's shadowy face,   
"When you just said those tanks couldn't end the war, do you know what? I felt relieved.   
Relieved!    What kind of mad reaction was that?" 
 
"Well, the war's something different, while it lasts."    Victor Henry gestured at the angry yellow   
flare-ups on the black western clouds. "The expensive fireworks-the travel to strange places-'   
"The interesting company," Pamela said. 
 
"Yes, Pam.    The interesting company."    The accordion was playing alone now, a plaintive tune   
like a lullaby, half drowned by the cracking and sighing of trees in the wind. 
 
'What is that sensation of sudden remembering supposed to mean?" 
 
she said.    "The sort of thing you felt yesterday at the Tolstoy place?" 
 
Pug said, 'Isn't it a kind of short circuit in the brain?    Some irrelevant stimulus triggers off the   
sense of recognition when it shouldn't.    So I once read." 
 
"()n the Bremen, the second day out," said Pamela, "I was walking the deck in the morning.   
And so were you, going the other way.    We passed each other twice.    It was getting silly.    I   
decided to ask you, next time we passed, to walk with me.    And I suddenly knew you'd ask me.   
I knew the exact words you'd use.    You used them.    I made a remark about your wife as though   
I were acting a play, and your answer came like the next line in the play, all old and familia r.   
I've never forgotten that." 
 
A tall soldier, muffled in his greatcoat, trudged by with smoking breath, the unsheathed   
bayonet of his rifle glinting in the moonlight. 
 
He stopped to glance at them, and passed on. 
 
"Where are we heading tomorrow, Victor?" 
 
"I'm going into the front line.    You and Talky will stay in a town several miles back.    Up front   
one sometimes has to make a dash for it, the colonel says, and of course Talky can't do that." 
 
"Why must you go?" 
 
"Well, Amphiteatrov offered.    It'll be informative." 
 686 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"This is the flight to Berlin again." 
 
"No.    I'll be on the ground all the way, on friendly territory. 
 
Quite a difference." 
 
"How long will you be gon from us?" 
 
"Just a few hours." 
 
A green radiance blinded them, a sudden blaze filling the heavens. 
 
Pamela uttered a cry.    As their pupils adjusted to the shock, they saw four smoky green lights   
floating very slowly down below the thickening clouds, and heard the thrum of engines.    The   
sentry had darted off the road. The village showed no sign of life: a tiny sleeping Russian   
hamlet of thatched huts in the woods an a mud road, like a hundred others, with a stage-setting   
appearance in the artificial glare.    All the tanks under repair had been camouflaged.  
 
'You look ghastly," Pam said. 
 
-You should see yourself.    The)ere searching for this tank battalion." 
 
The lights sank earthward.    One turned orange and went out.    The airplane sounds faded away.   
Pug glanced at his watch.    "I used to think the Russians were nutty on camouflage, but it has its   
points." 
 
He stiffly rose and opened the cabin door.    'We'd better try to sleep." 
 
Pamela put a hand out, palm up to the black sky.    The clouds were blotting out the moon and   
stars. "I thought I felt something." She held her hand toward Pug. In the light of the last   
falling flare he could see, melting on her 'aim, a fat snowflake. 
 
The car crossed a white bare plain in a steady snowfall in leaden gray light by which the driver   
guided the jolting, Tlight.    Pug could s no roa sliding, shaking machine.    What about mines?   
Trusting that Pug could Amphiore appetite than he to get blown up, Pug said nothing. 
 
teatrov had no m In about an hour an onion-top belft-y of yellow brick loomed ahead They   
entered a town where soldiers milled and through the veil of snow.    wood houses. 
 
army trucks lurched on mud streets between unpainted idlers peered the livid, bloody,   
bandaged faces of so From some trucks sadly. 
 
Villagers, mostly snow-flecked old women    and boys,    stood in front of the houses, dourly   
watching the traffic go by. 
 
At the steps of the yellow brick church, Pug parted company with the others. A political   
officer in a belted white leather coat, with the slanted eyes of a Tartar and a little beard like   
Lenin's, came to take him off in a small British jeep.    Talky Tudsbury happily said in Russian,   
pointing to the trademark, "Ah, so British aid has reached the front at last!" 
 687 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The political officer replied in ragged English that it required men and gunfire, not   
automobiles, to stop Germans, and that the British vehicles were not strong enough for heavy   
duty. 
 
Pamela gave Victor Henry a serious wide-eyed stare.    Despite the wear and soil of travel she   
looked charming, and the lambskin bat was tilted jauntily on her head.    'Watch yourself," was   
all she said. 
 
The jeep went west, out of the tumultuous town and into a snowladen quiet forest. They   
appeared to be heading straight for the front, yet the only gunfire thumps came from the left, to   
the south. 
 
Pug thought the snow might be muffling the sound up ahead.    He saw many newly splintered   
trees, and bomb craters lined with fresh snow. 
 
The Germans had been shelling the day before, the commissar said, trying in vain to draw the   
fire of Russian batteries hidden in the woods.    The jeep bounced past some of these batteries:   
big horse-drawn howitzers, tended by wearylooking bewhiskered soldiers amid evergreens and   
piles of shells at the ready. 
 
They came to a line of crude trenches through the smashed fallen trees, with high earthworks   
sugared by snow.    These were dummy dugouts, the commissar said, deliberately made highly   
visible.    They had taken much    of the shellfire    yesterday.    The real    trenches, a couple of   
hundred yards further on, had escaped.    Dug along a riverbank, their log tops level with the   
ground and snowed over, the actual trenches were totally invisible.    The commissar parked the   
jeep among trees, and he and Victor Henry crawled the rest of the way through the brush.  
 
"The less movement the Fritzes can observe, the better," said the Russian. 
 
Here, down in a deep muddy hole-a machine gun post manned by three soldiers-Victor Henry   
peered through a gun slit piled with sandbags and saw Germans.    They were working in plain   
view across the river with earth-moving machines, pontoons, rubber boats, and trucks.    Some   
dug with shovels; some patrolled with light machine guns in hatnhde. 
 
GUenrlike the Russians, concealed like wild eatures in the earth, mans were making no effort   
to hide themselves or what they were doing. 
 
cr Except for the helmets, guns, and long gray coats, they might have been a big crew o n a   
peacetime construction job.    Through binoculars handed him by a soldier-German binoculars- 
Victor Henry could see the eyeglasses and frost-purpled cheeks and noses of Hitler's chilled   
men. "You could shoot them like birds," he said in Russian. 
 
It was as close as he could come to the American idiom, "they're sitting ducks." 
 
The soldier grunted.    "Yes, and give away our position, and start them shelling us!    No thanks,   
Gospodin American."If    they ever get that bridge finished," said the commissar,    "and start   
coming across, that'll." 
 688 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"That's what we're waiting for," said a pipe-smoking soldier with heavy drooping moustaches,   
who appeared to be in command of this hole in the ground. 
 
Pug said, "Do you really think you can hold out if they get across?" 
 
The three soldiers rolled their eyes at each other, weighing this question asked in bad Russian   
by a foreigner.    Their mouths set sourly. 
 
Here, for the first time, in sight of the Germans, Victor Henry detected fear on Red Army   
faces.    "Well, if it comes to that," said the pipe smoker, every man has his time.    A Russian   
soldier knows how to die." 
 
The political officer said briskly, "A soldier's duty is to live, comrade, not to die-to live and   
fight.    They won't get across.    Our big guns are trained on this crossing, and as soon as they've   
wasted all the time it takes to build a bridge, and they start across, we'll blast these Hitlerite   
rats!    Eh, Polikov?    How about it?" 
 
"That's right," said a bristle-faced soldier with a runny nose, crouched on the earth in a corner   
blowing on his red hands.    "That's exactly right, Comrade Political Officer." 
 
Crawling through bushes or darting from tree to tree, Victor Henry and the commissar made   
their way along the dugoutsp pillboxes, trenches, and one-man posts of the thinly held line.    A   
battalion of nine hundred men was covering five miles of the river here, the commissar said, to   
deny the Cennans access to an important road.    "This campaign is simply a race," he panted, as   
they crawled between dugouts. 
 
"The Germans are trying to beat Father Frost into Moscow.    That's the plain fact of it.    They   
are pouring out their lifeblood to do it. 
 
But never fear, Father Frost is an old friend of Russia.    He'll freeze them dead in the ice.    You'll   
see, they'll never make it." 
 
The commissar was evidently on a morale-stiffening mission. Here and there, where they   
found a jolly leader in a trench, the men seemed ready for the fight, but elsewhere fatalism   
darkened their eyes, slumped their shoulders, and showed in dirty weapons, disarrayed   
uniforms, and garbage-strewn holes.    The commissar harangued them, exploiting the strange   
presence of an American to buck them up, but for the most part the hairy-faced Slavs stared at   
Henry with sarcastic incredulity as though to say-'If you're really an American, why are you so   
stupid as to come here yourself?    We have no choice"worse luck." 
 
The Germans were in view all along the river, methodically and intimidating, calmly preparing   
to cross.    Their businesslike air was more Pug thought, than volleys of bullets.    'neir numbers   
were alarming, too; where did they all come from? 
 
The commissar and Victor Henry emerged from one of the largest dugouts and lay on their   
elbows in the snow.    "Well, I have finished my tour of this part of the line, Captain.    Perhaps   
you will rejoin your party now." 
 689 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"I'm ready." 
 
With a grim little smile, the commissar stumbled to his feet. 
 
"Keep in the shadows of the trees." 
 
When they got back to the jeep, Pug said, "How far are we from Moscow here?" 
 
"Oh, quite far enough."    The commissar whirred the noisy engine. 
 
"I hope you saw what you wanted to see." 
 
"I saw a lot," Victor Henry said. 
 
The commissar turned his Lenin-like face at the American, appraising him with suspicious   
eyes.    "It is not easy to understand the front just by looking at it." 
 
"I understand that you need a second front." 
 
understand the The Commissar uttered a brutal grfurntn.t,"iTfhweenmyuosut, Captain Genry,   
main thing.    But even without the second cockroaches." 
 
we ourselves will smash this plague of German By the time they reached the central square of   
the town, the snowfall had stopped and patches of fast-moving blue showed through the   
clouds.    The wind was bitter cold. The tangle of trucks, wagons, horses, and soldiers was worse   
than before. Vehement Russian cursing and arguing filled the air. The old women and the   
wrinkle-faced boys still watched the disorder with round sad eyes. In a big jam of vehicles   
around two fallen horses and an overturned ammunition wagon, the jeep encountered the black   
automobile. Talky Tudsbury, in great spirits, stood near forty yelling soldiers and officers,   
watching the horses kick and struggle in tangled traces, while other soldiers gathered up long   
coppery shells that had spilled from burst boxes and lay softly gleaming in the snow.    "Hello   
there! 
 
Back already?    What a mess!    It's a wonder the whole wagon didn't go up with a bang, what?   
And leave a hole a hundred feet across." 
 
"Where's Pamela?" 
 
Tudsbury flipped a thumb over his shoulder.    "Back at the church. 
 
An artillery spotter is stationed in the belfry.    There's supposed to be a great view, but I   
couldn't climb the damned tower.    She's up there making some notes.    How are things at the   
front?    You've got to give me the whole picture.    Brrr!    What frost, eh?    Do you suppose Jerry   
is starting to feel it in his balls a bit?    Hullo, they've got the horses up." 
 
Amphiteatrov said he was taking Tudsbury to see a downed junker 88 
 
in the nearby field.    Pug told him that he had seen plenty of junker 88's; he would join Pam in   
the church and wait for them. 
 690 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ampbiteatrov made an annoyed face.    "All right, but please remain there, Captain. 
 
We'll come back in twenty minutes or less." 
 
Pug said good-bye to the bearded commissar, who was sitting at the wheel of the jeep,   
bellowing at a scravmy soldier who clutched a live white goose. The soldier was coarsely   
shouting back, and the goose turned its orange beak and little eyes from one to the other as   
though trying to learn its fate.    Making his way around the traffic tangle, Pug walked to the   
church on crunching squeaking dry snow.    Freedom from the escort-even for a few minutes-felt   
strange    and good. si the    church, a strong unI In de    churchlike    miasma    of medicine    and   
disinfectant filled the air; peeling frescoes of blue big-eyed saints looked down from grimy   
walls, at bandaged soldiers who lay on straw mats smoking, talking to each other, or sadly   
staring. The narrow stone staircase spiralling up the inside of the belfry with no handholds   
made Pug queasy, but up he went, edging along the rough wall, to a wooden platform level   
with big rusty bells, where wind gusted through four open brick arches.    Here he caught his   
breath, and wooden ladder. 
 
mounted a shaky st brick walk, Pam waved and "Victor!"    As he emerged on the topmo called   
to him.    gi e job of tin sheets Seen this close, the bulging onion dome was a c,d yellow brick   
nailed rustily on a curving frame.    Squared around it was a walk and parapet, where Pamela   
crouched in a corner, out of the whistling wind.    The artillery spotter, shapeless and faceless in   
an ankle-length thick earflaps, manned brown coat, mittens, goggles, and fastened-down giant   
binoculars on a tripody pointed west.    A fat black tomcat beside Pamela crouched over a bowl   
of soup, lapping, shaking its big head in distaste, nd the spotter were laughing at the cat.    'Too   
and lapping again.    Pamela a look showed she clearly was much pepper, kitty?" 
 
Pamela's gay flirtatious ched far east and south to enjoying herself. 
 
Below, the bare plain stret distant forests, and west and north to the black wriggling river and   
sparse t of life, made thin noise in an woods. Straight downward the town, a clo empty white   
Hat world. 
 
"Vy Amerikanski offitzer?"    The spotter showed fine teeth in the hairy uncovered patch of his   
face. 
 
"Da." 
 
'Pos-niotritye?"    The mittened hand tapped the binoculars. 
 
"Videte nemtzi?"    Pug said.    ("Can you see Germans?") 
 
"Slishkom m'nogo."    ("Too many.") 'Odin slishkom m'nogo," Pug said. 
 
("One is too many!") With a grim nod and chuckle the spotter stepped away from the bithem to   
the oculars.    Pug's eyes were watering from the wind; he put n eyepieces and the Germans on   
the riverbank leaped into sight, blurry and small, still at the same work. 
 
"Doesn't it give you an eerie feeling?"    Pam said, stroking the cat. 
 691 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"They're so calm about it." 
 
Victor Henry went to a corner of the brick parapet and surveyed the s, hands jammed in his   
blue snowy vista through all points of the compas south to north, made a slow coat. The   
spotter, turning the binoculars from east on a long black sweep along the river, talking into a   
battered telephone wire that dangled over the parapet."    The cat was washing itself, and "Kitty,   
don't forget behind the ears. 
 
Pamela scratched its head. 
 
Pug told her about his trip, meanwhile scanning the horizon round and round as though he were   
on a flying bridge.    An odd movement in the distant snowy forest caught his notice.    With his   
back to the spotter, he peered intently eastward, shielding his eyes with one chapped red hand.  
 
'Pass me those." She handed him small field glasses, in an open case beside the binocular   
stand.    One quick look, and Pug tapped the spotter's shoulder and pointed.    Swinging the large   
binoculars halfway round on the tripod, the spotter started with surprise, pulled off goggles and   
cap, and looked again.    He had a lot of curly blond hair and freckles, and he was only eighteen   
or twenty. Snatching up the telephone, he jiggled the hook, talked, jiggled some more, and   
gestured anger at no answer.    Pulling on his cap, he went trampling down the ladder. 
 
"What is it?"    Pamela said. 
 
'Take a look." 
 
Pamela saw through the big eyepieces of the spotter's instrument a column of machines coming   
out of the woods. 
 
"Tanks?" 
 
'Some are trucks and armored personnel cars.    But yes, it's a tank unit."    Victor Henry, glasses   
to his eyes, talked as though he were watching a parade. 
 
'Aren't they Russians?" 
 
"No." 
 
'But that's the direction we came from."    "Yes." 
 
They looked each other in the eyes. Her red-cheeked face showed fear, but also a trace of   
nervous gaiety.    "Then aren't we in a pickle? 
 
Shouldn't we get down out of here and find Amphiteatrov?" 
 
To the naked eye the armored column was like a tiny black worm on the broad white earth, five   
or six miles away.    Pug stared eastward, thinking.    The possibilities of this sudden Turn were   
too disagreeable to be pu dragging of t into words. He felt a flash of anger at Tudsbury's   
selfish his daughter into hazard.    Of course, nobody had planned on being surPrised in the rear   
by Germans; but there they were! 
 692 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
If the worst came to the worst, he felt he could handle himself with German captors, though   
there might be ugly moments with'soldiers before he could talk to an officer.      But the   
Tudsburys were enemies. 
 
'I'll tell you, Pam," he said, watching the worm pull clear of the forest and move sluggishly   
toward the town, leaving a black trail behind, "the colonel knows where we are now. Let's   
stick here for a while." "All right. How in God's name did the Germans get around back   
there?" 
 
"Amphiteatrov id theresa was trouble to the south.    They must have broken across the river and   
hooked through the woods.    It's not a large unit, it's a probe." 
 
The top of the ladder danced and banged under a heavy tread. 
 
The blond youngster came up, seized a stadimeter, pointed it at the Germans, and slid a vernier   
back and forth.    Hastily flattening out a small black and white grid map on one knee, he barked   
numbers into the telephone: "Five point six!    One two four!    R seven M twelve! 
 
That's right!    That's right!" 
 
Animated and cheery now, he grinned at the visitors. "Our batteries are training on them.   
When they're good and close, we'll blow them to bits. 
 
So maybe you'll see something yet."    He put on his goggles, changing back from a bright-eyed   
boy into a faceless grim spotter. 
 
Victor Henry said, "they're watching across the river for your batteries to fire." 
 
The spotter clumsily waved both heavy-clad arms.    "Good, but we can't let those bastards take   
the town from the rear, can we?" 
 
"I hear airplanes."    Pug turned his glasses westward to the sky. 
 
"Sa?Mlyuttil' "Da!"    Swivelling and tilting the binoculars upward, the spotter began to shout   
into the phone. 
 
"Airplanes too?"    Pamela's voice trembled.    "Well, I'm more used to them." 
 
"that's the German drill," said Victor Henry.    "Tanks and planes together." 
 
The oncoming planes, three Stukas, were growing bigger in Pug's glasses. The spotter switched   
his binoculars to the tanks again, and began cheering. Pug looked in that direction. "Holy   
cow!    Now I call this military observing, Pam."    Tanks in another column were coming out of   
the woods about halfway between the Germans and the town, moving on a course almost at   
right angles to the panzer track.    He handed her the glasses and squinted toward the airplanes. 
 
"Oh!    Oh!"    Pamela exclaimed.    "Ours?" 
 
'Da!" cried the spotter, grinning at her. "Nashil Nashil" A hand struck her shoulder and   
 693 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
knocked her to her hands and knees. 
 
"They're starting their dive," Victor Henry said.    "Crawl up close to the dome and lie still."    He   
was on his knees beside her.    His cap had fallen off and rolled away, and he brushed black hair   
from his eyes to watch the planes. They tilted over and dove. When they were not much   
higher than the belfry, bombs fell out of them.    With a mingled engine roar and wind screech,   
they zoomed by. Pug could see the black crosses, the swastikas, the yellowish plexiglass   
cockpits.    All around the church the bombs began exploding.    The belfry shook.    Flame, dirt,   
and smoke roared up beyond the parapet, but Pug remained clearheaded enough to note that the   
flying was ragged. The three ungainly black machines almost collided as they climbed and   
turned to dive again in a reckless tangle. The Luftwaffe had either lost most of its veteran   
pilots by now, he thought, or they were not flying on this sector of the front. Anti-aircraft guns   
were starting to pop and rattle in the town. 
 
Pamela's hand sought his.    She was crouched behind him, against the dome. 
 
"Just lie low, this will be over soon."    As Pug said this he saw one of the Stukas separating   
from the others and diving straight for the belfry. 
 
He shouted to the spotter, but the airplane noise, the chatter of A.A. guns, the clamor and cries   
from the town below, and the roar of the wind, quite drowned his voice.    Tracers made a red   
dotted line to the belfry across the gray sky. The tin dome began to sing to rhythmically   
striking bullets.    Victor Henry roughly pushed Pamela flat and threw himself on top of her.  
 
The plane stretched into a sizable black machine approaching through the air.    Watching over   
his shoulder to the last, Victor Henry saw the pilot dimly behind his plexiglass, an unhelmeted   
young blond fellow with a toothy grin.    He thought the youngster was going to crash into the   
dome, and as he winced, he felt something rip at his left shoulder. The airplane scream and roar   
and whiz mounted, went past, and diminished. The zinging and rattling of bullets stopped. 
 
Pug stood, feeling his shoulder. His sleeve was torn open at the very top and the shoulder   
board was dangling, but there was no blood. 
 
The spotter was lying on the bricks beside the overturned binoculars. 
 
Bombs were exploding below; the other twO planes were still whistling and roaring over the   
town; one plane was smoking badly. 
 
Blood was pooling under the spotter's head, and with horror Pug perceived white broken bone   
of the skull showing through the torn shot-away cap, under blond hair and thick-moving red   
and gray ooze. 
 
Pug went to the spotter and cautiously moved his goggles.    The blue eyes were open, fixed and   
empty.    The head wound was catastrophic. 
 
Picking up the telephone, Pug jiggled the hook till somebody answered. 
 
He shouted in Russian, "I am the American visitor up here.    You understand?" 
 694 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
He saw the smoking plane, which was trying to climb, burst into flames and fall.    "Da!    Where   
is Konstantin?"    The voice sounded exhilarated. 
 
"Airplane killed him." 
 
"All right.    Somebody else will come." 
 
Pamela had crawled beside the spotter and was looking at the dead face and smashed head.   
"Oh, my God, my God," she sobbed, head in hand. 
 
The two surviving planes were climbing out of sight. Smoke rose from fires in the town,   
smelling of burning hay.    To the east, the two tank unit tracks had almost joined in a black V,   
miles long, across the plain.    PLig n owing in the line of vision, he righted the binoculars. 
 
rough smoke bill saw the tanks milling in a wild little yellow-flashing vortex on the broad   
white plain.    Five of the KV monsters bulged among lighter Russian tanks. 
 
Several German tanks were on fire and their crewmen were running here and there in the snow   
like ants.    Some German tanks and trucks were heading back to the woods.    Pug saw only one   
light Russian tank giving off black smoke.    But even as he watched, a KV burst into violent,   
beautiful purple-orange flame, casting a vivid pool of color on the snow.    Meantime the rest of   
the German tanks began turning away. 
 
"Kitty!    Oh, Christ, Christ, no, stop it!"    Pam snatched up the cat, which was crouching over   
the dead man. 
 
She came to Pug, her tearstained face gaunt and stunned, holding the creature in her arms.    Its   
nose and whiskers were bloody and its tongue flickered. "It's not the animal's fault," she   
choked. 
 
"The Russians are winning out there," Victor Henry said. 
 
She was staring at him with blank shocked round eyes, clutching the black cat close to her.   
Her hand went to the rip at his shoulder. 
 
"Dearest, are you hurt?" 
 
"No.    Not at all.    It went right on through." 
 
"thank God!    Thank God!" 
 
The ladder jumped and rattled, and Colonel Amphiteatrov's face, excited and red, showed at   
the top.    "Well, you're all right.    Well, I'm glad. 
 
That was best to stay right here. The bombing was bad in the town. Many people killed.   
Quick!    Both of you.    Come along, please." 
 
Then his eye fell on the body lying in blood.    "Aghl' "We were strafed," Pug said.    "He's dead." 
 
The colonel shook his head and sank out of sight, saying, "Well, please, come quickly." 
 695 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Go first, Pam." 
 
Pamela looked at the dead spotter lying on the bricks in snow and blood, and then at the tin   
dome, and out at the tank fight, and the black V gouged in the landscape.    "It seems I've been   
up here for a week.    I can't get down the ladder with the cat.    We mustn't leave it here." 
 
"Give the cat to me."    Tucking the animal inside his bridge coat, steadying it with one arm,   
Victor Henry awkwardly followed her down the ladder and the spiral stairs. Once the cat   
squirmed, bit, and scratched, and he almost fell.    He turned the cat loose outside the church, but   
the clanking vehicles or the rolling smoke alarmed the animal and it ran back in and vanished   
among the wounded. 
 
Through the open door of the black automobile Tudsbury waved his cane at them. "Hello!   
There's a monstrous tank battle going on just outside the town! They say there's at least a   
hundred tanks swirling around, an utter inferno, happening right this minute! Hello, you've   
torn your coat, do you know that?" 
 
"Yes, I know."    Though drained of spirit, Victor Henry was able to smile at the gap between   
journalism and war, as he detached his shoulder board and dropped it in his pocket.    The reality   
of the two small groups of tanks banging away out there on the snowy plain seemed so pale   
and smallscale compared to Tudsbury's description. 
 
"We had a view of it," he said.    Pamela got into the car and sank into a corner of the back seat,   
closing her eyes. 
 
" 'Did you?    Well, Pam ought to be a help on this story!    I say, Pam, you're all right, aren't   
you?" 
 
"I'm splendid, Talky, thank you," Pam said, faintly but clearly. 
 
Pug said to the colonel, 'We saw the Germans starting to run." 
 
"mid.    Well, Kaplan's battalion got the word from down south. 
 
That is a good battalion."    Amphiteatrov slammed the car door.    "Make yourselves comfortable   
please.    We are going to drive straight back to Moscow now." 
 
"Oh no!"    Tudsbury's fat face wrinkled up like an infant's.    "I want to have a look when the   
fight's over.    I want to interview the tank crews." 
 
Amphiteatrov turned and faced them, and showed his gums and teeth without smiling.    Behind   
him through the frosted windshield they could vaguely, see on the main street of the town   
smoke, fire, a plunging horse, soldiers running, and green army trucks in a slow-moving jam. 
 
"Well, there has been a very big breakthrough in the north. 
 
Moscow is in danger.    Well, foreign missions all will be evacuated to the Caucasus. 
 
We must skedaddle."    He brought out the awkward slang word humorlessly , and turned to the   
 696 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
driver.    "Nu, skoror Under the blanket stretched across the passengers' legs, Pamela Tudsbury's   
gloved hand groped to Victor Henry's hand.    She pulled off her glove, twined her cold fingers   
in his, and pressed her face against the torn shoulder of his bridge coat. His chapped hand   
tightened on hers. 
 
ESLI]G SLOTH heard footfalls in the dark, as he sat in an overcoat and fur hat, working by the   
light of a kerosene lamp, His desk overflowing with papers and reports stood directly under the   
grand unlit chandelier in the marble-pillared great hall of    Spaso    House,    the ambassador's   
Moscow residence. 
 
"Who's there?"    The nervous strident words reverberated in the empty halls.    He recognized the   
white Navy cap, white scarf, and brass buttons, before he could make out the face.    "Ye gods,   
Captain Henry, why didn't they take you straight to the Kazan Station?    Maybe you can still   
make it. 
 
You've got to get out of Moscow tonight" 
 
"I've been to the station. The train to Kuibyshev had    left."      Pug brushed snow from his   
shoulders. "The air raid held us up outside the dty." 
 
Slote looked at his wristwatch in great agitation.    "But-that's terriblet God knows when there'll   
be another train to Kuibyshev-if ever. Don't you know that one German armored column's   
already passed by to the north and is cutting down behind the city? And they say another   
pincer is heading up from Kaluga.    One doesn't know what to believe any more, but it's at least   
conceivable that in the next twenty-four hours we may be entirely surrounded. It begins to   
smell like Warsaw all over again." Slote gaily laughed.    'Sorry there are no chairs, a party of   
mad Georgian workmen came in and covered and stacked all the furniture-oh, there's a stool a   
after all, do sit down-" Pug said, "That's more than I know, about the German pincers, and I've   
just come from the Narkomindel."    He sat down without opening his coat.    It was almost as   
cold and dark in Spaso House as in the snowstorm outside. 
 
"Did you suppose they'd tell you anything?    I got this straight from the Swedish ambassador, I   
assure you, at nine o'clock tonight in the dining room at the Kazan Station, when I was seeing   
off the staff. 
 
My God, that station was a spectacle to remember!    One bomb hit would have wiped out all the   
foreign correspondents and nine-tenths of the diplomats ill Russia-and a healthy chunk of the   
Soviet bureaucracy too." 
 
"Have all the typewriters been stowed?    I have to write a report." 
 
"There are typewriters in Colonel Yeaton's office.    I have a skeleton staff, and we're to keep   
things going somehow until the charge gets organized in Kuibyshev."    Slote gave this answer   
with absentminded calm, then jumped at a muffled sound from outside.    "Was that a bomb? 
 
You have no time to write reports, Captain.    It's really my responsibility to see that you leave   
Moscow at once, and I must insist that somehow-" Pug held up a hand.    "The Nark's making   
 697 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
arrangements. 
 
There are other stragglers like me.    I have to check back in at eleven in the morning." 
 
"Oh!    Well, if the Narkomindel's assumed responsibility, that's that," Slote giggled. 
 
Victor Henry looked narrowly at him. "How come you got stuck with this duty again? It   
seems kind of thick, after Warsaw."I volunteered. 
 
You look skeptical.    I truly did.    After all, I've been through the - I wasn't to drill 0 proud of the   
job I did in Warsaw and I thought perhaps I could redeem mys& this time." 
 
"Why, Byron told me you did a helluva job in Warsaw, Leslie." 
 
"Did he? Byron's a gentleman. A knight, almost. Which reminds me, an enormous pouch   
came in from Stockholm the day you left.    There was stuff from Rome.    Would you like to see   
a picture of your new grandson?" Fussing through papers on his desk he pulled a photograph   
from a wrinkled envelope.    "There he is.    Don't you think he's handsome?" 
 
The lamplight carved deep black marks in the naval officer's face as he read the sign on the   
back of the vmtn ha he snapshot, For old Slote Henry, aged ri s, t r la -Louis day U" h ci cus t   
lady, then contemplated the photograph.    A Plump, hollow-eyed Natalie in a loose robe held a   
baby that looked star ingly like B t] Byron as an infant. 
 
The triangular face, the large serous eyes, the comics Ily determined look, the fine blond hair- 
they were the sam was was another n e Pried -t of the template that had molded his Son.    He   
was much more of a Henry than Janice's boy.    Victor Henry cleared his choked-up throat. -Not   
bad. Natalie's right, she's gotten fat." 
 
'Hasn't e though? TOO much bed rest, she says. I'll bet the baby win be as clever as it's   
handsome- It looks clever."    Victor Henry sat staring at the snapshot.    Slote added, 'Would you   
care to keep that?" 
 
Henry at once extended it to him.    "No, certainly not.    She sent it to you. 
 
"I'll only lose it, Captain Heny.    I have a better picture of Natalie." 
 
"Are you sure?    All right.- Victor.    Henry tried to express in an awkward smile the gratitude for   
which he could find no words. 
 
Carefully he put the print in an inner pocket. 
 
"What about the Tudsburys?"    Slote asked.    "Are they stuck in Moscow too?" 
 
"I left Talky trying to wangle a ride to Archangel for himself and Pam. The Russians are flying   
out some R.A.F pilot instructors.    I'm sure he'll get on that plane." 
 
'Good.    Did you run into any trouble at the front?    What an idiocy, dragging a girl out there!" 
 
"Well, we heard some firing, and saw some Germans.    I'd better get at this report.    If Talky   
 698 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
does fly out, I want to give him a copy to forward via London." "Let me have a copy too,   
won't you?    And another to go in the next pouch.    If there is one." 
 
"You're a pesimist, Slote."    'I'm a realist.    I was in Warsaw.    I know what the German's can do."   
"Do you know what the Russians can do?" 
 
'I thought I did.    I was the Red Army's biggest booster in the embassy, until-' Slote shrugged   
and turned to his desk, blowing his nose.    "the only thing that really gets me is this stink of   
burning paper. My God, how it brings back Warsaw! The embassy absolutely reeks. We   
were burning and burning today, until the minute they all left.    And there's still a ton that I've   
somehow got to get burned in the morning." "All Moscow stinks of it," Pug said.    "It's the   
damnedest thing to drive through a snowstorm and smell burned paper. 
 
The city's one unholy mess, Slote.    Have you seen all the barbed wire and tangled steel girders   
blocking the bridges? And good Lord, the mob at that railway station! The traffic jams   
heading east with headlights blazing, blackout be damned!    I didn't know there were that many   
trucks and cars in the whole Soviet Union. 
 
All piled with mattresses and old people and babies and what-all. 
 
And with those blue A.A. searchlights stir swinging overhead-God knows why -and the snow   
and the wind, I    you it's a real end-of-the-world feeling."    Slote chuckled.    "Yes, isn't it?    This   
exodus began the day you leftIes been snowballing.    A convoy of government big shots left   
yesterday in a line of honking black limousines.    Gad, you should have seen the faces of the   
people along the streets!    I'm sure that triggered this panic.    However, I give Stalin credit.    He's   
staying on to the last, and that takes courage, because when Hitler catches Stalin he'll just hang   
him like a dog in Red Square.    And he'll drag Lenin's mummy out of the tomb too, and string it   
up alongside to crumble in the wind. 
 
Oh, there'll be stirring tngs to see and record here, for whoever survives to tell it all."    Victor   
Henry rose.    "Do you know there's no sentry at the door?    I just walked in." 
 
"That's impossible.    We're guarded night and day by a soldier assigned by the Narkomindel." 
 
"There's nobody there." 
 
Slote opened and Closed his mouth twice.    "Are you positive?    Why, we could be sacked by   
looters!    It's getting near the end when soldiers leave their posts.    I must call the Narkomindel.   
If I can get the operator to answer!"    He jumped up and disappeared into the gloom. 
 
Victor Henry groped to the military attache's office.    There he struck matches, and found and   
lit two kerosene lamps.    In their bleak yellowgreen glow be surveyed the office.    Bits of black   
ash flecked the floor and every surface. 'BURN-URGENT was scrawled in red crayon on   
manila folders topping heaps of reports, files, and loose papers piled on the floor and in the   
leather armchair. Emptied drawers and files stood open; a swivel chair was overturned; the   
place looked as though it had been robbed.    On the desk, on a tYPewriter with bunched tangled   
keys, a message was propped, printed in block letters on torn cardboard: IMPOUTIVE-BUYW   
 699 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
TONIGHT conmws SECOND BROWN LOCKM FILE.    (L. 
 
sLo-rE HAS C MiBiNA'noN.) Pug cleared the desk, untangled the typewriter keys and stood   
the lamps on either side of the machine.    He found paper, carbons, and onionskin paper in a   
drawer. 
 
Spaso House October 16, 1941 
 
THE MOSCOW FRONT-EYEWITNESS REPORT His cold stiff fingers struck wrong keys.   
Typing in a bridge coat was clumsy and difficult. The slow clicks of the machine echoed   
hollowly in the deserted embassy. 
 
One lamp began to smoke.    He fiddled with the wick tmtil it burned clear. 
 
This report attempts a description of a visit to the fighting front west Of MOscow, from which   
I have just returned. 
 
Tonight, twenty miles outside the city, our car halted because of an air raid on Moscow.    At a   
distance this was quite a spectacle: the fanning searchlights, the A.A. like an umbrella of   
colored fireworks over one patch of the horizon, blazing aw,y for half an hour straight. 
 
Whatever the Russian deficiencies, they seem to have an infinite supply of A.A. ammunition,   
and when the Luftwaffe ventures over the capital, they blow it skyward in huge displays.    This   
bats anything I saw in Berlin or London. 
 
However, this brave show is not being matched on the ground in Moscow tonight.    The town is   
getting ready for a Siege.    It has an abnormal look, and the fainthearted are fleeing in a heavy   
snow.    The Communist government is either unable or unwilling to stop the panic. 
 
I am told there is already a slang name for this mass exodus-Bolshoi Drap, the Big Scram. 
 
The foreign diplomats and newspapermen have been sent to Kuibyshev on the Volga, five   
hundred miles further east, and many government agencies are departing for the same haven en   
masse.    Heavy vehicular and foot traffic eastward gives an undeniable aspect of rats leaving a   
sinking ship.    However, it is reported that Stalin is staying on. 
 
I believe this panic is premature, that Moscow has a fair chance of holding, and that even if it   
falls, the war may not end.    I bring back many impressions from the front, but the outstanding   
one is that the Russians, though they are back on about their nine-yard line, are not beaten.   
The American leadership must guess whether Russia will stand or fall, and lay its bets   
accordingly in Lend-Lease shipments. 
 
An eyewitness account of the front, however fragmentary, may therefore be pertinent.  
 
The typewriter was clicking fast now.    It was almost one o'clock. 
 
Victor Henry still had to return to the hotel and pack.    He chewed another it polar bear," the   
Russian chocolate candy, for energy, and began banging out the tale of his journey.    Electricity   
all at once lit up the room, but he left the kerosene lamps burning and typed on. 
 700 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
In about half an hour the lights flickered, burned orange, dimmed, and pulsed, and went out.   
Still he typed ahead. He was describing the interior of the KV tank when Slote came in,   
saying, "You're really going at it."    "You're working late yourself." 
 
"I'm getting to the bottom of the pile." Slote dropped on the desk a brown envelope sealed   
with wax.    "By the way, that came in the pouch, too.    Care for some coffee?" 
 
"You bet.    Thanks." 
 
Pug stretched and walked up and down the room, beating his arms and stamping his feet,   
before he broke the seal of the envelope.    There were two letters inside, one from the White   
House and one from the Bureau of Personnel. He hesitated, then opened the White House   
letter; a few sentences in Harry Hopkins's dashed-off slanting hand filled a pageMy dear Pug1   
want to congratulate you on your new assignment, and to convey the Boss's good wishes.    He   
is very preoccupied with the Japanese, who are beginning to get ugly, and of course we are all   
watching the Russian struggle with anxiety.    I still think-and pray-they'll hold.    I hope my letter   
reached Stalin.    He's a land crab, and he's got to be convinced that the Channel crossing is a   
major task, otherwise bad faith accusations will start to fly, to Hitler's delight. 
 
There's been an unfortunate upturn in submarine sinkings in the Atlantic, and the Germans are   
cutting loose in Africa, too. 
 
All in all the good cause seems to be heading into the storm. 
 
You'll be missed in the gray fraternity of office boys. 
 
Harry H. 
 
The other envelope contained a Navy letter form in tele aphic style: gr 
 
MMLGRAM 
 
IPROM: nM CHIEF OF PFRSONNIEL. 
 
TO: VICTOR (NONE) HENRY, CAPTAIN, U.S.N. 
 
DETACHED ONE NOVEMBER PRESENT DUTY X PROCEED FASTEST AVAILABLE   
TRANSPORTATION PL OR X REPORT CALIFORNIA (BE 64) RELIEVE CO X SUBMIT   
VOUCHERS OF TRAVEL EXPENSES COM]BAT FOR PL In bald trite Navy jargon on a   
flimsy yellow sheet, here was command of a battleship.      And what a battleship!      The   
California, the old Prune Barge, a ship in which he had served twice, as an ensign and as a   
lieutenant commander, which he knew well and loved; the ship named for his own home state,   
launched in 1919 and completely modernized. 
 
Captain of the California! 
 
Pug Henry'S first reaction was orderly and calculating.    Evidently Admiral King's staff was a   
trap he had escaped. In his class only Warendorf, Munson, and Brown had battleships, and   
Robinson had the Saratoga.    His strange "gray oit:ice boy" service to the President had proved   
 701 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
a career shortcut after all, and flag rank was suddenly and brightly back in sight. 
 
He thought of Rhoda, because she had sweated out with him the twenty-seven-year wait for   
this bit of yellow tissue paper; and of Pamela, because he wanted to share his excitement right   
now.    But he was not even ure that he would see her again in Moscow.    They had parted at the   
railroad station with a strong handclasp, as Talky Tudsbury pleaded with the R.A.F pilots to   
take him along and simultaneously blustered at a Narkomindel man who was trying to lead him   
off. 
 
Leslie Slote walked in, carrying two glass tumblers of black coffee. 
 
"Anything good?" 
 
"New orders.    Command Of the California.m "Oh?    What is that?" 
 
"A battleship." 
 
"A battleship?"    Slote sipped coffee, looking doubtu.    'Is that what you wanted next?" 
 
"Well, it's a change." 
 
"I should think you'd find it somewhat confining and-well, routine, after the sort of thing   
you've been doing.    Not many naval officers-in fact not many Americans-have talked to Stalin   
face to face." 
 
"Leslie, I'm not entirely unhappy with these orders." 
 
'Oh' Well, then, I gather congratulations are in order.    How are you coming with that report?   
I'm almost ready to Turn in." 
 
"Couple of hours to go."    "You won't get much sleep."    Slote went out shaking his head. 
 
Victor Henry sat drinking coffee, meditating on this little rectangle of yellow paper, the sudden   
irreversible verdict on his life. 
 
He could ask for no better judgment.    This was the blue ribbon, the A-plus, the gold medal of   
naval service.    Yet a nag in his spirit shadowed the Marvelous news.    What was it?    Between   
sips of coffee, probing his own heart, Pug found out something surprising about himself. 
 
After more than twenty-five years, he had slightly outgrown his career drive.      He was   
interested in the war.    At War Plans, he had been waging a vigilant fight to keep priorities high   
for the landing craft program. 
 
"Pug's girlfriend Elsie" was no joke; but now he could no longer carry on that fight. Mike   
Drayton would take over.      Mike was an excellent officer, a commander with a solid   
background in BuShips and an extraordinary knowledge of the country's industries. But he   
was not pugnacious and he lacked rank.    "Elsie" was going to lose ground. 
 
That could not last.      One day the crunch would come-Henry was sure of this from his   
 702 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
operational studies-and landing craft would shoot to the top of the priority fist, and a frantic   
scramble would ensue to get them made.    The war effort might suffer; conceivably a marginal   
landing operation would fail, with bad loss of life.    But it was absurd, Pug thought, to feel the   
weight of the war on his shoulders, and to become as obsessed by 'Elsie" as he had once been   
by    his own    career.      That was swinging to the other extreme.      The war    was bigger than   
anybody; he was a small replaceable cog. One way or another, sooner or later, the United   
States would produce enough landing craft to beat Hitler. 
 
Meantime he had to go to his battleship. 
 
Taking a lamp to a globe standing in the corner, he used thumb and forefinger to step off the   
distance from Moscow to Pearl Harbor.    He found it made surprisingly little difference whether   
he    travelled    west    or east; the    two places    were    at    opposite    ends of the    earth.    But   
which   
direction would offer less delay and hazard? Westward lay all the good fast transportation,   
across the Atlantic and the United States, and then the Pan Am hop from San Francisco to   
Honolulu.    Duck soup! 
 
Unfortunately, in that direction the fiery barrier of the war now made Europe impassable from   
Spitzbergen to Sicily, and from Moscow to the English Channel.    Tenuous lanes through the   
fire remained: the North Sea convoy run, and a chancy air connection between Stockholm and   
London. In theory, if he could get to Stockholm, he could even pass via Berlin and Madrid to   
Lisbon; but Captain Victor Henry had no intention of setting foot in Germany or German- 
dominated soil on his way to take command of the California. 
 
His    coarsely insulting    last remark    to Wolf    Steller    about    Goering    undoubtedly was    on the   
record. The Germans, now so close to world victory, might enjoy laying hands on Victor   
Henry. 
 
Well then, eastward?    Slow uncertain Russian trains, jammed already with fugitives from the   
German attack; occasional, even more uncertain Russian planes.    But the way was peaceful and   
a bit shorter, especially from Kuibyshev, five hundred miles nearer Pearl Harbor. 
 
Yes, he thought, he had better start arranging now with the distraught Russians to make his   
way around the world eastward. 
 
"You look like a mad conqueror," he heard Slote say. 
 
"Huh?"    "Gloating over the globe by lamplight.    You just need the little black mustache."    The   
Foreign Service officer leaned in the doorway, running a finger along his smoking pipe.    'We   
have a visitor out here." 
 
By the desk under the chandelier, a Russian soldier stood slapping snow from his'long khaki   
coat. He took off his peaked army cap to shake it by an earflap, and Pug was startled to   
recognize jochanan Jastrow.    The man's hair was clipped short now; he had a scraggly growth   
of brown beard flecked with gray,    and he looked very coarse and dirty.    He explained in   
German, answering Slote's questions, that in order to get warm clothes and some legal papers,   
he had passed himself off as a soldier from a routed unit. The Moscow authorities    were   
 
 
 
 
 
 
collecting such refugees and stragglers and forming them into emergency work battalions, with   
few questions asked.    He had had a set of false papers; a police inspector in an air raid shelter   
had queried him and picked them up, but he had managed to escape from the man. More   
forged papers could be bought-there was a regular market for them-but he preferred army   
identification right now. 
 
"In this country, sir," he said, "a person who doesn't have papers is worse off than a dog or a   
pig.    A dog or a pig can eat and sleep without papers.    A man can't.    After a while maybe there   
will be a change for the better in the war, and I can find my family." 
 
'Where are they?"    Slote said. 
 
"With the partisans, near Smolensk.    My son's wife got sick and I left them there." 
 
Pug said, "You're not planning to go back through the German lines?" 
 
Natalie's relative gave him a strange crooked smile. One side of the bearded mouth curled   
upward, uncovering white teeth, while the other side remained fixed and grim.    "Russia is a   
very big country, Captain Henry, full of woods.    For their own safety the Germans stick close   
to the main roads.    I have already passed through the lines. 
 
Thousands of people have done it."    He turned to Leslie Slote. 
 
"So.    But I heard all the foreigners are leaving Moscow.    I wanted to find out what happened to   
the documents I gave you." The Foreign Service officer and Victor Henry looked at each   
other, with much the same expressions of hesitation and embarrassment.    "Well, I showed the   
documents to an important American newspaperman," Slote said.    "He sent a long story to the   
United States, but I'm afraid it ended I up as a little item in the back pages.    You see, there have   
been so many I stories of German atrocities!" I 'Stories like this?" exclaimed Jastrow, his   
bristly face showing anger and disappointment.    "Children, mothers, old people? 
 
In their homes, not doing anything, taken out in the middle of the night to a hole dug in the   
woods and shot to death?"    'Most horrible. 
 
Perhaps the army commander in the Minsk area was an insanely fanatical Nazi." 
 
"But the shooters were not soldiers.    I told you that.    They had different uniforms.    And here in   
Moscow, people from the Ukraine and from up north are telling the same stories.    This thing is   
happening all over, sir, not just in Minsk.    Please forgive me, but why did you not give those   
documents to your ambassador?    I am sure he would have sent them to President Roosevelt." 
 
'I did bring your papers to his attention.    I'm sorry to say that our intelligence people questioned   
their authenticity." 
 
"What?    But sir, that is incredible!    I can bring you ten people tomorrow who will tell such   
stories, and give affidavits.    Some of them are eyewitnesses who escaped from the very trucks   
the Germans used, and-' In a tone of driven exasperation, Slote broke in, "Look here, my dear   
chap, I'm one man almost alone now"-he gestured at his piled-up deskIt responsible for all my   
 704 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
country's affairs in Moscow. I really think I have done my best for you. In showing your   
documents to a newspaperman after our intelligence people had questioned them, I violated   
instructions. 
 
I received a serious reprimand.    In fact, I took this dirty job of staying on in Moscow mainly to   
put myself right.    Your story is ghastly, and I myself am unhappily inclined to believe it, but   
it's only a small part of this hideous war.    Moscow may fall in the next seventy-two hours, and   
that's my main business now.    I'm sorry." 
 
Jastrow took the outburst without blinking and answered in a quiet, dogged tone, "I am very   
sorry about the reprimand. However, if President Roosevelt could only find out about this   
crazy slaughter of innocent people, he would put a stop to it.    He is the only man in the whole   
world who can do it." Jastrow turned to Victor Henry. 'Do you know of any other way,   
Captain, that the story could possibly be told to President Roosevelt?" 
 
Pug was already picturing himself writing a letter to the President. 
 
He had seen several stories like Jastrow's in print, and even more gruesome official reports   
about German slaughter of Russian partisans and villagers. 
 
Such a letter would be futile; worse than futile-unprofessional. 
 
It would be nagging the President about things he suspected or knew. 
 
He, Victor Henry, was a naval officer, on temporary detached duty in the Soviet Union for   
Lend-Lease matters.    Such a letter would be the sort of impertinence Byron had offered at the   
President's table; but Byron at least had been a youngster concerned about his own wife. 
 
Victor Henry answered Jastrow by turning his hands upward. 
 
With a melancholy nod, Jastrow said, "Naturally, it is outside your province.    Have you had   
news of Natalie?    Have she and Aaron gone home yet?" 
 
Pug pulled the snapshot from his breast pocket.    "This picture was taken several weeks ago.   
Maybe by now they're out.    I expect so." 
 
Holding the picture to the light, Jastrow's face broke into an incongruously warm and gentle   
beam.    "Why, it is a small Byron.    God bless him and keep him safe from harm."    Peering at   
Victor Henry, whose eyes misted at these few sentimental words in German, he handed back   
the photograph.    "Well, you gentlemen have been gracious to me.    I have done the best I could   
to tell you what happened in Minsk.    Maybe my documents will reach the right person one day.   
They are true, and I pray to God somebody soon finds a way to tell President Roosevelt what is   
happening. He must rescue the Jews out of the Germans' claws.    Only he can do it." With this   
jochanan Jastrow gave them his mirthless crooked smile and faded into the darkness outside   
the small glow of the kerosene lamp. 
 
When his alarm clock woke him after an hour or two of exhausted slumber, Pug scarcely   
remembered writing the letter which lay on the desk beside the clock, scrawled on two sheets   
 705 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
of Hotel National paper. 
 
The tiny barren room was freezing cold, though the windows were sealed shut.    He threw on a   
heavy wooren bathrobe he had bought in London, and an extra pair of warm socks, and sat at   
the desk to reread the letter. 
 
My dear Mr.    President: Command of the California fulfills my life's ambitions.    I can only try   
to serve in a way that will justify this trust. 
 
Mr.    Hopkins is receiving a report on a visit I made at his request to the front outside Moscow.   
I put in all the trivial details which might not be worthy of your attention.    My basic impression   
was confirmed that the Russians will probably hold the Germans and in time drive them out.   
But the cost will be terrible.    Meantime they need and deserve all the aid we can send them, as   
quickly as possible.    For our own selfish purposes, we can't make better use of arms, because   
they are killing large numbers of Germans.    I saw many of the dead ones. 
 
I also take the liberty to mention that the embassy here has recently received documentary   
evidence of an almost incredible mass slaying of Jews outside the city of Minsk by some   
German paramilitary units.    I remember your saying on the Augusta that scolding Hitler any   
further would be humiliating and futile.    But in Europe, America is regarded as the last bastion   
of humanity; and you, Mr.    President, are to these people the voice of the righteous God on   
earth.    It's a heavy burden, but nevertheless that is the fact. 
 
I'venture to suggest that you ask to see this material about Minsk yourself.    The Germans will   
think twice about proceeding with such outrages if you denounce them to the world and back   
up your condemnation with documentary evidence.    Also, world opinion might be turned once   
and for all against the Hitler government. 
 
Respectfully yours, Victor Henry, Captain, U.S.N. 
 
In this fresh look after a sleep, the letter struck him most forcibly as an ill-considered   
communication, for which the right place was the wastebasket.    The first two paragraphs were   
innocuous; but the President's sharp eye would at once detect that they were padding.    The rest,   
the meat of the letter, was superfluous and even offensive.    He was advising the President to go   
over the heads of everybody in the State Department, including his own ambassador in the   
Soviet Union, to demand a look at some documents. The odds against Roosevelt's actually   
doing this were prohibitive; and his opinion of Victor Henry would certainly drop.    He would   
at once recall that Henry had a Jewish daughter-in-law, about whom there had been trouble.   
And Pug did not even know that the documents were authentic.    Jastrow might have been sent   
by the NKVD, as Tudsbury thought, to plant the material for American consumption.    The man   
seemed genuine, but that proved nothing. 
 
In his career Henry had drafted dozens of wrongly conceived letters to get a problem out of his   
system, and then had discarded the letters. He had a hard editorial eye, and an unerring sense of   
professional selfpreservation.    He threw the letter face down on the desk as a heavy rapping   
came at the door.      There stood Alistair Tudsbury, leaning on his cane in the doorway,   
 706 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
enormous and red-faced in an astrakhan hat and a long brown fur coat. "Thank God you're   
here, old friend."    The correspondent limped to an armchair and sat in a dusty shaft of sunlight,   
stretching out his bad leg.    "Sorry to crash in on you like this, but-I say, you're all right, aren't   
you?"    -Oh yes. 
 
I'm just great."    Pug was rubbing his face hard with both hands. 
 
"I was up all night writing a report.    What's doing?" 
 
The correspondent's bulging eyes probed at him.    "This is going to be difficult, but here it is   
straight.    Are you and Pamela lovers?" 
 
"What!"    Pug was too startled, and too tired, to be either angry or amused.    'y, no!    Of course   
not." 
 
"Well, funnily enough, I didn't think you were. That makes it all e the more awkward and   
baffling, Pamela has just told me flatly that she's not returning to London unless you're going   
there!    If you're off to Kuibyshev, she means to tag along and work for the British embassy or   
something.    Now this is wild nonsense!"    Tudsbury burst out, banging the cane on the floor.   
"To begin with, I know the Nark won't have it. 
 
But she's turned to stone.    There's no reasoning with her.    And those R.A.F fellows are flying   
off at nbon, and they've got space for both of us." 
 
"Where is she now?" 
 
'y, she's gone out for a stroll in Red Square, of all things! 
 
Can you imagine?    Won't even pack, you see.    Victor, I'm not coming the indignant father on   
you, you do realize that, don't you?" 
 
Talky Tudsbury appeared in a manic state of verbosity even for him. 
 
"That would be a most absurd stance for me to take.    Hell, I've done exactly as I pleased in   
these little matters myself all my life. 
 
She'd laugh in my face if I tried to talk morality to her.    But what about common sense?    You   
don't want her trailing after you, a happily married man, do you?    it's so embarrassing! 
 
In any case, what about Ted Gallard?    Why, she told me to tell him it was all off!    When I said   
I'd do nothing of the sort, she sat down and scribbled a letter for him and threw it in my bag.    I   
tell you I'm having the devil of a time with Pam." 
 
Putting a hand to his brow, Victor Henry said in weary tones, yet with a glad surge at heart,   
"Well, take my word for it, I'm utterly amazed." 
 
"I was sure you would be.    I've told her till I'm blue in the face that it's no go, that you're a   
straitlaced old-fashioned man, the soul of honor, devoted to your wife, and all that sort of   
thing.    Well, the minx simply agrees and says that's why -,he likes you.    Quite unreachable!   
 707 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Victor, surely it's    dangerous    and silly for a British    girl to go rattling    aimlessly around in   
Moscow, with the Huns closing in on all sides."    "Yes, it is.    Why don't you go to Kuibyshev   
with her, Talky? Every foreign correspondent in Russia was on that train, except you." 
 
"They're all idiots.    Getting news right here in Moscow was hard enough. What the devil will   
they find to write about in that mudhole on the Volga? They'll just drink themselves into   
cirrhosis of the liver and play poker until their eyes give out.    Mine are bad enough. 
 
I'm skedaddling.    If the Russkis hold Moscow, I'll come back.    I hope and believe they will, but   
if they don't, it's all over. 
 
England's at the end of her rope, you know that.    We'll all throw in our hands. 
 
It'll be the great world shift, and your FDR with his brilliant sense of timing can then face a   
whole globe armed against him." 
 
Victor Henry stumbled to the yellowed mirror and rubbed his bristly chin.    "I'd better talk to   
Pamela."    'Please, dear fellow, please.    And hurry!" 
 
Pug came outside to fresh snow, bright sunshine, and a ragged burst of Russian song by male   
voices.    A formation of old men and boys, shouldering picks and shovels and lustily shouting a   
marching tune, was following an army sergeant down Maneznaya Square. The rest of the   
Muscovites appeared to be trudging normally about their business, bundled up and shawled as   
usual, but the sidewalk crowds were much thinner.    Perhaps, thought Pug, all the rats had now   
left and these were the real people of Moscow. 
 
He walked up to Red Square, past an enormous poster of the embattled motherland, embodied   
as a shouting robust woman brandishing a sword and a red flag, and smaller posters of rats,   
spiders, and snakes with Hitler faces being bayonetted by angry handsome Russian soldiers or   
squashed under Red Army tanks.    The square was deserted; white thick snow almost unmarked   
by footprints carpeted the great expanse.    In front of the Lenin tomb outside the Kremlin wall,   
its    red marble    hidden    by layers    of snow-=sted sandbags, two soldiers    stood as    usual    like   
clothed statues, but there was no line of visitors.    Far on the other side, Victor Henry saw a   
bulky figure in gray walking alone past Saint Basil's Cathedral. Even at this distance he   
recognized the swingy gait of the Bremen deck and the way she moved her arms.    He headed   
toward her, his overshoes sinking deep in snow speckled black with paper ash. 
 
She saw him and waved.    Hurrying to meet him across the snow, she threw herself in his arms   
and kissed him as she had on his return from the flight to Berlin.    Her breath was fragrant and   
warm.    "Damn!    The governor went and told you." 
 
'That's right."    "Are you exhausted?    I know you were up all night. 
 
There are benches by the cathedral.    What are your plans?    Are you all set for Kuibyshev?    Or   
will you go to London?"    They were walking arm in arm, fingers clasped.    "Neither.    Sudden   
change.    I've gotten orders, Pam.    They were waiting for me here.    I'm going to command a   
battleship, the California." She stopped and pulled on his elbow to swing him toward her,   
 708 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
clasped both his arms, and looked in his face with wide glistening eyes.      "Command a   
battleship!' "Not bad, eh!"    he said like a schoolboy. 
 
"My God, smashing!    You're bound to be an admiral after that, aren't you?    Oh, how happy   
your wife will be!"    Pamela said this with unselfconscious pleasure and resumed walking.    "I   
wish we had a bottle of that sticky georgian champagne, right here and now. Well! That's   
absolutely wonderful.    Where's the California based?    Do you know?" 
 
'Pearl Harbor."    She glanced inquiringly at him.    'Oahu.    The Hawaiian Islands."Oh.    Hawaii.   
All right.    We'll start plotting to get me to Hawaii.    No doubt there's a ]British consulate there,   
or some kind of military liaison. 
 
There has to be." 
 
'Aren't you on leave from the Air Force?    Won't you have to go back on duty if Talky returns to   
London?"    "My love, let me take care of all that.    I'm very, very good at getting what I want" 'I   
believe that." 
 
She laughed.    They brushed snow from a bench outside the rail of the bizarre cathedral.    Its   
colored domes shaped like onions and pineapples were half-hidden, like the red stars on the   
Kremlin towers, under drapings of thick gray canvas.    'When do you leave for Hawaii, and how   
do you get there?"    'I'll leave as soon as I can, and go via Siberia, japan, and the Philippines."   
He clasped her hands as they sat down. "Now, Pam, listen-" 
 
"Are you going to lecture me?    Don't bother, please, Victor.    It won't work." 
 
"You mentioned my wife.    She'll probably come to Pearl." 
 
"I should think she would." 
 
"Then what have you in mind, exactly?" 
 
"My, love, since you ask me, I have in mind that you and I deceive her, decently, carefully, and   
kindly, until you're tired of me. 
 
Then I will go home."    This blunt declaration shook Victor Henry. 
 
It was so novel, so outside the set rules of his existence, that he only replied with clumsy   
stiffness, "I don't understand that kind of arrangement."    "I know, darling, I know it must seem   
shocking and immoral to you. 
 
You're a dear nice man.    Nevertheless I don't know what else to propose. 
 
I love you. That is unchangeable. I'm happy with you, and not happy otherwise. I don't   
propose to be separated from you any more for long stretches of time.    Not until you yourself   
dismiss me.    So you'll have to put up with this bargain.    it's not a bad one, really." 
 
"No, it isn't a bad bargain, but you won't keep it." 
 709 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pamela's face showed shocked surprise; then into her eyes came an amused glow, and her lips   
curved in a mature clever smile.    "You're not so dumb."    "I'm not in the least dumb, Pamela.   
The Navy doesn't give battleships to dumbbells." 
 
A line of olive-painted trucks marked with large red stars came roaring up into the square,   
rolling past the red brick museum and the shuttered GUM building, and pulled up side by side   
facing the Lenin tomb. 
 
'We're in a time bind here," Pug went on, raising his voice.    'For the moment I'll put Rhoda   
aside, and just talk about you-' She interrupted him.    "Victor, love, I know you're faithful to   
your wife. 
 
I've always feared you'd think me a pushing slut.    But what else can I do?    The time has come,   
that's all.    Ever since I was forced to tell Talky this morning, I've been flooded with joy." 
 
Henry sat leaning forward, his elbows on his knees, his hands Clasped, his eyes half closed in   
the sun glare off the snow, looking at her. 
 
Soldiers began piling out of the trucks.    Obviously new recruits, they were lining up in ragged   
ranks in the snow under the barking of sergeants in ankle-length coats, while rifles were passed   
and handed out.    After a long pause Henry said, in a matter-of-fact way, "I know this kind of   
chance won't roll around again in my life." 
 
'It won't, Victor.    It won't!"    Her face shone with excitement. 
 
"People to whom it happens even once are very lucky.    That's why I must go with you.    it's a   
mischance that you can't marry me, but we must accept that and go on from there."    "I didn't   
say I can't marry you," Henry said.    She looked astounded. 
 
"Let's be clear.    If I love you enough to have an affair with you behind my wife's back, then I   
love you enough to ask her for a divorce. 
 
To me the injury is the same.    I don't understand the decent kindly deception you talked about,   
There's a right name for that, and I don't like it. But all this is breaking too fast, Pam, and   
meantime you have to leave Moscow. The only place to go is LOndon. That's common   
sense.- hardened tone as he "I won't marry Ted.    Don't argue," she said in a started to talk, "I   
know it's a beastly decision, but it's taken. 
 
That's flat.      I didn't know about your battleship.      That's thrilling and grand, though it   
complicates things. I can't make you take me along across Siberia, of course, but you had   
better forbid me. 
 
right now, or I'll manage to get to Hawaii myself-and much sooner than you'd believe   
possible." 
 
"Doesn't it even bother you that you're needed in England?" 
 
"Now you listen to me, Victor.    There's no angle of this that I haven't contemplated very, very   
 710 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
thoroughly and long.    I wasn't thinking of much else on that four-day auto ride, if you want to   
know.    If I leave old England in the lurch, it will be because something stronger calls me, and   
I'll do This was dire Ian ag that at gu c t Victor Henry understood. Pamela's gray coat collar   
and gray wool hat half hid her face, which was pink with cold; her nose was red.    She was just   
another shapelessly bundled-up young woman, but all at once Victor Henry felt a stab of   
sexual hunger for her, and a pulse of hope that there might conceivably be a new life in store   
for him with this young woman, and her alone, in all the world.    He was overwhelmed, at least   
for the moment, by the way she had pitched everything On this one toss. 
 
'Okay.    Then let's get down to realities, he said gently, glancing at his watch.    "Youpve got to   
make a move today, in a couple of hours. 
 
And I have to attend to this little matter of going around to the other side of the world to take   
command of my ship." 
 
Pamela smiled beautifully, after listening with a formidable frown. 
 
'What a nuisance I must be, suddenly draping myself around your neck at this moment of your   
life.    Do You really love me?"    "Yes, I love you,"    Pug said without difficulty and quite   
sincerely, since it was the fact of the matter. 
 
"You're sure, are you?    Say it just once more." 
 
"I love you." 
 
Pamela heaved a thoughtful sigh, looking down at her hands. 
 
"Well! 
 
All right.    What move shall I make today, then?" 
 
"Go back with Talky to London.    You have no choice, so go quietly. 
 
I'll write you or cable you. "When?" 
 
"When I can.    When I know." 
 
They sat in silence.    The Kremlin wall, painted to look like a row of apartment houses, echoed   
the shouts of the sergeants and the metallic clash of rifle bolts, as the recruits clumsily did   
some elementary drill. 
 
"Well, that will be a communication to look forward to," Pamela said lightly.    "Can't you give   
me some hint of its contents now?" 
 
"No." 
 
For some reason this pleased her, or seemed to.    She put a hand t'o his face and smiled at him,   
her eyes full of naked love.    "Okay. 
 
I'll wait."    Her hand slipped down to the ripped shoulder of his coat. 
 711 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Oh, I wanted to mend that.    What time is it?"    ,it's after ten, Pam." 
 
'Then I must get cracking. Oh dear, I honestly don't want to travel away from you again."   
They rose and began walking arm in arm. 
 
Among the recruits they were walking past stood Berel Jastrow, newly shaved. 
 
He looked older so, with his scraped skin hanging in reddened folds. He saw Victor Henry, and   
for a moment put his right hand over his heart. 
 
The naval officer took off his hat as though to wipe his brow, and put it back on. 
 
"Who is he?"    Pamela said, alertly watching.    "Oh!    Isn't that the man who burst into Slote's   
dinner?" 
 
'Yes," Victor Henry said.    "My relative from Minsk.    That's him. 
 
Don't look around at him or anything."      In the unlit hallway outside her suite, Pamela   
unbuttoned her own coat and then unbuttoned Victor Henry's bridge coat, looking into his eyes.   
She pressed herself hard to him, and they embraced and kissed.    She whispered, "You'd better   
write me or cable me to come.    Oh God, how I love you!    Will you drive with us to the airport?   
Will you stay with me every second to the last?" 
 
"Yes, of course I'll stay with you."    She dashed tears from her face with the back of her hand,   
then miped her eyes with a handkerchief. "Oh, how glad I am that I dug in my nasty little   
hoofs!" 
 
Tudsbury came limping eagerly toward the door as she opened it. 
 
"Well?    Well?    What's the verdict?" 
 
"I was being silly," Pamela said.    "I'm going home with you." 
 
Tudsbury looked from her face to Henry's, for the tone was sharply ironic. 
 
'Is she going with me, Victor?"    'She just said she was." 
 
"Gad, what a relief!    Well, all's well that ends well, and say, I was about to come looking for   
you.    The R.A.F lads are being flown out half an hour earlier.    There's a rumor that a German   
column's breaking through toward the airport and that it may be under shellfire soon. 
 
The Nark says it's a damned lie, but the boys had rather not take a chance." 
 
"I can pack in ten minutes."    Pamela strode toward her room, adding to Pug, "Come with me,   
love." 
 
Victor Henry saw Tudsbury's eyes flash and a lewd smile curl the thick lips under his   
mustache. Well, Pamela was human, Pug thought, for all her strength. She couldn't resist   
exploding the possessive endearment like a firecracker in her father's face.    He said, 'Wait. 
 712 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
There's a report Talky must take to London for me.    I'll be right back." 
 
'What do you think, Talky?"    Pug heard her say gaily as he went out. "Victor's got himself a   
battleship command, no less, and he's off to Pearl Harbor.    That's in Hawaii!" 
 
He returned shortly, breathing hard from the run up and down the hotel staircase, and handed a   
manila envelope, stapled shut, to Tudsbury. 
 
"Give this to Captain Kyser, the naval attache at our embassy, hand to hand.    All right?" 
 
"Of course.    Top secret?"    Tudsbury asked with relish. 
 
"Well-be careful with it.    It's for the next Washington pouch." 
 
"When I travel, this case never leaves my hand," Tudsbury said, "not even when I sleep.    So   
rest easy." 
 
He slipped into a brown leather    dispatch case Pug's    envelope,    which contained    two other   
envelopes, sealed.    One was the long typed report for Harry Hopkins, and the other was the   
letter to the President about the Jews of Minsk. 
 
(from WORLD EMPIRE LOST) 
 
The Bouleversement One week in May 1940 sufficed to upset a balance of power in Europe   
that had lasted for centuries; and one week in December 1941 sufficed to decide the outcome   
of World War II and the future global balance of power. 
 
on December 4, our Army Group Center was driving through blizzards into the outskirts of   
Moscow, and from Leningrad to the Crimea Bolshevik Russia was tottering. The French   
Empire was long since finished.    The British Empire too was finished, though the British Isles   
still hung feebly on, more and more starved by our ever-expanding U-boat arm. No other   
power stood between us and world empire except America, which was too weakened by soft   
living and internal strife to make war.    Its industrial plant, half paralyzed by strikes, was still   
geared to producing luxuries and fripperies.    Its military strength lay in an obsolescent navy   
centered around battleships, riskily based in Hawaii in order to overawe the Japanese, and quite   
impotent to affect the world-historical German victory that loomed. 
 
Seven days    later,    on December    11, we were at war with an America    transformed    into an   
aggressive military dictatorship, united with one will under a fanatical enemy of the Reich,   
converting its entire industry on a crash basis to war, and conscripting a vast fresh army and air   
force in order to crush us.      The Red Army on the Moscow front, stiffened with Anglo- 
American supplies and fresh, primitive, hard-fighting Siberian divisions, had swung over to the   
counterattack. 
 
Elsewhere Soviet troops were forcing us to retreat from Rostov-the first German retreat since   
Adolf Hitler had risen to lead us in 1933. 
 
One step from the pinnacle of world empire on December 4, the German people on December   
 713 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 found themselves plunged into a total two-front war, fighting for their lives, menaced from   
the east and from the west by two industrial giants with five times our population and twenty   
times our territory. 
 
History offers no parallel for this gigantic military bouleversement. The chief cause of it was   
the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.    Sir Winston Churchill records frankly that when he got   
the news of this attack, he shed tears of thankful joy, for he knew then and there that the war   
was won. He wasted no tears, of course, on the American sailors caught by surprise and   
slaughtered. 
 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTE: Here is the passage in Churchill: "No American will think it wrong   
of me if / proclaim that to have the United States at our side was to me the greatest joy.    I could   
not foretell the course of events. / do not pretend to have measured accurately the martial   
might of Japan, but now at this very moment I knew the United States was in the war, up to the   
neck and in to the death. 
 
So we had won after at//" No tears are mentioned.    As previously noted, Genera/ von Roon is   
not dispassionate in his references to Winston Churchill.-V.H. 
 
The Japanese Blunder 
 
The Japanese attack was of course quite justified, but it was a hideous strategic mistake. 
 
The fall of French and British power had left the far eastern European colonies almost   
undefended.    Japan was the natural thief of this wealth. She needed it to fight her war against   
China to a finish. 
 
The Europeans had come halfway round the earth a few generations earlier to subjugate East   
Asia and plunder its resources.    But now all that was over.    Japan was the only strong presence   
in East Asia.    It was far more moral for this Asiatic people to take over administration of this   
rich sphere, than for a few drunken white civil servants of defunct European empires to   
continue their pukka-sahib parasitism. 
 
Adolf Hitler had sought only friendly ties with this clever hard-working people of destiny.    In   
the General Staff we assumed that Japan would march at the time best suited to her. We   
approved of this on every basis'of world philosophy. 
 
The Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor was tactically an excellent operation, comparable in many   
ways to Barbaross,3.    In both cases a small poor notion caught a big wealthy nation off guard,   
despite a tense war atmosphere and all manner of advance warnings and indications.    In both   
cases surprise was exploited to destroy on a great scale the enemy's first-line forces. The   
Barbarossa surprise depended on the nonaggression treaty, then in force with soviet Russia, to   
lull the enemy.    The Japanese went us one better by attacking in the middle of peace parleys. 
 
At the time of both attacks, of course, there were loud outcries of "infamy" and "treachery," as   
though these terms of private morality had any relevance to historical events.    A poor nation   
seeking to supplant a rich one must use the best means it can find; moreover Thucydides said   
 714 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
long ago that men by a natural law always rule where they are strongest. In history what is   
moral is what works. 
 
The will of God, Hegel taught, reveals itself only in historical outcomes.      So viewed,   
Barbarossa and Pearl Harbor were both idealistic thrusts toward a heroic new world order. 
 
The difference was that Barbarossa was strategically impeccableand would have resulted in   
victory if not for unlucky and unforeseen factors-including this very Japanese attack five and a   
half months later, which, contrariwise, was such a strategic miscalculation that for once   
Churchill speaks no more than the truth in calling it suicidal madness. 
 
One violation of a cardinal rule is enough to invalidate a strategic plan. 
 
The Japanese surprise attack violated two. 
 
The two iron laws of warfare that Japan disregarded were: 1. 
 
Strike for the heart. 
 
2. Know your enemy. 
 
"Strike for the Heart" 
 
The rule "Strike for the heart" is only a corollary of the first principle of warfare, the   
Concentration of Force.    This was what Japan's military leaders overlooked. 
 
From the moment they correctly decided that the war in Europe was their big chance to take   
East Asia, a hard choice confronted them: should they first move north against the Soviet   
Union by invading Siberia; or south, to scoop up the weakly held treasures of the European   
colonies?    The move south was the the more tempting, of course.    But in warfare one must not   
be misled by mere easy loot or the line of least resistance. 
 
The stakes of the war comprised nothing less than political redistribution of the world's   
landmasses.    It was a radical global conflict, the first true World War. 
 
The lineup was classical- the rich against the poor, gold against iron. Germany was the only   
first-class power on the ascendant side, the side that was seeking to draw a new world map, and   
her attack on the Soviet Union was her great bid. 
 
Once master of Russia, Germany would have been invincible.    It followed that the Japanese   
should have moved to help Germany crush the Soviet Union. With Germany triumphant,   
Japan could have taken and held anything in East Asia she wanted.    But with Germany beaten,   
Japan had small hope of keeping even the vastest gains. 
 
Had Japan invaded Siberia in 1941, the German drive to Moscow would have succeeded.    The   
Russian counterattacks in December would not have been mounted. The Bolshevik regime   
would either have fallen or made a second peace of Brest-Litovsk.    For what saved Moscow in   
December was only Stalin's desperate denuding of the Siberian front for reserves to throw into   
the battle, tipping the scales at the last second by a hair. 
 715 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Moreover, if Napoleon's maxim holds that the moral is to the physical in warfare as three to   
one, the mere fact of a Japanese assault on Siberia in the autumn might have brought on a   
Russian collapse.      In mid-October panic gripped the Bolsheviks to the highest levels of   
government, with whole departments fleeing Moscow in disgraceful tumult, and the frightened   
dictator issuing shrill orders for a levie en masse to save the city.      There is even an   
unconfirmed story that Stalin himself secretly fled, secretly returned when the panic subsided,   
and had everybody shot who knew of his disgraceful act. 
 
Russian rulers operate inside a Byzantine maze, and there is no way of checking this episode.  
 
In any case, this was surely the psychological moment of World War II, the once-in-a- 
thousand-years opportunity for the Japanese nation. 
 
Its irresolute leaders, poorly trained in military thinking and subject to the strange Oriental   
character mixture of excessive rashness, caution, and emotion, let the moment slip through   
their fingers to all eternity.    History, like a woman, must be firmly taken when she is ready.   
Otherwise she scorns the fumbler, never forgives him, and never offers him another chance. 
 
"Know Your Enemy" 
 
The first mistake, then, was to go south instead of north, and to snatch booty instead of triking   
at the heart.    But the Axis might still have won the war despite this dispersion of effort, had   
Japan not compounded the blunder with a second one that verged on true insanity. 
 
Granted the southward strategy, the obvious course was to move into the East Indies with   
maximum speed and force, consolidate rapidly, and prepare to defeat any American   
countermove.    The Americans might not have moved at all. 
 
Tremendous opposition existed in the United States to sending American boys to die for the   
pukka sohibs in Asia.    Roosevelt might have just sputtered harsh words, as he had after all of   
Adolf Hitler's triumphs. Roosevelt never moved one visible step beyond the range of public   
opinion.    This was the master key to the nature of the enemy. 
 
Japan was oblivious to it, because of the distortions of Oriental thinking. 
 
Even if Roosevelt had sent his navy, defying half his public, against the entrenched Japanese in   
East Asia, this fleet would have fought its showdown battle at the end of a long supply line, in   
enemy waters, within range of Japan's land-based air force.    It would have been another Battle   
of Tsushima Strait, with air power added.    This humiliating slaughter in an unpopular cause   
might have brought on the impeachment of the none too popular Machiavellian in the White   
House. 
 
But even this was not the worst aspect of the Japanese blunder. 
 
America had the largest and most advanced industrial plant on earth. This mercenary nation,   
devoted to the almighty dollar and blessed with wonderful mineral resources stolen from the   
Indians, had reared an mmense plant capacity for making toys and trifles.    But it was a capacity   
 716 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
readily convertible to munitions    manufacture on the most fantastic    imaginable    scale. The   
whole hope of Axis victory in World War II lay in keeping America divided and soft until the   
time come to deal with her as an isolated unit without allies. 
 
This prospect was in sight.    Half of America would have rejoiced at a German victory over the   
Soviet Union. The Lend-Lease program was bogged down in red tape and inertia the day   
before the Pearl Harbor attack, reflecting the discord and confusion in the people. 
 
For this, great credit goes to Adolf Hitler.    He was a narrow-minded man, appallingly ignorant   
of the United States.    But his almost female intuition warned him that he must give his blood   
enemy, Roosevelt, no chance to unite the Americans against him. That is why the Fuhrer   
swallowed all the President's scurrilous public abuse and compelled the U-boat arm to endure   
appalling provocation. 
 
This wise strategy of the fuhrer was blown to smithereens by Pearl Harbor. 
 
Overnight a hundred thirty million quarrelsome, uncertain, divided Americans become one   
angry mass thirsting for battle.    Roosevelt rammed through Congress gigantic war plans and   
expenditures which a few days earlier would have been utterly inconceivable.    The Congress,   
which in August had extended a mild draft law by a single vote after weeks of debate, now   
unanimously passed fierce declarations of war, and all Roosevelt's long-plotted stupendous war   
programs, in a matter of hours. 
 
This was the chief result of Pearl Harbor, for the fleet was soon repaired and expanded.    In one   
week Germany passed from the strategic offensive, with world empire in her grasp, to the   
strategic defensive, with no long-range prospect but to be crushed unless our enemies    did   
something just as stupid and selfdestructive. 
 
Nonexistent "Axis" 
 
If one asks, "How did Germany permit such a catastrophe to occur?" 
 
the answer is that we were not consulted.    We found out that Pearl Harbor was the target when   
the Americans did-when the torpedoes and bombs exploded. 
 
The "Axis" of Germany, Japan, and Italy never existed as a military reality. 
 
It was a ferocious-looking rubber balloon blown up by propaganda. 
 
Its purpose was bluff.    The three nations went their own ways throughout the war, and usually   
did not even inform their partners in advance about attacks, invasions, and strategic decisions. 
 
Thus, when Hitler attacked Poland, Mussolini suddenly declined to fight and did not jump in   
until France was toppling.    The Italian dictator invaded Greece without notifying Hitler.    Hitler   
did not inform 11 Duce of the attack on Russia until just before the event. 
 
But for this he had good reason.    Our intelligence had advised us that anything Mussolini knew   
went straight to the British via the Italian royal family. 
 717 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Not once did real staff talks take place among the "Axis" armed forces. 
 
England and America were having such conferences a year before Pearl Harbor/ They followed   
a combined    strategy throughout in close cooperation    with the Bolsheviks. Now they can   
reflect at leisure on the wisdom of helping Stalin destroy us, and losing the Slav flood to the   
Elbe.    But Allied operations were a model of combined strategy, while "Axis" strategy was a   
nullity.    It was every man for himself, and unhappy Germany was tied to second-rate partners   
who made rash wild plunges that ruined her. 
 
Yomamoto's Role 
 
Why did Japan take this aberrant, foredoomed course? 
 
She had burst into modern history with the sneak attack on the Russian navy at Port Arthur in   
1904,    and perhaps was    obsessed    with    this    way for    yellow men to    beat white    men.     
The   
Japanese Naval Staff favored the right move: a seizure of the indies, and a showdown with the   
United States Navy-if one should occur -in Japanese waters.    But Pearl Harbor was conceived   
by one Admiral Yamamoto, the commander-in-chief of the fleet, who forced it on his navy and   
government by threats ' to resign. 
 
Yamamoto opposed the war with the United States entirely, on the grounds that against an   
enemy with an industrial superiority of seven to one, the attempt was hopeless.    But he insisted   
that if he had to fight, he wanted to knock out the American fleet at the outset.    To the broader   
effects of the attack, he was blind.    The Naval Staff considered the attack too risky a gamble,   
but Yamamoto prevailed. 
 
Tactically, of course, he was vindicated.    As long as men read and write, "Pearl Harbor" will be   
a synonym for successful surprise attack. 
 
it is as much a part of world language as "Waterloo." 
 
How, indeed, could the Japanese fleet assemble, steam across the Pacific to within two hundred   
miles of Hawaii, elude all United States intelligence efforts and all its sea and air patrols, and   
catch its Army and navy by surprise? This mystery is doubled and tripled by the postwar   
revelation that the United States had broken Japan's codes and was reading her secret   
diplomatic cables! The record of the Pearl Harbor investigation by the American Congress   
runs to millions of words. Still the mystery remains. 
 
As a German staff officer, I look upon Pearl Harbor as an abstract battle problem like Salamis   
or Trafalgar.    Yamamoto's operation surprised the Americans precisely because it was such a   
foolish thing to do, such an outrageous gamble, such bad strategy, such muddled politics, and   
such unsound psychology, Even if it succeeded, it was just about the worst move the Japanese   
could try. 
 
Therefore the Americans    made the mistake of shutting it from their minds. The Japanese   
irrationally went ahead and did it, and it happened to work. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A little-noted passage in the hearings, from the interrogation of the cashiered Admiral Kimmel,   
may provide a key to the mystery.    Aerial torpedoes in those days needed to be dropped in deep   
water in order to straighten out and make their run.      The minimum depth, according to   
American technical opinion, was about seventy-five feet.    Pearl Harbor is thirty feet deep.    The   
danger of a torpedo plane attack on the battle fleet was therefore called "negligible," and no   
torpedo nets were rigged.    On December 7, aerial torpedoes hit seven battleships and wreaked   
vast havoc in Pearl Harbor.    For the Japanese had devised a torpedo that could be launched in   
less than thirty feet, and their pilots had practiced shallow launchings from May to December!   
This sums up the mental difference in 1941 between the two nations. 
 
Did Roosevelt Plan It? 
 
The historical suspicion arose, and still lingers, that Roosevelt and his top aides conspired to   
cause the Pearl Harbor defeat. On this theory, they concealed from the Hawaiian command   
their    certain    knowledge    that    Japan was about to strike, obtained    from decoded diplomatic   
telegrams, so as to keep the armed forces there unprepared for the blow. Roosevelt, on this   
view, decided that getting America solidly into the war was more important militarily than the   
loss of his battleships. This conjecture originated with the military leaders who were caught   
napping. They and their supporters maintain it to this day. 
 
Roosevelt was, of course, capable of this dastardly action.    He was capable of anything.    But   
the record shows    that the Pearl Harbor command,    and all    the United    States    forces    in the   
Pacific,    certainly knew    that    war was    imminent.    Indeed,    all    they had    to do was    read the   
newspapers.    In any case, there is no acceptable excuse for professional military leaders ever to   
be surprised, even under the most lulling and peaceful of circumstances.    it happens, but it is   
not excusable. 
 
No evidence has turned up, in exhaustive investigations, that Roosevelt knew where the blow   
would fall. The Japanese kept the secret of the intended target perfectly.    Their own top   
diplomats did not know it. Our Supreme Headquarters did not know it.    it was never entrusted   
to a coded cable. 
 
The American military men were surprised because, like the Red Army in June, they were   
psychologically unprepared for war.    On the eve of the attack, the officers at Pearl Harbor no   
doubt observed the sacred American Saturday night ritual of getting stinking drunk, as did   
most of their men, and so when the first bombs fell, they were incapable of manning their   
numerous planes and A.A. 
 
guns to defend themselves.    Here the rule "Know the enemy" definitely helped the Japanese.    If   
American forces, wherever stationed, are ever attacked again, the proper time will always be   
Sunday morning. 
 
National character changes very slowly. 
 
Roosevelt would have been far better served by a victory at Pearl Harbor than by a disaster.   
Success in repelling the blow would have raised the martial spirit higher.    The Americans were   
 719 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
a long time recovering mentally from the Pearl Harbor defeat.    Roosevelt was not an imbecile,   
and only an imbecile would have forgone a chance to countersurprise the oncoming exposed   
Japanese fleet and sink it. 
 
Roosevelt did not warn the Pearl Harbor command of an imminent air strike because he, like   
everybody else, did not know and could not guess that the Japanese would act as grotesquely as   
they did.    The Conspiracy theory of Pearl Harbor is a trivial excuse for professional failure. 
 
It is of course absolutely the case that by cutting off Japan's oil supply and then brusquely   
demanding, as the price of restoring it, that the Japanese make peace in China and stay out of   
East Asia, Franklin Roosevelt forced Japan to attack.    There was no other honorable escape for   
this proud warlike notion from the Corner into which he squeezed them. But these global   
political maneuvers, at which he was a grand master, he performed openly.    The newspapers   
were full of the diplomatic exchanges, so talk of conspiracy is silly.    Roosevelt probably hoped   
to the last that he could bully and bluff this smaller, weaker nation into obeying him without   
war.    Hitler would have played that situation exactly the some way.    However, there was this   
difference: the German armed forces would not have let him down by being surprised, as   
Roosevelt's did.    We were soldiers. 
 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTE: Roon's professional acumen is most striking when German conduct   
is not in the picture.    With his appraisal of the Pearl Harbor surprise, I unhappily concur.    He   
neglects the reo/ bungling and stupidity that went on in Washington during those days, as well   
as in Hawaii; but his conclusion must be accepted that there is never an excuse for   
commanders in the field to be surPrised- A similar failure by our armed services in the nuclear   
age will spell the end of American history.    There will be no margin for recovery next time.- 
V.H. 
 
as he sat on the back la" S'ENS-n of lost time haunted Victor Henry three o'clock in the   
morning, Aof the Army and Navy Club in Manila at en thousand listening to a broadcast of a   
football game going on elev miles away. Overhead, as always on Army-Navy game night,   
Orion sprawled brilliantly across half the heavens.      On the roads outside Moscow the   
constellation had blazed brightY, too, but far down toward the southern horizon. crowd of   
officers from both services, and a Pug sat on the grass amid a sprinkling of their Filipino   
girlfriends. 
 
Wives had long since been sent -Navy night-fresh-cut lawn grass, from home.    The old smells   
of Army Spam, rum, women's perfume and the rank smell of harbor water-the gi o, the heat,   
the sweaty feeling even in a cotton shirt and paper lanterns, to interservice jokes and insults, all   
pulled him back in spirit slacks, the old amazingly unchanged. 
 
The jumpy overa dozen years.    life in Manila was wrought embassy people in Tokyo had been   
speculating that there might be no Army-Navy game, that either the Japanese would go to war   
by Thanksgiving, or that at least the American armed forces would be on hA alert.    Yet there   
stood the same old display board, with the flat white football that would slide back and forth on   
a string across the painted gridiron. 
 720 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
There were the mascot animals-Army mule in a brown blanket, Navy goat in a blue one- 
tethered and waiting for the comic moments. 
 
It might just as well be sleepy 1928, Pug thought.    Only the floodlights blazing across the bay   
at the Cavite Navy Yard for all-night repair work suggested that it was November 1941, and   
that the Navy was slightly bestirring itself for an emergency. 
 
The loudspeakers bellowed above the chatter on the lawn, and the radio reception tonight was   
better    than in some    years.    This    game    still had its    old ritual    fascination    for Pug; he was   
following it tensely, smoking a cigar.    Once his nostalgia had been keen for the tough youthful   
combat on the grass, the slamming of bodies, the tricky well-drilled plays, above all for the rare   
moments of breaking free and sprinting down the field, dodging one man and another with the   
stands around him a roaring sea of voices.    Nothing in his life had since been quite like it.    But   
long ago that nostalgia had departed; those grooves of memory had worn out.    To think that   
lads much younger than his own two sons were out on that chilly field in Philadelphia now,   
made Victor Henry feel that he had led a very long, multilayered existence, and was now   
almost a living mummy. 
 
"Pug!    I heard you were here."    A hand lightly struck his shoulder. 
 
His classmate Walter Tully, bald as an egg and deeply tanned, smiled down at him; Tully had   
left the submarine school to take command of the undersea squadron at Manila.    He gestured at   
a crowded table near the &splay board.    "Come and t with us." 
 
"Maybe    at the half, Red." It was decidedly an anachronism, but everybody still used the   
nickname.    "It's more like the old days, sitting on the grass." 
 
"You're dead right.    Well, I'll join you." 
 
"Now you're talking.    Sit you down." 
 
Tully had played Academy football too, and he listened to the broadcast as intently as Pug.   
After a while the white football slid all the way for an Army run to a touchdown.    Amid yells,   
cheers, and groans, a young lieutenant unloosed the mule, jumped on its back, and galloped   
around the lawn. 
 
"Oh, hell," Pug exclaimed. 
 
Tully shook his head.    "We're going to lose this one, old buddy. 
 
They've got a fine backfield.    We could use Pug Henry in there." 
 
"Ha!    Fifteen-yard penalty for illegal use of wheelchairs.    Say, Red, you're the original Simon   
Legree, aren't you?" 
 
"How do you mean?" 
 
"I mean sending the Devilfish out on exercises the night of the ArmyNavy game.    What's the   
matter, you think there's a war threatening or something?" 
 721 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tully grinned at the heavily ironic tone.    "It was Branch Hoban's idea. they're going alongside   
for two weeks starting today-they're due in at noon-and he wanted to get in some drils.    You'll   
see plenty of Byron." 
 
clilli only be here till the Clipper leaves."Yes, I hear tell you've got the California.    That's just   
great, Pug." 
 
The game resumed. After some dull skirmishing the white -shap shot far across therm ball   
board; Navy had intercepted a pass and run it deep into Army territory.    Pug and Tully got to   
their feet and joined in the Navy Yells of "Beat Army!    Goal!    Goal!"    while an ensign happily   
paraded the goat around. The half ended righth after the touchdown. Cheerily Red Tully   
ordered drinks from a passing steward. 
 
itlet's stay here on the grass, Pug. 
 
Tell me about Romhia.His happy grin changed to a tough sober look as Victor Henry described   
the tank battle he had observed and the October 16 panic in Moscow. "Jesus, you've really   
been in there!    I envy you. And here we sit, fat, dumb, and happy.    They told me you flew here   
via Tokyo."    "That's right."    "What's the straight dope, Pug? 
 
Are those bastards really going to fight?    We're getting some scary alerts here, but at this point   
we're kind of numb." 
 
"Well, our people there are worried.    The ambassador talked to me at length about Japanese   
psychology.    They're a very strange nation, he said, and hara-kiri is a way of life to them.    The   
odds don't matter much.    They're capable of executing a suicidal plan suddenly, and he fears   
they will." 
 
Tully glanced around at the nearby couples on the grass or on folding chairs, and dropped his   
voice.    "That checks out.    Admiral Hart received a straight war warning today, Pug.    But we've   
been hearing nervous chatter from Washington, on and off, all summer and fall.    In July when   
ihey landed in Indo-China and Roosevelt shut off their oil, we all thought, here goes! The   
squadron ran dawn and dusk GQ's for a week, till it got kind of stilly.    Should I start that up   
again?" 
 
Pug gestured his puzzlement with turned-up palms.    "Look, I talked to some businessmen one   
night at a dinner party in the embassy, Americans, British, and one jap, a big-time shipbuilder.   
The jap said the straight word, right from the Imperial Court, is that war with the USA is   
unthinkable.    Everybody there agreed.    So-you pays your money and you takes your choice." 
 
"Well, all I know is, if they do go, we're in trouble.    The state of readiness in the Philippines is   
appalling.    The people themselves    don't want to fight the japs. That's    my opinion. The   
submarine force is so short of everything-torpedoes, spare parts, watch officers, what have   
you-that it's simply pitiful.    Speaking of which, when did you see Byron last?" 
 
'I guess about six months ago.    Why?" 
 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 722 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Well, he has more damn brass! He walked into my office the other day and asked for a   
transfer to the Atlantic command.    His own skipper had turned him down and Byron was trying   
to go over his head.    I sure ate him out about that.    I told him, Pug-I said this, word for word- 
that if he weren't your son I'd have kicked his ass out of my office." 
 
Victor Henry said with forced calm, "His wife and baby are in Italy. 
 
He's worried about them."    'We're all separated from our kinfolk, Pug. It just isn't in the cards   
to transfer him.    I'm trying to comb submarine officers our of tenders and destroyers.    I'd do   
anything within reason for a son of yours, but-"- "Don't put it that way. 
 
Byron's just another officer.    If you can't do it, YOU can't "Okay. I'm glad you said that." 
 
"Still, his family problem is serious.    If it's possible, transfer him." 
 
"There is this little problem of the japs, too." 
 
"No argument."    Victor Henry was taking some pains to keep his tone light and friendly.    A   
crowd roar poured from the loudspeakers, and he said with relief, "Okay!    Second half." 
 
When the game ended, many people were stretched out asleep on the grass, under a paling sky   
streaked with red.    White-coated boys were still passing drinks and huddled Navy officers were   
bawling "Anchors Aweigh," for their team had won.    Pug declined Captain Tully's invitation to   
break and went up to his room for a nap. 
 
He had stayed in a room like it-perhaps in this very one-on first reporting to Manila, before   
Rhoda had arrived with the children to set up housekeeping. High-ceilinged, dingy, dusty,   
with featureless old club furniture and a big perpetually turning and droning fan, the room hit   
Pug again with a strong sense of lost time and vanished days. He turned the fan up high,   
stripped to undershorts, opened the french windows looking out over the bay, and sat smoking   
cigarette after cigarette, watching the day brighten over the broad blue harbor and the busy   
traffic of ships. 
 
He was not sleepy.    He sat so for more than an hour, scarcely moving, while gathering sweat   
trickled down his naked skin. 
 
thinking of what? 
 
Seeing pictures generated by his return to Manila. Pictures of himself and Byron under a   
poinciana tree at the white house on Harrison Boulevard, working on French verbs; the boy's   
thin face wrinkling, silent tears falling at his father's roared exasperation.    Of Warren winning a   
history medal, an English medal, and a baseball award at the high school; of Madeline,   
fairylike in a gossamer white frock, wearing a gold paper crown at her eighth birthday party. 
 
Pictures of Rhoda crabbing about the heat and the boredom, getting drunk night after night in   
this club, falling on her face at the Christmas dance; of the quarrel that put an end to her   
drinking, when he coldly talked divorce.    The smell of the club's lawns and halls, and of the   
spicy Manila air, gave him the illusion that all this was going on now, instead of belonging to a   
 723 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
past more than a dozen years dead. 
 
Pictures of Pamela Tudsbury in Red Square.    Of the dreary mud streets of Kuibyshev, the all- 
night poker games, the visits to farm communes, the stagnant slow passing of time while he   
waited for train tickets; then the two-week rail ride across Siberia; the beautih Siberian girls   
selling fruits, flat circular bread, sausage, and hot chickpeas at tiny wooden stations; the single   
track of the railroad stretching backward from the last car, a dark straight line through a pink   
snow desert, pointing straight at a setting sun that flattened like a football as it sank to the   
horizon; the long stops, the wooden benches in the "hard" coach, the onion breaths and body   
smells of the local travellers, some white, some Mongol, in queer fur hats; the awesome three- 
day forest stretches; the ugly miles on miles of huts in Tokyo; the wretchedness of the   
Japanese, the hate you could feel in the back of your neck on the street, the war weariness and   
poverty so much worse even than Berlin; the half-dozen letters to Pamela Tudsbury he had   
drafted and torn up. 
 
Through all these strange scenes Victor Henry had preserved a happy sense that he was moving   
toward a new life, a fulfilled life he had almost despaired of, a life delayed, postponed, almost   
lost, but now within grasp. 
 
When he thought of Rhoda it was usually as the effervescent Washington girl he had courted.   
He could understand falling in love with that girl and marrying her.    The present-day Rhoda he   
pictured with detachment, almost as though she were somebody else's wife, with all her faults   
and all her charms seen clear. To divorce her would be cruel and shocking. How had she   
offended?    She had been giving him an arid, half-empty existence -he now knew that-but she   
had been doing her best. Yet the decision evidently lay between being kind to Rhoda and   
seizing this new life. 
 
He had written the letters to Pamela as he had written the one about the Minsk massacre-to get   
a problem on paper for a clear look at it. By the time he arrived in Tokyo, he had decided that   
letters were too wordy and too slow-travelling. He had to send one of two cables-come, or   
DOre'T comis. Pamela needed no more than that. And he had concluded that Pamela was   
wiser than he, that the first step should indeed be a love affair in which they could test out this   
passion or infatuation before wounding Rhoda; for it might never come to that.    In bald fact the   
prescription was a shackup.    Victor Henry had to face the novel notion-for him-that in some   
circumstances a shackup might be the best of several difficult courses. 
 
In Tokyo he had actually hesitated outside a cable office, on the point of cabling: come.    But he   
had walked away.    Even if it were the best course, he could not yet picture himself bringing it   
off; could not imagine conducting a hole-in-corner affair, even if with Pamela it did not seem a   
squalid or immoral idea.    It was not his style.    He would botch it, he felt, and weaken or tarnish   
his work as the new captain of the California.    So he had arrived still undecided in Manila. 
 
And in Manila, for the first time since his talk with Pamela Tudsbury in Red Square, an   
awareness of his wife Rhoda began to overtake him and the reality of Pamela to fade.    Manila   
was saturated with Rhoda, the good memories and the bad memories alike, and with his own   
hardened identity. Red Tully, his classmate, a bald commander of all the submarines of the   
 724 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Asiatic Fleet; the Army-Navy game, in which he had last played twenty-eight years ago, when   
Pamela had been an infant a few months old; the dozens of young Navy lieutenants on the club   
lawn, with girlfriends Pamela's age-these were the realities now. 
 
The wild Siberian scenery was a fading patchwork of mental snapshots. 
 
So was the incandescent half hour on Red Square. 
 
Was it really in the cards for him to start over, to have new babies learning to talk, little boys   
playing on grass, a little girl twining arms around his neck?    Manila above all recalled to Pug   
the pleasure he had taken in his children.    Those days he looked back on as the sweetest and   
best in his life.    To do it all once again with Pamela would be a resurrection, a true second life.   
But could a rigid, crusty man like himself do it? 
 
He had been hard enough on his kids in his thirties. 
 
He was very tired, and sleep at last overtook him in the chair, as it had in the Tudsburys' suite   
in the Hotel National. But this time no cold caressing fingers woke him. His inner clock,   
which seldom failed, snapped him awake in time to drive out to Cavite and watch the Devilfish   
arrive. 
 
Byron was standing on the forecastle with the anchor detail, in khakis and a life-jacket, but Pug   
failed to recognize him. Byron sang out, as the Devilfish nosed alongside the pier, 'Holy   
smoke, it's my father. You Dad! 
 
Dad!' Then Pug perceived that the slim figure with both hands in his back pockets had a   
familiar stance, and that his son's voice was issuing from the lean face with the curly red beard.   
Byron leaped to the dock while the vessel was still warping in, threw his arms around Victor   
Henry, and hugged him hard.    Kissing that scratchy hairy face was a bizarre sensation for Pug.  
 
"Hi, Briny.    Why the foliage?" 
 
'Captain Hoban can't stand beards.    I plan to grow one to my knees. 
 
God, this is a monumental surprise, Dad." From the bridge an officer shouted impatiently   
through a megaphone.    jumping back on the moving forecastle like a goat, Byron called to his   
father,    "I'll spend the day with you.    Hey,    Mom wrote me    you're    going to command    the   
California! That's fabulous!" 
 
When the vessel was secured alongside, the Devilfish officers warmly invited Victor Henry to   
lunch at a house in the suburbs which they had rented.    Pug caught a discouraging look from   
Byron, and declined. 
 
'I live aboard the submarine," Byron said.    They were driving back to Manila in the gray Navy   
car Pug had drawn from the pool'.    "I'm not in that setup." 
 
'y not?    Sounds like a good thing." 
 
"Oh, neat. Cook, butler, two houseboys, gardener, five acres, a swimming pool, and all for   
 725 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
peanuts when they split up the cost.    I've been there for dinner.    They have these girls come in,   
you know, and stay ovemightdifferent ones, secretaries, nurses, and whatnot-and whoop it up   
and all that." 
 
"Well?    Just the deal for a young stud, I should think."    "What did you do, Dad, when you were   
away from Mom?" 
 
"Think I'd tell you?"    Pug glanced at Byron.    The bearded face was serious.    "Well, I did a lot   
of agonized looking, Briny. But don't act holier-than-thou, whatever you do." "I don't feel   
holier than thou. 
 
My He's in Italy.    That's that.    They can do as they please." 
 
'What's the latest word on her?" 
 
"She's flying to Lisbon on the fifteenth.    I've got a picture of the kid. 
 
Wait till you see him!    It's incredible how much he looks like my baby pictures." 
 
Pug had been poring over the snapshot in his wallet for two months, but he decided not to   
mention it.    The inscription to Slote was an awkward detail. 
 
"God, it's rotten, being this far apart," Byron exclaimed.    "Can you picture it, Dad?    Your wife   
with a baby you've never even seen, on the other side of the earth-no telephone, a letter now   
and then getting through by luck?    It's hell.    And the worst of it is, she almost got out through   
Switzerland.    She panicked at taking a German airplane. 
 
She was sick, and alone, and I can't blame her.    But she'd be home by now, if there'd been any   
other way to go.    The Germans!    The goddamned Germans."    After a silence he said with self- 
conscious chattiness, "Hot here, isn't it?" 
 
"I'd forgotten how hot, Briny."    "I guess it was pretty cold in Russia." 
 
"Well, it's freezing in Tokyo, too." 
 
"Say, what's Tokyo like?    Quaint and pretty, and all that?" 
 
"Ugliest city in the world," Pug said, glad for a distracting subject. 
 
"Pathetic.    A flat shantytown stretching as far as the eye can see. Downtown a few tall modern   
buildings and electric signs, and crowds of little Japanese running around.    Most of the people   
wear Western clothes, but the cloth looks to be made of old blotters.    You see a few women   
dressed Japanese doll-style, and some temples and pagodas,. sort of like in San Francisco's   
Chinatown.    It's not especially Oriental, it's poor and shabby, and it smells from end to end of   
sewage and bad fish.    Biggest disappointment of all my travelling years, Tokyo. Moreover, the   
hostility to white men is thick enough to cut with a knife." 
 
"Do you think they'll start a war?" 
 726 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Well, that's the big question."    Victor Henry's fingers drummed the steering wheel.    'I have a   
book on their Shinto religion you'd better read. It's an eye-opener.    The ambassador gave it to   
me.    Here are people, Briny, who in the twentieth century believe-at least some do-that their   
kings descended from a sun god, and that their empire goes straight back two thousand six   
hundred years.    Before the continents broke apart, the story goes, japan was the highest point   
on earth.    So she's the center of the world, the divine nation, and her mission is to bring world   
peace by    conquering everybody else-you're smiling, but you'd better read this book,    boy.   
Under the religious gibberish it's exactly like Nazi or Communist propaganda, this idea of one   
crowd destined to take over the world by force.    God knows why this idea has broken out in   
different forms and keeps spreading. It's like a mental leprosy. Say, how hungry are you?   
Let's look at the old house before lunch." Byron's smile, framed in the neatly trimmed red   
beard, looked odd but no less charming.    "Why, sure, Dad.    I've the r 
 
mi ve done that.    I don't know 
 
why." 
 
As they drove along Harrison Boulevard and approached the house, Byron exclaimed, "Ye   
gods, is that it?    Someone went and painted it yellow.)# "That's it."    Pug parked the car across   
the street and they got out. The unpleasant mustardy color surprised him too.    It was all over   
the low stone wall and the wrought-iron fence, as well as the house-a sun-faded old paint job,   
already peeling.    On the lawn lay a tumbled-over tricycle, a big red ball, a baby carriage, and   
plastic toys. 
 
"But the trees are so much taller and thicker," Byron said, peering through the fence, "yet the   
house seems to have shrunk.    See, here's where Warren threw the can of red paint at me.    How   
about that? 
 
There's still a mark."    Byron rubbed his shoe over the dim red splash on the paving stone.  
 
"I had a bad time here, all in all.    Warren laying my head open, and then the jaundice-2 
 
'Yes, and that truck hitting you on your bicycle.      I wouldn't think you'd remember it   
pleasantly." 
 
Byron pointed.    "That's where we used to sit, right there under that tree, when you'd tutor me.   
Remember, Dad?    Look how thick that trunk is now!" 
 
"Oh, you recall that?    I wouldn't think that would be a pleasant memory either." 
 
"Why not?    I missed all that school.    You had to do it." 
 
"But I was a lousy tutor.    Maybe your mother should have taken it on. 
 
But in the morning she liked to sleep late, and in the afternoon, well, she was either shopping,   
or getting her hair done, you know, or fixing herself up for some party.    For all the times I lost   
my temper, I apologize."    Byron gave his father a peculiar glance through half-closed eyes and   
scratched his beard.    "I didn't mind." 
 
  805 
 
   
 727 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Sometimes you cried.    Yet you didn't cry when you got hit by the truck. Pain never made you   
crypt "well, when you put on that angry voice, it scared me. But it was all right. I liked   
studying with you. 
 
I understood you." 
 
"Anyway, you got good marks that year." 
 
'Best I ever got." 
 
They looked through the fence without talking for a couple of long minutes.    "Well, now we've   
seen the place," Pug said.    "How about lunch?"    "You know something?"    Byron's gaze was   
still on the house. 
 
"Except for the three days I had in Lisbon with Natalie, I was happier here than I've ever been   
in my life, before or since.    I loved this house."    "That's the worst of a service career," Pug said.   
"You never strike roots.    You raise a family of tumbleweeds." 
 
The crab cocktail at the Army and Navy Club was still served with the same bland red sauce in   
the same long-stemmed cups, with one purposeless green leaf sticking up in the crabmeat.    The   
roast beef from the steam table was lukewarm and overdone, much as it had been in 1928.  
 
Even the faces of the people eating lunch seemed the same-all but Byron's. 
 
The thin little boy who had eaten with such exasperating slowness was now a bearded tall   
young man.    He still ate too slowly; Pug finished his meat first, though he was doing nearly all   
the talking. 
 
He wanted to probe Byron a bit about Pamela, and about Jochanan Jastrow. He described   
Jastrow's sudden incursion into Slote's Moscow flat, and his spectral reappearance in Spaso   
House out of a snowstorm. 
 
Byron    exploded    in    anger when    his father mentioned    Tudsbury's    refusal to    use    the Minsk   
documents, and his guess that Jastrow might bean NKVD emissary.    "What?    Was he serious?   
Why, he's either a hypocrite or an idiott Vnat he said about people not wanting to help the Jews   
is true, God knows.    Hitler paralyzed the world for years by playing on that chord. 
 
But nobody can talk to Berel for five minutes without realizing that he's a remarkable man.   
And dead on the level, too." 
 
"You believe the story about the massacre?" 
 
'y not?    Aren't the Germans capable of it?    If Hitler gave the order, then it happened." 
 
wasn't that sure myself, Byron, but I wrote to the President about Byron stared openmouthed,   
then spoke in a low incredulous tone.    "You did what, Dad?" 
 
"Well, those documents got shunted aside in the embassy as probable fakes. I thought they   
deserved more investigation than that. 
 
 728 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
It was an impulse-probably a stupid one-but I did it." 
 
Byron Henry reached out, covered his father's hand, and pressed it. 
 
The bearded face took on an affectionate glow- "All I can say is, well done." 
 
"No.    I believe it was a futile gesture, and those are never well done. 
 
But it's past.    Incidentally, have you ever met Tudsbury's daughter? Natalie mentioned in the   
Rome airport that she knew her." 
 
"You mean Pamela?    I met her once in Washington.    Why?" 
 
"Well, the Tudsburys and I travelled in the combat area together. 
 
She struck me as an unusually brave and hardy sort.    She endured a lot and always remained   
agreeable and well-groomed.    Never whined or crabbed." 
 
"Oh, Pam Tudsbury's the original endurer, from what Natalie says. 
 
They're not too unlike in that way, but otherwise they sure are. 
 
Natalie told me a lot about her.    In Paris Pamela was a hellion." 
 
"Really?"    ' "Yes, she had this Hemingwayish boyfriend who used to room with Leslie Slote.   
She and this character raised Cain all over Gay Paree.    Then he dropped her and she went into   
a bad spin.    I'm ready for some dessert, Dad.    You too?" 
 
'Sure."    Victor Henry could not help persisting.    "How-a spin?" 
 
. "Oh, can't you imagine?    Sleeping around, trying to drink up all the wine in Paris, driving like   
a maniac.    She wrapped a car around a tree outside Marseilles and almost killed this French   
writer she was with. 
 
What's the matter?    You look upset."    "That's an upsetting story. 
 
She seems a fine girl.    I'll be here a week," Pug said abruptly, "unless the Clipper changes its   
schedule.    Can we get in some tennis?" 
 
"Sure, but I'm not in shape, the way I was in Berlin."    'Nor am I." 
 
They played early in the mornings to dodge the heat, and after showering they would breakfast   
together.    Victor Henry did not mention Pamela again.    At night, lying awake in warm humid   
darkness under the moaning fan, he would think of ways to reopen the subject.    But facing his   
son at the breakfast table, he couldn't do it. He could guess what Byron would think of a   
romance between his staid father and Pamela Tudsbury. It would strike the youngster as a pure   
middle-aged aberration-disconcerting, shabby, and pathetic.    Victor Henry now had spells of   
seeing it the same way. 
 
C)the day Branch Hoban prevailed upon him to visit the house in Pasay for lunch. Byron   
 729 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
mulishly would not join them.    Pug took a long swim in a pool ringed by flowering trees, and   
enjoyed    a superb curry lunch; and after a nap he beat Lieutenant Aster at tennis. It was   
altogether a satisfying afternoon.    Before he left, over rum drinks on a terrace looking out on   
the garden, Hoban and Aster talked reassuringly about Byron. They both considered him a   
natural submarine man; only the military bone, they said, seemed to be missing in him. 
 
Transfer to the Atlantic was his obsession, but Hoban tolerantly pointed out to the father that it   
was impossible.    The squadron was far under complement now, and the Devilfish could not put   
to sea if it lost one watch officer.    Byron had to make up his mind that the Devilfish was his   
ship. 
 
Victor Henry brought up this topic at what he hoped was a good time-just before breakfast next   
morning after their game and shower, when they were having coffee on the lawn.    On other   
days    Byron    had been in the highest spirits over this early cup of coffee. As casually as   
possible, Pug remarked, 'Incidentally Byron, you said Natalie's flying to Lisbonwhen? The   
fifteenth of this month?" 
 
"That's right, the fifteenth." 
 
"Do you think she'll make it this time?" 
 
"God, yes.    She'd better!    They've got every possible official assurance and high priority." 
 
"Well now, the fifteenth isn't very far off, is it?    This transfer request of yours-"- Victor Henry   
hesitated, for a look came over Byron's face which he knew only too well: sullen, vacuous,   
remote, and introverted.    'Isn't it something you can table, at least until then?" 
 
"Table it?    It's tabled, don't worry.    I've been turned down by Hoban, Tully, and Admiral Hart's   
personnel officer.    What more do you want?" 
 
"I mean in your own mind, Briny." "Listen, I'm assuming she'll get home with the baby.   
Otherwise I'd probably desert and go fetch her out.    But I still want to be transferred.    I want to   
see them.    I want to be near them.    I've never seen my own son!    I've spent the sum total of   
three days with my wife since we got married." 
 
"There's another side to it.    Your squadron is desperate for watch officers, we're in a war alert,   
and-" Byron broke in, "Look, what is this, Dad?    I haven't asked you to go to Tully and use   
your influence with him, have I?" 
 
"I'm sure glad you haven't.    Red Tully can't do the impossible, Byron. 
 
He stretched a point, taking you into that May class, but that was different-" Byron broke in,   
"Jesus, yes, and I'm eternally grateful to both of you. 
 
That's why my son was born in Italy, and that's why I'm separated from my wife by the whole   
wide earth." 
 
"Maybe we'd better drop it," said Victor Henry. 
 730 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'That's a fine idea, Dad."    Byron turned genial again over the bacon and eggs, but Victor Henry   
felt that in the short bitter exchange he had lost all the ground he had been gaining with his son. 
 
Yet Byron could not have been more amiable when he saw his father off on the Clipper next   
day.    On the pier he threw his arms around Pug. 
 
Impulsively Pug said, as the beard scratched his lips, "Is Natalie going to like all this   
shrubbery?"    It was    a pleasure    to hear    Byron    laugh. "Don't    worry.    The day    I    leave the   
Devilfish, off it comes." 
 
"Well, then-I guess this is it, Byron."    "The tumbleweeds blowing apart," Byron said. 
 
'That's exactly right. The tumbleweeds blowing apart." dwell, you'll be seeing Warren and   
Janice in a few days, anyhow. 
 
That's great.    Give them my love." 
 
The loudspeaker called for passengers to board the huge flying boat. 
 
Victor Henry looked in his son's eyes and said with great difficulty, "Look, I pray for Natalie   
and your boy." 
 
Byron's eyes were steady and inscrutable. 
 
'I'm sure you do, Dad Thanks." 
 
When the Clipper wheeled away for the long takeoff the son still stood on the pier, hands thrust   
in his back pockets, watching. 
 
The Japanese fleet at that moment was well on its way to Hawaii. 
 
The Kurile Islands, a chain of volcanic rocks more than seven hundred miles long, loosely   
linking japan and Siberia, had made a good secret rendezvous.    japan's six aircraft carriers had   
met in a setting of black snowpatched island crags, flecked with the gnarled vegetation that can   
survive in high winds and long freezes. Through rain and sleet, their fliers had practiced   
shallow    torpedo runs    while    battleships,    cruisers, destroyers,    oilers, and    supply ships    came   
straggling in.    Nobody knew of this gathering armada except the men in the ships and a few of   
japan's leaders.    When the force set out eastward, only a few flag officers had been told where   
they were going, and why. 
 
They had no set day or hour to attack.    They were not sure the attack would go.    The fleet was   
sailing in case the Washington talks broke down. 
 
Japanese peace envoys were trying to work out a modus vivendi, a "way of living," a sort of   
cease-fire in the Pacific before the guns could go off.    The Japanese modus vivendi called for   
the United States to resume sending oil and scrap iron, and to recognize japan's right to rule   
East Asia and colonize China.    If the Americans granted this, the fleet on signal would Turn   
back. 
 731 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the United States called for the Japanese But the modus vivendi to abandon the Clinese war   
and get off the southeast Asian mainland, in return for normal economic relations.      The   
Japanese leaders had already decided that if this was the last word, they would fight.    In that   
case, on signal, the timing of an enormous simultaneous assault, planned to burst Out of japan   
like red rays all over the South Pacific, would be locked on to one irrevocably appointed hour:   
the time for a surprise air strike against Hawaii.    The three strong points held by the white race   
in the South Pacific were Pearl Harbor, Manila, and Singapore- The plan was to knock out   
United States air and sea power at Pearl Harbor from the air; to capture Singapore by seaborne   
assault; to land troops in the Philippines and take Manila, and then to sweep up the chips in the   
East Indies; and thereafter to use these new resources for a strong drive to finish China, while   
beating off Anglo-American counterattacks. The ultimate gamble was that Germany would   
either win the big fratricidal white man's war that was giving japan her chance, or would so use   
up American and British strength that japan would in the end keep what she had seized, no   
matter what happened to Germany. 
 
The Japanese leaders, including the emperor, doubted that this risky plan would come off, but   
they thought they had no choice. 
 
japan's predicament was much like Germany's before the attack on the Soviet Union. 
 
Both countries, in the hands of their militarists, had started wars they couldn't finish.    As time   
ran out and supplies dwindled, both turned to strike elsewhere, hoping to mend their fortunes. 
 
Three reasons were forcing the Japanese to a showdown now.    Their oil was running out.    The   
weather would soon Turn bad for military operations. And the white men, alarmed at last,   
were strengthening their three bastions every week with more and more planes, warships, anti- 
aircraft guns, tanks, and fortifications.    japan's temporary advantage in the South Pacific and   
East Asia was melting away, Unless President Roosevelt ,ddenly relented in Washington, she   
had to go, or give up her drive for empire. 
 
And so, on the day before the Army-Navy game, the armada had sortied into the black stormy   
waters off the Kuriles, and set out for Hawaii. 
 
And as the Japanese task force steamed east, a much smaller American task force sortied from   
Pearl Harbor, headed out. 
 
Admiral William Halsey was taking twelve marine fighter planes to Wake Island in the Enter s   
- japan had long s e ince illegally fortified every island and atoll it held on trust in the Pacific.   
Time after time, President Roosevelt had failed to get money out of Congress for counter-long   
American isIan Now, at the end of November 1941, the funds had come through. 
 
The work was being wildly rushed.    At Wake it was half finished, but the atoll sO had no air   
defense. 
 
The second day out, on a sunny crystalline morning, Warren Henry returned from the dawn   
search and came slanting aroundthteo land on the EnterPise- The deck rose up at Warren, the   
hook caught number two cable, his stomach thrust hard against the safety belt, and he was   
 732 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
down and stopped among deck force sailors in brilliant red, green, and yellow jumpers, doing   
their frantic gesticulating dance around landed planes. 
 
Warm sea air eddied in from his rear gunner's open canopy. 
 
Disconnecting belts and cables, gathering up his charts and log sheets, Warren awkwardly   
cumd out into the brisk wind over the deck, as another scout plane roared in and jerked to a   
stop. 
 
The landing officer shouted at him, holding his paddles on either side of his mouth, "Hi.    All   
Pilots to Scouting Six ready room at ogoo." 
 
"What's up?, "The old man wants a word with you all." 
 
"The captain?" 
 
"Halsey." 
 
"Christ." 
 
In the ready room the deep comfortable chairs were already full, and pilots in khakis, or flying   
suits and yellow lifejackets, lined the bulkheads. 
 
Halsey entered with the ship's captain and the squadron commanders, and stood in front of the   
scored plexiglass panels up forward, where orange grease marks showed search patterns and   
assignments. Warren was only a few feet from him. Seen this close, Halsey's face looked   
patchy and aged, and now and then he grimaced, showing his teeth in a nervous tic. 
 
The squadron commander waved a green mimeographed sheet. 
 
"Okay, now all you fellows received and discussed,this yesterday, but the admiral has asked   
me to read it again, out loud. 
 
(4 
 
BATTLE ORDER NUMBER 1. 
 
1. The Enterprise is now operating under 'War conditions. 
 
2. At any time, day or night, we must be ready for instant action. 
 
3. Hostile submarines may be encountered. 
 
... 'Steady nerves and stout hearts are needed now."    Commanding Officer, U.S.S. Enterprise.  
 
Approved: W. F. Halsey Vice Admiral, U.S. Navy Commander Aircraft, Battle Force."    The   
captain stepped back among the squadron commanders behind the admiral.    Halsey squinted   
around the room, contracting his flaring gray eyebrows.    'Thank you, skipper.    I'm told there   
were questions yesterday.    I'm here to accommodate you, gentlemen." 
 733 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Not a word or a raised hand. 
 
Admiral Halsey involuntarily grimaced, glancing over his shoulder at the ship's captain and the   
squadron commanders.    He addressed the pilots again.    'Cat got your tongue?"    This raised an   
uneasy titter. 
 
'I'm reliably informed that someone said this paper gave every one of you carte blanche to put   
the United States of America into the world war.    Now would the brave soul who said that care   
to stand?"    Warren Henry took a step forward from the bulkhead.    Faces turned to him.  
 
"what's your name?" 
 
'Lieutenant Warren Henry, sir."    'Henry?"    Halsey looked a shade less grim.    "Are you related   
to Captain Victor Henry?" 
 
"He's my father, sir." 
 
"Well, he's a fine officer.    Now then.    You think this order permits you to plunge the country   
into war, do you?"    "Sir, I added yesterday that I was all for it." 
 
'You're all for it, hey? Why? What are you, one of these bloodthirsty killer types?" The   
admiral raised his outthrust jaw. 
 
"Admiral, I think we're in the war now, but fighting with both hands tied behind us." 
 
Halseys face twitched and he motioned Warren to step back. 
 
Clasping his hands behind his back, the admiral said in harsh tones: "Gentlemen, this force   
stripped for action weeks ago.    There's nothing loose, dispensable, or inflammable left aboard   
the Enterprise that I know about, except the wardroom piano.    I made that exception myself. 
 
Now, our mission is secret.    There will be no vessels of the United States or of friendly powers   
in our path.    They have been warned away. 
 
Ships we encounter will belong to the enemy. Unless we shoot first, we may never have a   
chance to shoot.    Therefore, this force will shoot first and argue afterwards.    The responsibility   
is mine-Questions?"    He slowly looked around at the young sober faces. 
 
"Good day, then, and good hunting." 
 
Later, Warren's wing mate, lying naked on the top bunk, said, "Well, give him one thing.    He's   
a fighting son of a bitch." 
 
"Or a trigger-happy old    nut," said Warren,    rinsing lather    from    his    razor. "Depending    on   
events."    On the day that the Japanese steaming east and Halsey's ships steaming west made   
their closest approach, Warren Henry flew the northern search pattern, more than two hundred   
miles straight toward the Japanese fleet.    The Japanese routinely sent a scout plane due south   
about the same distance.    But in the broad Pacific Ocean the game was still blindman's buff.   
Hundreds of unsearched miles of water stretched between the two scouting planes at their far   
 734 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
reach, and the two forces passed in peace. 
 
The light was failing over Guam.    From the window of the descending Clipper, Victor Henry   
glimpsed in the sunset glow the island's mountain ridges and broken sea cliffs to the south,   
levelling northward to a jungle checkered with terraced fields. The shadowy light flattened   
perspectives; Guam was Bke a painted island on a Japanese screen. Sharp on the red horizon   
jutted the black lump of Rota, an island held by the Japanese. 
 
The passengers were standing in a sweaty weary cluster outside the immigration shed in the   
twilight, when a gray car drove up, fluttering on its front fenders an American flag and a starry   
blue jack. 
 
"Captain Henry?"      The white-clad marine officer saluted and handed him an envelope,   
confidently picking out the Navy four-striper in a seerof sucker suit from among the ferry   
pilots and civilians. 
 
"Compliments the governor, sir." The note was scrawled on cream-colored stationery cres   
THE GOVERNOR OF GUAM rt Tollever, Jr Captain, U.S.N. 
 
Clifton Norbe Hi, Pug- t hearts player, and as long asies not Sunday, Greetings to the world's   
wors how's for coming around for drinks, dinner, and a game Kip Pug smiled at the tired joke   
about his minor Sabbath abstinence. 
 
"NG, Lieutenant.    Sorry.    By the time I check through here, go to the hotel, and get cleaned up   
and whatnot, len be way past the governor's dinner hour." 
 
"No, sir.    Let me expedite this.    The governor said I'm to bring you out to the palace, bags and   
all.    He'll give you a room to freshen up in." The gold loops on the starchy white shoulder of   
the governor's aide conjured away difficulties.    Victor Henry was entering the governor's car   
within five minutes, leaving the other Clipper passengers behind, enviously staring. 
 
Driving across the island in gathering darkness on a narrow winding tarred road, the lieutenant   
skillfully avoided some potholes but struck others with bone-jarring jolts. 
 
"You folks short of road repair equipment?"    Pug asked. 
 
'Sir, the governor's been cadging money from public works for gun emplacements and   
pillboxes.    He says maybe he'll hang for it, but his first duty is not to patch roads but to defend   
this island.    Insofar as it can be defended." 
 
The headlights shone on green jungle and a few tilled fields most of the way.    "Well, here's the   
metropolis at last, sir." 
 
The car passed down a paved block of shuttered shops, and dimly lit bars with names like   
Sloppy Joe's and The Bucket of Blood. Here lonesome-looking sailors meandered on the   
sidewalk, some with giggling brown girls in flimsy dresses. The car emerged on a broad,   
handsomely gardened square, formed by four stone structures in antique Spanish style: a   
cathedral, a long barracks, an immense jail, and an ornate building that the lieutenant called the   
 735 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Governor's Palace. 
 
Kip Tollever waved as Victor Henry mounted a broad staircase to the palace terrace.    Wearing   
stiffly starched whites, he sat in a large carved Spanish armchair, in yellow fight cast by a   
wrought-iron chandelier.    Natives in shirt-sleeves and trousers stood before him. 
 
"Sit you down, Pug!"    He motioned at a chair beside him. "Welcome 
 
ted in gold: 
 
aboard.    This won't take long.    Go ahead, Salas.    What about the schoolchildren?    Have they   
been drilling every day?" 
 
It was a conference on defense preparations.    Tollever addressed the Guamanians in English or   
Spanish, with    condescending    kindness. One or two spoke a    queer dialect    that    the others   
translated.    The men were taller than Filipinos, and very good-looking. 
 
"Well, Pug Henry!"    The governor lightly slapped his guest's knee as the natives bowed and   
went off down the stairs.    "Quite a surprise, seeing your name on the Clipper passenger list!   
that's always the big news item on this island, you know.    Kate used to fall on the list like a   
love letter twice a week, when she was still here.    Well!    What's your pleasure?    A drink, then a   
shower?    Come on, let's have just one. 
 
Where have you been?    What brings you to our island paradise?" 
 
They drank excellent rum punches there on the terrace, in tall curiously carved green glasses,   
and Pug talked about his travels. 
 
Tollever seemed far more interested in the Russian war than in japan. 
 
His response to Pug's remark that he had spent four days in Tokyo was, "Oh, really? 
 
Say, incidentally, you'll stay overnight, won't you?    I'll assign a boy to look after you.    You'll   
be very comfortable." 
 
"Well, Kip, thanks.    I'd better bed down in the Pan Am Hotel. 
 
Takeoff depends on weather, and I don't want to get left by that Clipper." 
 
"No problem."    Kip's voice rang with magisterial authority.    "They won't leave without you.   
I'll see to that." 
 
Pug found the palace depressing, for all the handsomely tiled spaces and rich dark furniture.   
Under the slow-turning fan the bed in his room was covered in gold-and-silver brocade.    New   
nickel    plumbing    in the vast bathroom gushed wonderful hot water.    But the silencer    The   
Guamanian stewards in their snowy mess jackets stole around like spirits.    He and the governor   
seemed to be the only white men here, for the marine lieutenant had driven off to the bay.   
From the other end of the palace, Pug could hear the clink of silver and china as he dressed. 
 736 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
In a sombrely magnificent SPanish dining room, at one end of a long gleaming black table, the   
two Americans    ate a dinner made up wholly of frozen or canned stores from home. Kip   
Tollever maintained his gubernatorial dignity through the first course or two, asking polite   
questions about his old friends in Berlin and about the situation in Manila.    But as he drank   
glass after glass of wine, the facade cracked, then fell apart.    Soon he was expressing friendly   
envy of Pug and admitting that his assignment was dismal.    The younger officers could go to   
the Bucket of Blood, or drink and play cards at the club. 
 
The governor had to sit it out alone in the palace.    He slept badly. He missed his wife.    But of   
course the women had had to go.    If the japs moved, Guam could not be held for a week.    At   
Saipan and Tinian, a half hour away by air, jap bombers lined the new air strips and big troop   
transports swung to their anchors.    Guam had no military airfield. 
 
As dessert was being served, four young officers in white appeared, led by the marine aide- 
decamp. 
 
"Well, well, here's company," said the governor.    "These tender lads come in every night after   
dinner, Pug, and I educate them in the subtler mysteries of hearts.    What do you say?    Care for   
a game, or would you rather just shoot the breeze?"    Pug saw the youngsters' faces light up at   
the mention of an alternative. Shading his voice toward lack of enthusiasm, he said, "Why,   
let's play, I guess."    The governor of Guam looked irresolutely from his visitor to the young   
officers.    He held himself very straight, talking to his juniors; the thick gray hair, lean long- 
jawed face, and bright blue eyes should have made him lodable.    Yet he seemed only tired and   
sad, hesitating over this small choice between habit and courtesy.    The hearts game evidently   
was the high moment in the governor's isolated days. 
 
'Oh, what the hell," Tollever said.    "I don't get to see a classmate very often, especially such a   
distinguished one. You young studs run along and amuse yourselves. See you tomorrow,   
same time." 
 
"Aye aye, sir," said the marine officer, trying to sound disappointed. 
 
The four young officers vanished in a rapid tattoo of heels on tile. 
 
Captain Tollever and Captain Henry sat long over brandy. What did Pug really think, Kip   
asked; would the japs go, or was this buildup at Saipan just a bluff for the Washington t?    He   
had once served as attache in Tokyo, but the japs were an enigma to him.    The wrong people   
had gotten in the saddle, that was the trouble.    The army had gained the power to confirm or   
veto the minister of war.    That meant the army brass could overthrow any cabinet it didn't like.   
Ever since then Japan had been i going hell-bent for conquest; but would they really attack the   
United States?    Some Japanese he had known had been the finest imaginable people, friendly   
to the United States and very worried about their militarists; on the other hand, Clipper   
travellers had been telling him blood-freezing stories of Japanese cruelties in China, especially   
toward white people who fell into their hands. "And have you ever read about what the jap   
army did, Pug, when they captured Nanking in ' king 37?    We were so steamed up about their   
sin the Pamay, we hardly paid attention.    Why, they ran amuck.    They raped twenty thousand   
 737 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chinese women, so help me, and butchered most of 'em afterward.    I mean butchered-just that.   
Women's thighs, heads, and tits, for God's sake, were strewn in the streets!    This is the truth,   
Pug.    And they 
 
IL 
 
tied Chinamen together by the hundreds and mowed 'em down with machine guns. They   
hunted kids in the street and shot 'em like rabbits.      They murdered maybe two hundred   
thousand civilians in a few days. All this is in official reports, Pug. It happened. I've had   
occasion to check into the facts, being somewhat personally interested, as you might say. And   
here I sit," he went on, sloshing his fourth or fifth brandy into a shimmering balloon glass and   
rolling white eyeballs at his old classmate, "here I sit, with no aircraft, no warships, no ground   
troops, just a few sailors and a few marines.    The Navy should order me to evacuate, but oh no,   
the politicians wouldn't stand for that!    The same politicians who refused to vote the money to   
fort4 the island.    No, here we'll sit till they come.    The fleet will never get here in time to save   
us. 
 
'Tug, remember what the Lucky Bag said about me when we graduated? 
 
'Any one of Kip Tollever's classmates would like to be in his shoes today, and even more,   
thirty years from today."    Funny, isn't it? 
 
Isn't that the biggest laugh of all time?    Come on, let's have one more and listen to the midnight   
news from Tokyo." 
 
In the wood-panelled library, the governor manipulated the dials of a Navy receiver: a big   
black machine seven feet high that winked red, green, and yellow lights and emitted whistles   
and moans.      A    Japanese woman's    voice    came    through clearly.    After    recounting    gigantic   
German victories around Moscow and predicting the early surrender of the Soviet Union, the   
voice went on in tones of glee to report a great uproar in the United States over the unmasking   
of Franklin Roosevelt's secret war plans. 
 
The Chicago Tribune had obtained a document known as the Victory Program-Victor Henry   
sat up as the dulcet voice drawled "Victory Plot-calling for an army of eight million men, a   
defensive war against japan, and an all-out air attack on Germany from bases in England, to be   
followed by invasion of Europe in 1943- The newspaper, she announced, had patriotically   
printed the whole plan!    Roosevelt's devilish schemes to,drag America into war on the side of   
the colonialist plutocracies were now exposed; so the woman said.    The American people were   
rising in anger.    Congressmen were calling for impeachment of the White House deceiver.    The   
White House was maintaining shameful silence, but the fairness and peaceful intent of the   
latest Japanese proposals-especially in the light of this secret warmongering Roosevelt plot- 
were being hailed throughout the United States.    On and on the woman went, reading whole   
passages of the document from the Tribune.    Pug recognized them. Some sentences were his   
own. 
 
"What do you make of that, Pug?    It's a lot of poppycock, isn't it?" 
 738 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tollever yawned. "Some reporter got hold of a contingency staff study maybe, and blew it   
way up." 
 
"Sure.    What else?" 
 
Pug felt sick to the heart.    If this could happen, the United States was infected bone-deep with   
decay. The japs could grab the East Indies, even the Philippines; America would not fight.   
This betrayal of the highest national secret in a newspaper was a collapse of honor, it seemed   
to him, unlike anything in history.    The only relieving aspect was that so bald and amazing was   
the treason, the Germans and the Japanese could probably not bring themselves to believe it,   
though of course they would make heavy propaganda of it. 
 
"Time for me to go to bed."    Victor Henry shook his head and stood up. 
 
"Hell, no, Pug.    Sit down.    How about an omelette, or something? 
 
My chef makes fine omelettes.    In a half hour we'll get the 8 A.M. 
 
news from San Francisco.    This beast picks it up like it was next door. 
 
Let's see if there's anything to all this Chicago Tribune business. 
 
It's always fun, checking Tokyo against San Francisco." 
 
Pug insisted on going back to the Pan American Hotel.    The sense of doom enveloping him   
was thick enough without the added black misery emanating like a smell from the trapped   
governor of Guam, the faded hotshot of his Naval Academy class, maundering over his brandy.  
 
Tollever ordered up the omelettes all the same, and kept Victor Henry for another hour, talking   
about the old days in Manila when they had been next-door neighbors.    His dread of loneliness   
was stark and terrible. 
 
Sadly Tollever went at last to a telephone and summoned the marine officer, who arrived  in the   
car in a few minutes.    Four Guamanian stewards busied themselves with Pug's valise and two   
handbags.    44 
 
From the top of the palace stairway, Kip raised his voice.    Say, how about giving Kate a ring   
from Pearl?    She's back in our house in La Jolla. 
 
Tell her you saw me and that everything's fine.    She's very interested in the Guam schools, you   
know.    Tell her the enrollment's way up for next term. 
 
And, you know, tell her I love her and all that stuff." 
 
"I sure will, Kip." 
 
"And say, you give my love to Rhoda, too.    Will you?    Of all the Navy wives I knew, she was   
the prettiest and the best-excepting my Kate, naturally." 
 
"I'll tell her you said that, Kip," Pug replied, chilled by Tollever's use of the past tense about   
 739 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
himself. 
 
"Good hunting with the California, Pug." Tollever stood watching as the car left, a white   
straight mark in the warm night. 
 
The Clipper took off from Guam at dawn. 
 
On the day that Victor Henry left Manila, the Japanese embassy in Rome gave an unexpected   
party for Japanese and American newspaper correspondents.    The purpose seemed to be a show   
of cordiality to counteract all the war talk. A New York Times man asked Natalie to come   
along.    She had never before left her baby in the evening; none of her clothes fitted her; and   
she did not like the man much.    But she accepted, and hastily got a seamstress to let out her   
largest dress. 
 
On leaving the hotel she gave to a motherly chambermaid an enormous list of written   
instructions for bathing and feeding him, which made the woman smile. 
 
The rumors of war in the Pacific were eating away Natalie's nerves, and she hoped to learn   
something concrete at the party. 
 
She came back with a strange tale.    Among the American guests had been Herb Rose, a film   
distributor who maintained his office in Rome. 
 
Herb had somewhat enlivened the cold, stiff, pointless party by speaking Japanese; it'turned   
out that he had managed a similar office in Tokyo. 
 
Herb was a tall gOOd-looking California Jew, who used the best Roman tailors, conversed   
easily in Italian, and seemed a most urbane man until he started talking English. Then he   
sounded all show business: wisecracking, sharp, and a bit crude. 
 
This Herb Rose, who was booked to leave for Lisbon on the same Plane as Natalie and her   
uncle, had approached her at the party and walked her off to a corner.    In a few quiet nervous   
sentences, he had told her to go to Saint Peter's with her -uncle the following morning at nine   
o'clock, and stand near Michelangelos Pieta statue.    They would be offered a chance to get out   
of Italy fast, he said, via Palestine. 
 
War between American and Japan was coming in days or hours, Herb believed; he was   
departing that way himself and forgoing the Lisbon plane ticket. 
 
He would tell her no more.    He begged her to drop the subject and not to discuss it inside the   
walls of the hotel.    when she returned from the party she recounted all this to her uncle, while   
walking on the Via Veneto in a cold drizzle.    Aaron's reaction was skeptical, but he agreed that   
they had better go to Saint Peter's. 
 
He was in a testy mood next morning.    He liked to rise at dawn and work till eleven.    Sleep put   
an edge on his mind, he claimed, that lasted only a few hours, and to spend a morning on such   
a farfetched errand was a great waste.    Also, the chill damp in the unheated hotel had given   
him a fresh cold.    Hands jammed in his overcoat pockets, blue muffler wound around his neck,   
 740 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
head drooping in a rain-stiffened old gray felt hat, he walked draggily beside his niece down   
the Via Veneto to the taxi stand, like a child being marched to school.    "Palestine!" 
 
he grumbled. 
 
"Why, that's a more dangerous place than Italy."    "Not according to Herb.    He says the thing is   
to get out of here at once, by hook or by crook.    Herb thinks the whole world will be at war   
practically overnight, and then we'll never get out." 
 
'But Herberes leaving illegally, isn't he?    His cidt visa is for Lisbon, not Palestine.    Now that's   
risky.    When you're in a touch-and-go situation like this, the first principle is not to give the   
authorities the slightest excuse'-Jastrow waved a stiff admonitory finger-'to act against you.   
Obey orders, keep your papers straight, your head down, your spirits up, and your money in   
cash.    That is our old race wisdom. And above all, stay within the law."    He sneezed several   
times, and wiped his nose and eyes.    'I have always abominated the weather of Rome. I think   
this is a wild goose chase.    Palestine! 
 
You'd be getting even further from Byron, and I from civilization. 
 
It's a hellhole, Natalie, a desert full of flies, Arabs, and disease. 
 
Angry Arabs, who periodically riot and murder.    I planned a trip there when I was writing the   
Paul book.    But I cancelled out once I'd made a few inquiries.    I went to Greece instead." 
 
There was a long queue at the taxi stand, and few taxis; they did not reach Saint Peter's until   
after nine. As they hurried out of the sunshine into the cathedral, the temperature dropped   
several degrees. 
 
Jastrow sneezed, wound the muffler tighter around his neck, and turned up his collar.    Saint   
Peter's was quiet, almost empty, and very gloomy. 
 
Here and there black-shawled women prayed by pale flickering candles, groups of   
schoolchildren followed vergers, and tourist parties listened to guides, but these were all lost in   
the grand expanse. 
 
"My least favorite among Italian cathedrals," said Jastrow.    "The Empire State Building of the   
Renaissance, intended to overpower and stupefy. Well, but there's the P, and that is lovely." 
 
They walked to the statue. A German female guide stood beside it, earnestly lecturing to a   
dozen or so camera-bearing Teutons, most of whom were reading guidebooks as she talked   
instead of looking at the Pieta, as though to make sure the woman was giving them full value. 
 
"Ah, but what a lovely work this is after all, Natalie," Jastrow said, Ll as the Germans moved   
on, "this poor dead adolescent Christ, draped on the knees of a Madonna hardly older than   
himself.    Both of them are so soft, so fluid, so young in flesh!    How did he do it With stone?   
Of course it's not the Moses, is it?    Nothing touches that.    We must go and look at the Moses   
again before we leave Rome.    Don't let me forget." 
 741 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'Would you call that a Jew's Jesus, Dr. Jastrow?" said a voice in German. The man who   
spoke was of medium height, rather stout, about thirty, wearing an old tweed jacket over a red   
sweater, with a Leica dangling from his neck.    He had been in the group with the guide and he   
was lingeeing behind.    He took a book from under his arm, an old British edition of A Jew's   
Jesus in a tattered dust jacket.    With a grin he showed Jastrow the author's photograph on the   
back. 
 
"Please," said Jastrow, peering curiously at the man.    "That picture gives me the horrors.    I've   
since disintegrated beyond recognition." 
 
"Obviously not, since I recognized you from it.    I'm Avram Rabinovitz. Mrs.    Henry, how do   
you do?" He spoke clear English now, in an unfamiliar, somewhat harsh accent. Natalie   
nervously nodded at him.    He went on, "I'm glad you've come.    I asked Mr.    Rose what other   
American Jews were left in Rome.    It was a great surprise to learn that Dr. Aaron Jastrow was   
here." 
 
"Where did you pick up that copy?"    Jastrow's tone was arch.    Any hint of admiration warmed   
him. 
 
"Here in a secondhand store for foreign books.    I'd read the work long ago.    It's outstanding.   
Come, let's walk around the cathedral, shall we? 
 
I've never seen it. I'm sailing from Naples on the flood tide tomorrow    at four. Are you   
coming?" 
 
"You're sailing?    Are you a ship's captain?"    Natalie asked. 
 
The man momentarily smiled, but looked serious again as he spoke, and rather formidable.    His   
pudgy face was Slavic rather than Semitic, with clever narrow eyes and thick curly fair hair   
growing low on his forehead. "Not exactly. I have chartered the vessel. This won't be a   
Cunard voyage.    The ship is an old one, and it's small, and it's been transporting hides, fats,   
horses, and such things along the Mediterranean coast.    So the smell is interesting. But it'll   
take us there." 
 
Natalie said, "How long a voyage will it be?" 
 
"Well,    that    depends. The    quota    for the year    was    used up long ago,    so the    way may be   
roundabout." 
 
"What quota?"    Jastrow said. 
 
The question seemed to surprise Rabinovitz.      "Why, the British allow only a very small   
number of Jews into Palestine every year, Professor, so as not to get the Arabs too angry.   
Didn't you know that? 
 
So it creates a problem, depending on the current situation about that. De roblem- I want to be   
frank v. or we may go to Turkey, we may sail straight to Palesine anyway Syria, the Lebanon,   
and through the mown and then proceed overlandtains into the Galilee." An illegal entry,   
 742 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
then"' Jastrow sounded severe. 
 
alking about a so.    In "You're t a jew to go home yes, We don't think "If it can be illegal for s.   
They're refugees from the there , s no choice for my passenger them, including any case, barred   
the doors to all other countries have Germans, and tates- they can , t just lie down and die." 
 
your United States d , and what you're proposing that isn't our situation," 
 
" Jastrow says unsafe."    " 're not safe here."    "Professor, you you with?    And what would you   
charge?" 
 
i'What organization are p.      We move Jews out of Europe. s a long stOrY What's "MY   
organization?    That - Th one can talk about that.    You can ask Mr.    Rose of As for paying-well,   
oney.    I came to Rome in fact f 
 
ways use m 
 
seconclaryp though we can al 
 
Rose." 
 
s how I met MT money.    Thee estine-then what?" 
 
why not just g'And once we get to Pal eeable look.    'Vel' 9) Rabinovitz gave him a warm, agr t   
jewish historian among us. d to have a great stay? We would be honored o- -OICI infant.)   
Natalie put in, "I have a two month eyes, so Mr.    Rose said."    the 'could a small baby make that   
trip?y altar, Rabinovitz stared in admiration at Halting at the main ful. It's overwhelm ,Inis   
cathedral is so rich and beautiful twisted pillars, where Jew executed 
 
e ort, just to honor one p 
 
ma if 00 isn't it?    Such a gigantic hun n" dominates all Rome, 1 
 
guess we by the Romans.    And now this builcli.    in a forceful should feel flattered."    He looked   
straight    in Natalie's    eyes    Pobaven't you    heard the stories    coming    from way.    irwell, Mrs.   
Henry, you should take some risk to get your baby out land and Russia?    Maybe of Europe." 
 
"One hears all kinds of stories in war Aaron JastrOW Said benignly, aid. time." vi eeks,"   
Natalie Rabinovitz, we're leaning in less than two w Mr.    R s, all our documents.    We were at   
tremendous pains "We have all our ticket P) to get them. Were flying home. d his head   
swayed, Rabinovitz put a hand to his face an 
 
ed his arm. 
 
"Are you all right?tp Natalie touch d smiled painfully.    "I have a headHe uncovered a knotted   
brow, an erbert Rose had an airplane ticket ache, but that is all right.    Look, Mr.    H too, and   
he's coming to Naples with me.    If you join us, you'll be welcome. 
 
What more can I say?" 
 743 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Even if we did want to consider this drastic move, we couldn't get our e idt visas changed,"   
Jastrow said. 
 
"Nobody will have an exit visa.    You will just come aboard to pay a visit.    The ship will leave,   
and you will forget to go ashore." 
 
"If one thing went wrong, we'd never get out of Italy," Jastrow per it sisted, until the war   
ended." 
 
Rabinovitz glanced at his watch.    'Let's be honest.    I'm not sure you will get out anyway, Dr.   
Jastrow. Mr. Rose told me about the difficulties you've been having. I don't think they're   
accidental. 
 
I'm afraid you're what some people call a 'blue chip"-he used the American slang haltingly'and   
that's your real problem. The Italians can trade you someday for a lot of 'white chips," so   
something can always go wrong at the last minute when it's time to leave.    Well, meeting you   
was a great honor.    If you come along we'll talk some more. 
 
I have many questions about your book.    Your Jesus had very little to do with this, did be?"    He   
swung both his hands around at the cathedral. 
 
'He's a Jew's Jesus," said Jastrow.    "That was my point." 
 
'Then tell me one thing," said Rabinovitz.    "These Europeans worship a poor murdered Jew,   
the young Talmud scholar you wrote about so well-to them he's the Lord God-and yet they go   
right on murdering Jews. How does,a historian explain that?" 
 
In a comfortable, ironic, classroom tone, most incongruous in the circumstances, Jastrow   
replied, "Well, you must remember theyre still mostly Norse and Latin pagans at hart.    They've   
always chafed under their Jewish Lord's Talmudic morals, and possibly they take out their   
irriration on his coreligionists." 
 
"Now that explanation hadn't occurred to me," Rabinovitz said. 
 
"It's a theory you should write up.    Well, let us leave it this way. 
 
You want to think it over, I'm sure.    Mr.    Rose will telephone you tonight at six o'clock and ask   
you whether you want the tickets for the opera. Tell him yes or no, and that will be that."   
'Good," Natalie said.    'We're deeply grateful to you."    'For what?    My job is moving Jews to   
Palestine.    Is your baby a girl or a boy?"Boy.    But he's only half-Jewish." 
 
With his crafty grin, and an abrupt handwave of farewell, Rabinovitz said, 'Never mind, we'll   
take him.    We need boys," and he walked rapidly away.    As his plump figure merged into a   
tourist group leaving Saint Peter's, Natalie and her uncle looked at each other in puzzlement. 
 
"It's freezing in here," said Dr.    Jastrow, "and very depressing. 
 
Let's go outside."    They strolled in the sunshine of the great piazza for a while, talking the thing   
over.    Aaron tended to dismisss the idea out of hand, but Natalie wanted to give it thought and   
 744 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
perhaps discuss it with Rose.    The fact that he was going troubled her. 
 
Jastrow pointed out that Rose was not as secure as they were.    If war should break out between   
the United States and Italy-and that was the threat in the Japanese crisis-they had the   
ambassador's promise of seats on the diplomatic train, with the newspaper correspondents and   
the embassy staff.    Rose had no such assurance.    Earlier in the year, the embassy had given him   
seaming after seaming to leave. 
 
He had chosen to stay at his own risk, and now he had to face the consequences.    If he wanted   
to chance an illegal exit, that did not mean they needed to. 
 
At the hotel, Natalie found the baby awake and fretful.    He seemed a frail small creature indeed   
to expose to a sea voyage uncertain even in its destination, let alone its legalities; a voyage in a   
crowded old tub-no doubt with marginal food, water, sanitation, and medical service-that might   
lead to a rough trip through mountains; the goal, a primitive and unstable land.    One look at her   
baby, in fact, settled Natalie's mind. 
 
Rose called promptly at six.    "Well, do you want the opera tickets?" 
 
His voice on the telephone was friendly and, it seemed, anxious. 
 
Natalie said, 'I think we'll skip it, Herb.    But thank your friend who offered them."    "You're   
making a mistake, Natalie," Rose said. "I think this is the last performance. You're sure?"   
"Positive." 
 
"Good luck, kid.    I'm certainly going." 
 
Janice Henry left her house and drove toward Pearl City in a cool morning echoing with distant   
church bells. Vic had wakened her at seven o'clock, coughing fearfully; he had a fever of   
almost 105-Yawning on the telephone, the doctor had prescribed an alcohol rub to bring the   
baby's temperature down, but there was no rubbing alcohol in the house. 
 
So she had given the fiery, sweat-soaked little boy his cough medicine, and set out for town,   
leaving him with the Chinese maid. 
 
From the crest of the hill, under a white sun just climbing up from the ocean rim, the harbor   
wore a Sabbath look. The fleet was in, and ranged at its moorings in the morning mist: a   
scattering of cruisers, oilers, and tenders, clusters of gray destroyers and minesweepers, nests   
of black submarines. Off Ford Island the battleships stood in two majestic lines with white   
sun-awnings already rigged; and on the airfield nearby dozens of planes touched wings in still   
rows. Scarcely anybody was moving on the ships, the docks, or the airfield. Nor was any   
large vessel under way to ruffle the glassy harbor.    Only a few church party boats, with tiny   
sailors in whites, cut little foamy Vs on the green still water. 
 
Janice got out of the car to look for her husband's ship.    To her disappointment, the Enterprise   
was not only absent from the harbor, it was nowhere in sight on the sea. She had been   
counting on a Sunday morning return.    She took binoculars from the glove compartment and   
 745 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
scanned the horizon.    Nothing: just one old four-piper poking around, hull down. 
 
Tuesday would be two weeks that Warren had been gone; and now here she was with a sick   
baby on her hands, and a hangover.    What a life! 
 
What a bore! 
 
She had gone to the Officers' Club dance the night before out of loneliness and boredom,   
accepting the invitation of a lieutenant she had dated long ago, a Pensacola washout who now   
served on Cincpac's staff. 
 
Vic had had a cough for days, but his temperature had remained normal. 
 
Of course she would never have stayed out until after three, cavorting and boozing, had she   
known he would Turn so sick.    Still she felt guilty, irritated, and bored to the bone with this   
idiotic existence. 
 
Since her return from Washington, she had been growing more and more bored, realizing that   
she    had married    not    a    dashing rake    after all,    but    a    professional Navy fanatic,    who 
made   
Marvelous love to her now and then and otherwise almost ignored her. Uvemaking at best   
took up very little time.    What an end for Janice Lacouture-at twenty-three, a Navy babtsitterl   
She had taken a half-day coding job at Cincpac to avoid being evacuated with the service   
wives, but that was dull drudgery too. 
 
Janice had spells of deep rebellion, but so far she had said nothing to Warren.    She was afraid   
of him.    But sooner or later, Janice meant to have it out, even if divorce ensued. 
 
A    small    general    store in    a green wooden shack at    a crossroads    stood open, with two fat   
Japanese children playing on the rickety porch. 
 
That was lucky; it stocked a strange jumble of things, and she might not have to drive clear into   
town. As she went in, she heard gunfire pop over the harbor, as it had been popping for   
months off and on in target practice. 
 
The    storekeeper, a    black-haired little    Japanese    in    a    flowered    sport    shirt,    stood behind   
his   
counter drinking tea.    On shelves within reach of his arms, goods were neatly stacked: canned   
food, drugs, pans, brooms, candy, toys, soda pop, and magazines.      He bobbed his head,   
smiling, under hanging strips of dried fish.    "tubbing acoho?    Ess, ma'am."    He went through   
the green curtain behind him.    The gunfire sounded heavier and louder, and planes thrummed   
overhead.    A funny time for a drill, she thought, Sunday morning before colors; but maybe that   
was the idea. 
 
Going to the doorway, Janice spotted the planes flying quite high, lots of them, in close order   
toward the harbor, amid a very heavy peppering of black puffs.    She went to her car for the   
binoculars.    At first she saw only blue sky and clouds of black smoke, then three planes flew   
into the field of vision in a shining silvery triangle. On their wings were solid orange-red   
circles.    Stupefied, she followed their flight with the glasses. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Ess, ma'am?    Many pranes!    Big, big drir!"    The storekeeper stood beside her, offering her the   
package with a toothy smile that almost shut his eyes.    His children stood behind him on the   
porch, pointing at the sky and chattering in shrill Japanese. 
 
Janice    stared at him.    Nearly everybody in the Navy disliked the Hawaiian Japanese and   
assumed they were spies.    She had caught the feeling.    Now here was this jap grinning at her,   
and overhead jap planes were actually flying!    Flying over Hawaii!    what could it mean?  
 
The nerve of these japs!    She took the package and abruptly, rudely offered him the binoculars.   
The man bobbed his head and peered upward at the planes, now beginning to peel off and dive,   
one by one, glinting silver amid the thickening black puffs.    With a queer noise in his throat, he   
pulled himself erect and held out the binoculars to her, regarding her with a blank face, his   
slant eyes like black glass.    More than the unreal, startling sight of the orange-marked planes,   
the look on his face told Janice Henry what was happening in Pearl Harbor.    She snatched the   
binoculars, jumped into her car, slammed the door, and whirred the ignition.    He hammered on   
the door, holding out his hand, palm up, and shouting.    She had not paid him. 
 
but now with a pulse of pleasure Janice was an honest lady, you able childish excitement she   
shouted harshly-using the sailor epithet for the first time in her life-'Fuck you!"    and shot off up   
the road. 
 
That was how the war came to Janice Henry, and that was the story she told down the years   
after a few drinks in suitable company, usually to laughter and applause. 
 
Accelerator to the floor, she careered and screeched uphin and around curves to the top of the   
ridge, jammed on the brakes, and leaped out into roadside grass. She was all alone here.   
Below, silver planes were flitting and diving about the peaceful Navy base, where the morning   
mist still lay pearly pink around the ships.    Columns of water were shooting up, a couple of   
ships were on fire, and here and there guns were flashing pale yellow.    But it still looked much   
more like a drill than Bke war. 
 
Then she saw a very strange and shocking sight.    A battleship vanished ! One instant the vessel   
stood in the outer row and the next second nothing was there but a big red ball surrounded by   
black and yellow smoke.    A cracking explosion hit and hurt her ears; the pressure wave struck   
her face like an errant warm breeze; and the ball of smoke and red fire climbed high into the air   
on a pillar of lighter smoke, and exploded again, in a beautiful giant burst of orange and purple,   
with another delayed BOOM The vanished battleship dimly appeared again in the binoculars, a   
vast broken twisted wreck all on fire, sinking at a slant. Men were running around and jumping   
overboard, and some with their white suits on fire were moving in and out of the smoke,   
silently screaming. It looked like a movie, exciting and unreal, but now Janice Henry began to   
grow horrified.    Here was one battleship actually sinking before her eyes, and the whole thing   
had scarcely bee, going on ten minutes!    She saw more planes coming in overhead.    Bombs   
began to explode in the hills.    Remembering her baby, she ran to the car, backed it squealing   
onto the road, and raced home. 
 
The Chinese maid sat in an armchair, dressed for church, hat on her knee, glumly leafing   
 747 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
through the mist. "The baby's asleep," she said in clear English; she was island-born and   
convent-raised.    "The Gillettes never even came.    They forgot me. 
 
So I'll have to go to ten o'clock mass.    Please telephone Mrs. 
 
Fenney."    "Anna May, don't you know that the Japanese are attacking us?" 
 
"What?" 
 
"Yes!      Can't you hear the guns, the explosions?"      Janice gestured nervously toward the   
window.    'Turn on the radio.    You'll hear plenty! 
 
jap Planes are all over the harbor.    They've already hit a battleship!" Victor lay on his back, still   
doped by the cough syrup, breathing loud and fast.    Janice stripped the hot, flushed little body.  
 
From the ra o me ttl ro dica the sliding twangs of Hawaiian guitars and a woman's voice   
singing 'Lovely Hula Hands.- As Janice , sponged the infant an announcer gibbered cheerfully   
about Cashmere Bouquet Soap, and another Hawaiian melody began.    The maid came to the   
doorway. 
 
',you sure about the war, Mis' Henry?    There's nothin on the radio. I think maybe you just saw a   
drill." 
 
'Oh, for heaven's sake!    A drill!    How stupid do you think I am? 
 
I saw a battleship blow up, I tell you, I saw a hundred jap planes, maybe more!    They're all   
asleep or out of their minds at that radio station. 
 
Here-please give him the aspirin.    He feels a lot cooler. 
 
I'D try to call the Fenneys." 
 
But the line was dead.    She jiggled and jiggled the hook to no avail. 
 
"Sp dip-the tar that causes tobacco harshness.    Lucky strike is the only cigarette from which   
every trace of sheep dip has been removed," said a rich, happy male voice.    "Smoke Luckies,   
they're kind to your throat-' Janice spun the dial to another station and got organ music. "Good   
God! What's the mamr with them?" 
 
The maid leaned with arms crossed in the doorway, regarding Janice with quizzical slanted   
eyes as she twisted the dial, looking in vain for news. 
 
"Why, they're all insane!    Sailors are burning up and drowning out there!    What's that?    Who's   
there?    Is that the Gillettes?"    She heard tires rattling the driveway gravel.    A fist banged at the   
door and the ben chimed.    The maid stared at her mistress, unmoving.    Janice ran to the door   
and opened it.    Bloody-faced, Warren Henry stumbled inside, in heavy flying boots, a zipper   
suit, and a bloodied yellow life-jacket. 
 
"Hi, have you got twenty bucks?" 
 748 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"My God, Warren!" 
 
"Go ahead, pay off the cab, Jan."    His voice was hoarse and, tight "Anna May, get out some   
bandages, will you?" 
 
The taxi driver, a hatchet-faced old white man, said, "Lady, I'm entitled to fifty.    I heard the   
japs have already landed at Kahuku Point.    I got my own family to worry about-"- She gave   
him two bills. 
 
"Twenty is what my husband said." 
 
'I'm getting on the first boat out of here," said the driver, pocketing the bills, "if I have to shoot   
my way aboard.    Every white person in Hawaii will be butchered.    That's Roosevelt for you." 
 
In    the kitchen,    Warren sat    bare-chested.    The maid was    dabbing antiseptic on    his blood- 
dripping upper left arm.    'I'll do that," Janice said, taking the sponge and bottle.    "Make sure   
Victor's all right." 
 
Warren gritted his teeth as Janice worked on a raw wound two inches long.    "Jan, what's wrong   
with Vic?" 
 
'Oh, a fever.    A cough.    Darling, what in God's name happened to you?" y 'I got sho t down.   
Those bastards killed my radioman.    Light me a cigarette, will you?    Our squadron flew patrol   
ahead of the Enterprise and ran into them-hey, easy with the iodine, that's plentyHow about   
these 
 
goddamned Japs?    ) 
 
"Honey, you've got to go to the hospital.    This has to be stitched up." 
 
'No, no.    The hospital will be jammed.    That's one reason I came here. 
 
And I wanted to be sure you and Vic were okay. I'm going to Ford Island, find out what's   
happening, and maybe get a plane.      Those jap carriers haven't gone far.      We'll be   
counterattacking, that's for sure, and I'm not missing that. just bandage it up, Jan, and then   
dress this nick, in my ear.    That's what's dripped most of this gore all over me." 
 
Janice was dizzied to have Warren suddenly back, literally fallen out of the sky, half-naked,   
bloody, returned from battle.    She felt deep happy stirrings as she rubbed his skin, smelled his   
sweat and blood, and bound up his wounds.    He talked on at a great rate, all charged up. 
 
"God, it was weird-I thought those A.A. bursts were target practice, of course. 
 
We could see them forty miles away.    There was a hell of a lot of smoke coming off the island,   
too.    I talked to my wing mate about it. 
 
We both figured they were burning sugarcane.    We never did spot the japs until six of them   
jumped us out of the sun.    That was the last I saw of Bill Plantz. 
 749 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
I still don't know what happened to him, all I was doing from then on was trying to stay alive.   
The way those fellows came diving-zoe-" 
 
"Hold still, honey."    "Sorry.    I tell you, it was rough, Jan.    The SBD's a good dive bomber, but   
these jap Zeroes! The speed they've got, the maneuverability! They can Turn inside you- 
whoosh!    It's no contest. 
 
They do acrobatics like birds. 
 
You can't shake them and you can't hold them in your sights.    the pilots are hot, let me tell you.   
I don't know if the F4F's a match for them, but one thing's sure, an SBD against Zeroes is   
simply a dead pigeon. All I could do was keep turning and turning to evade. They got De   
Lashmutt right away.    He almost broke my eardrums with a horrible scream on the intercom.   
And then he yelled, 'Mr.    Henry, I'm pouring blood, I'm dying," and he moaned and that was   
all.    There was nothing I could do. They kept coming at me.    They were so eager, one of them   
finally overshot and hung for a second or two, in my sights, turning.    I let go with my fifties   
and I could swear he started smoking, but I can't claim anything.    I lost sight of him.    Tracers   
started from three sides, right past my vindows, these big pink streaks, zing, zing, zing-and   
then, goddamn it, our own A.A. opened up! 
 
Why the hell they shot at me    I'll never know, the silly sons of bitches-maybe    they were   
gunning for the japs and missing-but the flak was bursting all around me.    I still don't know   
whether they got me, or one of the japs did. 
 
All I know is my gas tank caught fire.    Poor De lashmutt, I yelled and yelled at him, till the   
flames were coming up around the cockpit, but he didn't answer, he certainly was dead.    So I   
popped the canopy and jumped.    I didn't even see where I was until the parachute opened, I just   
saw water.    I was out over Honolulu Harbor, but the wind took me inshore.    I almost got hung   
up in a palm tree in a little park off Dillingham Boulevard; then I cleared it and got down.    I   
grabbed that cab, but I had a time with that fellow.    He saw the chute draped all over the tree,   
he saw me unbuckling-he stopped to watch-and he still wanted fifty dollars to take me home.   
A patriot, that one!" 
 
"I've got the bleeding sort of under control, sweetie.    just sit quiet, will you?" 
 
"Good girl.    One thing I want to do before this day's out is get at a typewriter.    I may file the   
first combat report of this war on Zeroes. Hey? 
 
How about that?... You should see the sights downtown!" 
 
Warren crookedly grinned at his wife.    "People out in pajamas, nightgowns, or less, yelling,   
running around gawking at the sky.    Old people, kids, mothers shrapnel was rainin with babies.   
Damn loo s, when A-A.    shr g all over the place!    The only safe place was inside. 
 
I saw this beautiful Chinese girlacross Dillingham Boulevard Anna May reminds me of her-go   
galloping in nothing but a bra and pink panties, and I mean small transparent panties-really a   
sight-" 
 750 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"You would notice something like that," said Janice.    "No doubt you'd notice it if your arm had   
been shot clean off."    With his good arm, Warren gave her a rough intimate caress, and she   
slapped his hand.    'All right! 
 
I've got this wound plastered down.    Maybe it'll hold for a while. 
 
Your ear is all right too.    I still think you should see a doctor at the Naval Air Station." 
 
'If there's time, if there's time."    Grimacing as he moved the arm, Warren put on his shirt and   
sweater and zipped up the suit.    "I'll have a look at Vic.    Get out the car." 
 
He emerged from the house a few moments later and opened the car door. 'y, the son of a gun's   
sleeping peacefully.    He feels cool and he looks like he's grown twice as big." 
 
'Maybe the fever broke."    Janice paused, hand on the gearshift. 
 
The car radio was broadcasting an appeal from the governor to keep calm, with assurances that   
fleet damage was slight and that the attackers had all been driven off.    'Warren, that cab driver   
said the japs were landing at Kahuku.    Do you suppose there's any danger of that, and-" 
 
"No, no, get started.    Landing?    How the hell could they keep a beachhead supplied from four   
thousand miles away?    You'll hear all kinds of crazy scuttlebutt.    This was a hit-and-run raid.   
Christ, the high brass on this rock must be cutting their collective throats about now. Of all the   
sucker plays, a Sunday morning sneak attack! 
 
Why, it's been a routine battle problem for years."    On the ridge sightseers stood in the grass   
beside parked cars, chattering and pointing.    Heavy black smoke boiled up out of the anchorage   
and mushroomed    over the sky,    darkening the    sun to a pale    ball. Janice    stopped the car.   
Through the windshield, Warren swept the harbor with the binoculars. 
 
"Good God, Jan, Ford Island's a junkyard!    I don't see one undamaged plane.    But there must   
be many left in the hangars.    Lord, and there's a battlewagon CaPsized.    "I'll bet a thousand   
guys are caught inside that-Hey!!    Jesus Christ!    Are they coming back?" 
 
All over the harbor guns began rattling and flaming, and black A.A. balls blossomed again in   
the blue. Warren peered skyward. "I'll be goddamned. There they are. How about that?   
Those sons of bitching jap"; are sure betting everything on this one, Janice!    Well, that means   
the carriers are still in range anyway, waiting to recover them. 
 
Great!    Move over.    I'm driving." 
 
Speeding made Janice nervous when she wasnpt at the wheel, and Warren knew it, but he   
whistled down to Pearl City like an escaping bank bandit.    After a few moments of fright his   
wife began to enjoy the breakneck ride.    Everything was different on this side of time, the side   
after the japs attacked; more adventurous, almost more fun.    How handsome Warren looked,   
how competent, how desirable, handling the wheel with a relaxed turn of his unhurt arm,   
puffing a cigarette in his taut mouth, watching the road through narrow eyes!    Her boredom   
and irritability were gone and forgotten The black puffballs were far thicker than before, and   
 751 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
through the windshield they saw one Japanese plane after another burst into flames and fall.   
Each time Warren cheered. 
 
The fleet landing was a mess and a horror.    Sailors with blistered faces and hands, with skin   
hanging    in    yellow    or    black    scorched    pieces    from    bloody    flesh,    were being    helped 
out    of   
whaleboats or lifted off in stretchers and loaded onto hospital trucks by men in red-smeared   
whites. 
 
Wounded and unwounded alike were bawling obscenities, unmindful of the women crowding   
the landing and gnawing their fingers as then scanned the faces of the hurt men; unmindful too   
of the children who played and joked around the women's skirts-those not old enough to stare   
with round eyes at the burned sailors.    The coxswain of a whaleboat full of sheeted bodies was   
trying to come alongside, and a fat old chief in khaki kept cursing at him and waving him off.   
Over all this noise rolled the massive thumping and cracking of guns, the wail of sirens, the   
blasts of ships' horns, and the roar of airplanes, for the second attack was now in full swing.   
There was a heavy smell of firecrackers in the air, mingled with a sour stink from the black oil   
burning on the water all around Ford Island and sending up clouds of thick smoke.    Hands on   
hips, cigarette dangling from his mouth, Warren Henry calmly surveyed the terrible and   
spectacular scene. 
 
Janice said, in shaken tones, "I don't know how you'll ever get 
 
across."    absently, then strode    to    the end    of    the landing    to a    long    He    nodded after    him. 
"Coxswain, whose barge is this?" 
 
canopied boat.    Janice hurried a The immaculate sailor at the tiller flipped a hand to a white hat   
perfectly squared on his close-cropped head.    Big-jawed, bronzed, and tall, he eyed Warren's   
gory life-jacket curiously, and drawled, "Suh, this is Admiral Radburn's barge." 
 
"Is the admiral on the beach?" 
 
"Yes, suh."    "Do you know how long he'll be?" 
 
"Negative, suh, he just told me to wait." 
 
Glancing back at the milling boats along the landing, Warren said "Well, look, here's how it is.   
I'm Lieutenant Henry, off the Enterprise. 
 
I'm a dive bomber pilot." 
 
"Yes, suh?" g, just when the attack started.    The japs shot "I flew in this mornin me down.    I   
have to find another plane and get into this fight, so how's 
 
for taking me over to Ford Island?" 
 
The coxswain hesitated, then straightened up and saluted. "Come t those sons of bitches.   
Excuse aboard, suh.    The important thing is to ge 
 
am.)) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
me, ma "Oh, quite all right," Janice laughed.    "I want him to get those sons of bitches too." 
 
Hair stirring in the wind, bloody lifeiacket dangling open, Warren stood in the stern sheets,   
hands on hips, smiling at her as the barge pulled away. 
 
"Get them," she called.    "And come back to me." 
 
"Roger.    Don't drive back till these bastards quit, or you may get strafed.    Be seeing you." 
 
He ducked as a red and yellow Japanese plane passed right over his head, not twenty feet in the   
air, its motor noisily coughing and missing; then it turned sharply and flew away across the   
channel, over the capsized crimson hull of a battleship.    Warren straightened, still grinning. 
 
Janice watched the admiral's beautiful barge, all new gray paint, shiny brass, snowy curtains   
and cordwork, carry her bloodstained husband away to the flaming smoky mid-harbor island   
that was the Navy's airfield.    He waved and she wildly waved back.    She was horror-stricken   
by what she had seen at the Beet landing; yet never had she felt so aroused, so fuu of life, so   
plain damn good, and so much in love. 
 
An Army spokesman came on the automobile radio as she drove home, urging calm, warning   
against sabotage, and assuring the people that the second attack had been turned back with   
little further damage to the fleeting over the and at fearful cost to the Japanese. All-clear   
sirtenisngwetroe twheailradio, which island.    She found the maid in an armchair us was playing   
Hawaiian music again. 
 
"Victor's been very quiet, Missus Henry," she said.    "Not a sound. 
 
Isn't it terrible about the war?    But we'll beat them." 
 
ace of sheep "SheeP dip-the tar that causes tobacco harshness))) said the -olin, voice.    "Lucky   
Strike is the dip-' ri , O,l y cigarette from which every tr In his bedroom Victor coughed, a deep   
harsh cough like a man.    "Why, there he goes now," Janice said. 
 
"The very first time, ma'am, since he got his medicine.    I've been listening."    Janice's watch   
read eight minutes to ten.    "Well, it's been about two hours.    I guess that's all the medicine's   
good for. 
 
I'll give him more."    The, baby still felt cool.    He took the spoonful of brown syrup without   
opening his eyes, sighed, and turned over. 
 
Janice sank in a chair, perspiring and spent, thinking that a war had begun and the Pacific fleet   
had been smashed between her baby's two doses of cough medicine. 
 
The sun poked up over the horizon, painting a red Hush on the TClipper's wing.    Wide awake,   
Victor Henry watched the brightening disk rise free of the ocean.    The flying boat's engines   
changed pitch, rasping at his nerves.    Since he had said good-bye to Pamela Tudsbury in Red   
Square in the snow, he had been shaken up in trains, planes, boats, trucks, jeeps, sleighs, and   
even oxcarts.    He thought his bones would vibrate aboard the California for a month.    Forty- 
 753 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
eight hours, two more fifteenhundred-mile hops, and if nothing went wrong the trek halfway   
round the earth would be over. 
 
The sun moved sidewise.    The turn was so shallow that he felt no tilt in his seat.    A pink ray   
shot across his lap from the opposite side of the plane.    Pug left his seat and walked forward   
into the galley, where the steward was scrambling eggs.    "I'd like to talk to Ed Connelly, if he's   
free." 
 
The steward smiled, gesturing at the door marked FLiGffrDEcx. The naval officer and the   
Clipper captain had been eating meals together and sharing rooms at the island hotels.    In the   
dial-filled cockpit the engines sounded much louder, and beyond the plexiglass the void purple   
sea and clear blue sky stretched all around.    The captain, a beefy ckled man in shirt-sleeves and   
headphones, looked oddly at Pug Henry. 
 
'Morning, Ed.    Why are we heading back?" 
 
Connelly passed him a radio message, hand-printed in red ink on a yellow form. 
 
CINCPAC OR CMCUIT GENERAL PLMN LANGUAGE MESSAGE QUOTE AIR RAM   
ON PEARL HARBOR X THIS IS NO DRILL UNQUOTE X HEAVY GUNFIRE IN   
ANCHORAGE X RECOMMEND YOU RETURN WAKIR TILL srruAInoN CLARLFMS   
"How about that?" 
 
The captain removed the sponge-rubber headphones and rubbed his curly red hair.    "Do you   
suppose it's for real?" 
 
"I wouldn't doubt it," said Victor Henry. 
 
"I'm damned.    I honestly never thought they'd go.    Attacking Pearl! 
 
They'll get creamed." 
 
"Let's hope so.    But what's the point of turning back, Ed?" 
 
"I guess they might be hitting Midway, too." 
 
"Well, they might be hitting Wake, for that matter." 
 
"I've talked to Wake.    All quiet." 
 
Victor Henry returned to his seat, agitated though far from astonished. Here it was at last, he   
thought: an attempted sneak attack on Pearl, in the midst of a war scare. The uninventive   
Asiatics had elected to try the Port Arthur trick again, after all.    But surely this time they were   
running their heads into a noose!    The United States in 1941 wasn't Czarist Russia in 1904-   
One phrase in Cincpac's message nagged at him: This is no drill. 
 
That was silly, to a fleet onw2r alert!    Some low-level communicator must have tacked that one   
on. 
 754 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
A calm sunburned man'the in a jeep, naked except for shorts, socks, and boots, waited for him   
at the landing.    The marine commander had put his forces on combat alert and wanted to see   
Captain Henry.    They drove along the beach road in blazing sunlight and choking coral dust,   
then turned off into the brush. Combat alert had not changed the look of Wake in the past   
hours: three Hat sandy peaceful islands in a horseshoe shape around emerald shallows, ringed   
by the wide sea, alive with myriads of birds-for it had been a sanctuary-and bustling with the   
bulldozers and trucks of civilian construction gangs.      The queer humpbacked island rats   
hopped like tiny kangaroos out of the jeep's path, and brilliantly colored bircls rose from the   
brush in chirping cloud.-,. 
 
Perfectly camouflaged by scrub, the command post was sunk far down in coral sand.    When   
Victor Henry faced the marine colonel in this deep timbered hole, saw the radio gear and crude   
turn:,ture and smelled perking coffee and freshly dug soil, the war with japan became a fact for   
him. 
 
The dugout did not have the graveyard-muck odor of the Russian trenches; it was roasting hot   
and dry, not freezing cold and wet; the men frantically working on the telephone lines and the   
overhead beams were not frostbitten, pale, bundled-up Slavs, but sunburned, heavily sweating   
Americans in shorts.    Yet here, where the roar of the Pacific dimly sounded, these Americans- 
like the Russians outside Moscow-were going into the ground to await attack. The United   
States was in. 
 
The colonel, a mild-faced scrawny man with whom Pug had dined the night before, gave him   
an envelope to take to Cincpac.    "Put it in the adrriral's hand yourself, Captain.    Please!    It's a   
list of my worst shortages. 
 
We can make a fight of it here, Maybe we can hold out till we're relieved, if he'll send us that   
stuff.    Radar gear for Wake is sitting right now on the dock in Hawaii.    It's been there for a   
month.    For God's sake, ask him to put it on a destroyer or better yet a bomber, and rush it here.   
I'm blind without radar.    I can't send fighters on patrols, I have too few.    I'm twenty feet above   
the ocean at my highest point, and I only gain a few more feet with my water tower.    We'll   
probably end up eating fish and rice behind barbed wire anyway, but at least we can make the   
bastards work to take the place." 
 
Pug got back to the hotel just ahead of a rain squall.    The Clipper passengers were sitting down   
to lunch when blasts shook the floor, rattled the dishes, and sent broken windowpanes clinking   
to the tiles. Amid shouts and cries the passengers jumped for the windows. 
 
Fat cigar-shaped airplanes, with orange circles painted on their flamboyant jungle camouflage,   
were flashing past in the rain; Pug noted their twin engines and twin tails.    Smoke and fire were   
already rising from the airfield across the lagoon, and more explosions, bigger flames, heavier   
smoke,    came    fast. Pug had often seen bombing,    but this attack,    destroying    an American   
installation with impunity, still outraged and numbed him. 
 
The marauding bombers, blurry in the rain, kept crisscrossing the islands and the lagoon with   
thunderous engine roars, meeting only meager bursts of fire. Soon a line of bombers came   
 755 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
winging straight for the Pan American compound, and this was what Victor Henry was fearing.  
 
An attack on the Clipper might strand him and paralyze his war career before it started.    There   
was no way off Wake Island, except aboard that huge inviting silvery target. 
 
Savage explosions and crashes burst around them as the planes bombed and machine-gunned   
the hotel, the Pan Am repair shops, the dock, and the radio tower.    A gasoline dump close by   
went up in a colossal sheet of white flame, climbing to the sky with a terrific howl. The   
passengers dove under tables or huddled in corners, but Victor Henry still crouched at the   
window beside the pilot, watching.    They saw spurts of water approach the flying boat.    They   
saw pieces of the Clipper go flying. 
 
When the bomber sounds faded, Pug followed the pilot out onto the pier at a run. Like a   
clothed ape, Ed Connelly clambered over the slipery flying boat in the rain, making it rock and   
slosh.    "Pug, so help me God, I think we can still fly!    They didn't hole the tanks or the engines. 
 
At least I don't think they did.    I'm hauling my passengers the hell out of here now, and I'll   
argue with Hawaii later." 
 
The passengers eagerly scrambled aboard.    The Clipper took off, and it flew.    Below, smashed   
airplanes named and all three islands poured smoke.    Pug could see little figures looking up at   
the departing Clipper. 
 
Some waved. 
 
Even in the dead of night, nine hours later, Midway was not hard to find. The pilot called   
Victor Henry to the cockpit to show him the star of flame far ahead on the black sea.    "Christ,   
these japs had the thing all lined up, didn't they?"    he said.    "They hit everywhere at once.    I   
heard over the radio they're already in Malaya, Thailand, Hong Kong, they're bombing   
Singapore"Can we land, Ed?" 
 
"We've got to try.    I can't raise them.    All the navigation lights are out.    Midway has a lot of   
underground tanks.    And if we can just get down, we can fuel.    Soooo-here goes." 
 
The riving boat dropped low over dark waters, lit only by the glare from blazing hangars and   
buildings.    On slapping into the sea, it hit something solid with a frightening clang, but slowed   
and floated undamaged. 
 
The airfields of Midway, they soon learned, had been shelled by a japanese cruiser and a   
destroyer.    An eaflarated    mob    of almost    naked fire    fighters    was    flooding    the blazes   
with   
chemicals and water, generating giant billows of acrid red smoke.    Victor Henry found his way   
to the commandant's office and tried to get news of the Pearl Harbor attack.    The lieutenant on   
duty was obsequious and vague.    The commandant was out inspecting the island's air defenses,   
he said, 'and he had no authority to show top secret dispatches, but he could tell the captain that   
the Navy had shot down a mess of Japanese planes. 
 
'How about the California?    I'm going there to take command of her." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The lieutenant looked impressed.    "Oh, really, sir?    The California? 
 
I'm sure she's all right, sir.    I don't recall any word about the California." 
 
This news enabled Victor Henry to sleep a little, though he tossed and muttered all night and   
got up well before dawn to pace the cool hotel veranda. The goony birds of Midway, big   
book-beaked creatures    which he had heard about but never seen, were out by the dozens,   
walking the gray dunes.    He saw them clumsily Ely, and land, and tumble on their heads.  He   
watched a pair do a ridiculous mating dance on the beach as the sun came up, plopping their   
feet like a drunken old farm couple. 
 
Ordinarily Victor Henry would have seized the chance to inspect Midway, for it was a big   
installation, but today nothing could draw him out of sight of the flying boat, rising and falling   
on the swells and bumping the dock with dull booms. 
 
The four hours to Hawaii seemed like forty. Instead of melting away at its usual rate, time   
froze.    Pug asked the steward for cards and played solitaire, but forgot he was playing.    He just   
sat, enduring the passage of time like the grind of a dentist's drill, until at last the steward came   
and spoke to him,    smiling.    "Captain    Connelly would like you    to come    up forward, sir."   
Ahead, through the pie;dglass, the green sunny humps of the Hawaiian Islands were showing   
over the horizon. 
 
"Nice?"    said the pilot. 
 
"Prettiest sight I've seen," said Pug, "since my wife had a girl baby." 'Stick around, a nd we'll   
take a look at the fleet." Nobody aboard the Clipper knew what to expect. The rumors on   
Midway had varied from disaster to victory, with graphic details both ways.    The Clipper came   
in from the north over the harbor and hooked around to descend.    In these two passes, Victor   
Henry was struck sick by what his disbelieving eyes saw.    All along the east side of Ford Island   
the battleships of the Pacific Fleet lay careened, broken, overturned, in the disorder of a child's   
toys in a bath.    Hickam Field and the Navy's air base were broad dumps of blackened airplane   
fragments and collapsed burned hangar skeletons. Some dry docks held shattered tumbled- 
over ships.    Pug desperately tried to pick out the California in the hideous smoky panorama.   
But at this altitude the ships with basket masts looked alike. Some of the inboard vessels   
appeared just slightly damaged. If only one was the California! "My God," Connelly said,   
looking around at Pug, his face drawn, what a shambles!" 
 
Speechless, Victor Henry nodded and sat on a folding seat, as the flying boat swooped low past   
a smashed gutted battleship with tripod masts, sunk to the level of its guns and resting on the   
bottom at a crazy angle. 
 
The Clipper threw up a curtain of spray that wiped out the heart-rending sight lourmy) s end. 
 
Passing several clanging, speeding Navy ambulances, Pug went from the customs shed at the   
Pan Am landing straight to the Cincpac building, where officers and sailors busily swarmed.   
They all wore unsure scared expressions, like people after a bad earthquake.    A very handsome   
ensign in whites, at a desk that barred access to Cincpac's inner offices, looked incredulously at   
 757 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pug, who wore wrinkled slacks and a seersucker jacket.    The admiral?    You mean Cincpac, sir?   
Admiral Kimmel?"    "That's right," Pug said. 
 
"Sir, you don't really expect to see Admiral Kimmel today, do you? 
 
Shall I try his Assistant Chief of Staff?" "Give the admiral a message, please.    I'm Captain   
Victor Henry.    I've just come in on the Clipper with a personal letter for him from the marine   
commandant on Wake Island." 
 
The very handsome ensign gestured wearily at a chair and picked up a telephone.    "You may   
have to wait all day, or a week, sir.    You know what the situation is." 
 
"I have the general picture." 
 
A minute or so later, a pretty woman in a tailored blue suit looked through the double doors.   
"Captain Henry?    This way, sir." 
 
The ensign    stared at    Victor Henry    walking    past    him,    as    though    the captain    had 
sprouted   
another head. Along the corridor, the offices of Cincpac's senior staff stood open, and the   
sound of excited talk and typewriter clatter drifted out.    A marine rigidly saluted before high   
doors decorated with four gold stars and a Navy seal, and labelled in gold comMANDER-IN- 
CHIEF, PACIFIC FLEET.    Hey passed into a wood-panelled anteroom.    The woman opened a   
heavy polished mahogany door. 
 
"Admiral, here's Captain Henry." 
 
"Hey, Pug! Great day, how long has it been?" Kimmel waved cheerily from the window,   
where he stood gazing out at the anchorage. 
 
He was dressed in faultless gold-buttoned whites, and looked tanned, fit, and altogether   
splendid.    though much older and quite bald.    "Have I seen you since you worked for me on the   
Maryland?"    "I don't think so, sir." 
 
"Well, the years are dealing kindly with you!    Sit you down, sit you down.    Been flying high,   
haven't you?    Observing in Roosia, and all thatch?"    They shook, hands.    Kimmel's voice was   
as hearty and winning as ever. this was an outstanding officer, Pug thought, who had been   
marked for success all the way and had gone all the way. Now, after twenty years of war   
exercises and drills against Orange, the fleet he commanded lay in sight beyond the window,   
wrecked in port by the Orange team in one quick real action.    He appeared remarkably chipper,   
but for his eyes, which were reddened and somewhat unfocussed. 
 
"I know how little time you have, sir."    Pug drew out of his breast pocket the letter from Wake   
Island. 
 
'Not at all.    It's nice to see an old familiar face.    You were a good gunnery officer, Pug.    A good   
officer all around.    Cigarette?" 
 
Kimmel offered him the pack, and lit one for himself.    "Let's see. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Don't you have a couple of boys in the service now?" 
 
"Yes, sir.    One flies an SBD off the Enterprise, and-" 
 
"Well, fine! 
 
They didn't get the Enterprise or any other carrier, Pug, because the carriers at least followed   
my orders and were on one hundred percent alert.    And the other lad?"    "He's aboard the Dfish   
in Manila." 
 
"Manila, eh?    They haven't hit the fleet at Manila yet, though I understand they've bombed the   
airfields. Tommy Hart's got some warning now, and he'll have no excuse. I only hope the   
Army Air people in Manila aren't as totally asleep as they were here!    The Army was and is   
completey responsible for the safety of these islands and of this anchorage, Pug, including the   
definite responsibility of air patrol and radar search.    Nothing on God's earth could be clearer   
than the way that is spelled out in the islands' defense instructions.    The documents leave no   
doubt about that, fortunately.    Well-you have something from Wake, don't you?    Let's have a   
look-see.    Were you there when they hit?" 
 
"Yes, sir."    "How bad was it?    As bad as this?"    'well, I'd say about two dozen bombers worked   
us over.    Mainly they went after planes and air installations, Admiral.    No ships were there to   
get bombed." 
 
CincPac shot a glance at Victor Henry, as though suspecting irony in his words.    "Say, weren't   
you supposed to relieve Chip Walenstone in the California?" 'Yes, sir." Kimmel shook his   
head, and started to read the letter. 
 
Pug ventured to say, "How did the California make out, Admiral?" 
 
"Why, don't you know?" 
 
'No, sir.    I came straight here from the Clipper." 
 
Not looking up, in the brisk tone of a report, Kimmel said, "She took two torpedoes to port and   
several bomb hits and near misses. One bomb penetrated below decks and the explosion   
started a big fire. 
 
She's down by the bow, Pug, and sinking. They're    still    counterflooding,    so she may not   
capsize.    She's electric drive, and the preliminary estimate"-he pulled toward him a sheet on his   
desk, and peered at it-"a year and a half out of action, possibly two.    That's top secret of course.   
We're releasing no damage information." 
 
Cincpac finished the letter from Wake in a heavy silence, and tossed it on the desk. 
 
Victor Henry's voice trembled and he swallowed in mid-sentence. 
 
"Admiral, if I broke a lot of asses, including my own-ah, is there a chance I could put her back   
on the line in six months?" 
 759 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'Go out and see for yourself.    It's hopeless, Pug.    A salvage officer will relieve Chip."    The tone   
was sympathetic, but Victor Henry felt it did Cincpac good to give someone else catastrophic   
news. 
 
"Well, that's that, then, I guess." 
 
"You'll get another command." 
 
"The only thing is, Admiral, there aren't that many available battleships.    Not any more." 
 
Again, the quick suspicious glance.      It was hard to say    anything in this context without   
seeming to needle the commander of the Pacific Fleet. Kimmel made a curt gesture at the letter   
Pug had brought. "Now there's a problem for you. Do we relieve Wake or not? It means   
exposing a carrier.    We can't go in without air cover.    He's asking for a pile of things I can't   
give him, for the simple reason that the Russians and the British have got the stuff. Mr.   
Roosevelt was a great Navy President until that European fracas started, Pug, but at that point   
he took his eye off the ball.    Our real enemy's always been right here, here in the Pacific. 
 
This ocean is our nation's number one security problem.    That's what he forgot.    We never had   
the wherewithal to conduct proper patrols.    I didn't want to rely on the Army, God knows, but   
equipment only has so much life in it, and what would we have had to fight the war with if   
we'd used up our planes in patrolling?    Washington's been crying wolf about the japs for a year.   
We've had so many full alerts and air raid drills and surprise attack exercises and all, nobody   
can count them, but-well, the milk is spilled, the horse is stolen, but I think it's pretty clear that   
the President got too damned interested in the wrong enemy, the wrong ocean, and the wrong   
war." 
 
It gave Victor Henry a strange sensation, after Berlin and London and Moscow, and now this   
staggering personal disappointment, to hear from Admiral'Kinnnel the old unchanged Navy   
verbiage about the importance of the Pacific.    "Well, Admiral, I know how busy you are," he   
said, though in fact he was struck by the quiet at the heart of the cataclysm, and by Kimmel's   
willingness to chat with a mere captain he did not know very well.    Cincpac acted almost as   
lonesome as Mp Tollever had. 
 
"Yes, well, I do have a thing or two on my mind, and you've got to go about your business too.   
Nice seeing you, Pug," said Admiral Kimmel, in a sudden tone of dismissal. 
 
Janice answered Pug's telephone call and warmly urged him to come and stay at the house.   
Pug wanted a place where he could drop his bags, and get into uniform to go to the California.   
He drove out in a Navy car, took suitable if brief delight in his grandson, and accepted Janice's   
commiseration over his ship with a grunt.    She offered to get his whites quickly pressed by the   
maid.    In the spare room he opened his suitcase to pull out the crumpled uniform, and his letter   
to Pamela Tudsbury fell to the floor. 
 
In a dressing gown he glanced through the letter, which he had written during the long hop   
from Guam to Wake Island.    It embarrassed him as one of his old love letters to Rhoda might   
have.    There wasn't much love in this one, mostly a reasoned and accurate case for his living   
 760 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
out his life as it was.    The whole business with the English girl-romance, flirtation, love affair,   
whatever it had been-had begun to seem so far away after his stops in Manila and Guam, so   
dated, so unlike him, so utterly outside realities and possibilities! Pamela was a beautiful   
young woman, but odd.    The best proof of her oddness was her very infatuation with him, a   
grizzled United States Navy workhorse with whom she had been thrown together a few times.   
Dour and repressed though he was, she had ignited a flash of romance in him in those last   
turbulent hours in Moscow. 
 
He had allowed himself to hope for a new life, and to half believe in it, in his elation over his   
orders to the California. 
 
And now-how finished it all was!    California, Pamela, the Pacific Fleet, the honor of the United   
States, and-God alone knew-any hope for the civilized world. 
 
A knock at the door; the voice of the Chinese maid: "Your uniform, Captain?" 
 
'Thank you.    Ah, that's a fine job.    I appreciate it."    He did not tear the letter up.    He did not   
think he could write a better one.    The situation of a man past fifty declining a young woman's   
love was awkward and ridiculous, and no words could help much.    He slipped the envelope   
into his pocket, When he passed a mailbox on his way to the Navy Yard, he stopped and   
mailed it.    The clank of the box was a sad sound in a sad day for Captain Victor Henry.  
 
Sadder yet was the trip to the California, through foul-smelling water so coated with black oil   
that the motor launch cut no wake, but chugged slimily along in smoky air, thumping like an   
icebreaker through a floating mass of black-smeared garbage and debris.    The launch passed all   
along Battleship Row, for the California lay nearest the channel entrance. One by one Pug   
contemplated these gargantuan gray vessels he knew so well-he had served in several-fire- 
blackened, bomb-blasted, down by the head, down by the stern, sitting on the bottom, listing,   
or turned turtle.    Grief and pain tore at him. 
 
He was a battleship man.    Long, long ago he had passed up flight school. Navy air had seemed   
to him fine for reconnaissance, bombing support, and torpedo attacks, but not for the main   
striking arm. He had argued with the fly-fly boys    that when war came,    the thin-skinned   
carriers would    lurk    far    from the action    and    would fuss    at    each other    with    bombings   
and   
dogfights,    while    the    battleships with    their    big    rifles    came to    grips    and    slugged    it   
out    for   
command of the sea. The fliers had asserted that one aerial bomb or torpedo could sink a   
battleship.    He had retorted that a sixteen-inch steel plate wasn't exactly porcelain, and that a   
hundred guns firing at once might slightly mar the aim of a pilot flying a little tin crate. 
 
His natural conservative streak had been reinforced by his football experience.      To him,   
carriers had been the fancy-Dan team with tricky runners and razzle-dazzle passers;   
batdewagons, the heavy solid team of chargers, who piled up the yardage straight through the   
line. 
 
These tough ground gainers usually became the champions. So he had thought-making the   
mistake of his life.    He had been as wrong as a man could be, in the one crucial judgment of his   
 
 
 
 
 
 
profession. 
 
. Other battleship men might still find excuses for these tragic slaughtered dinosaurs that the   
launch was passing.      For Pug Henry, facts governed- Each of these vessels was a giant   
engineering marvel, a floating colossus as cunningly put together as a lady's watch, capable of   
pulverizing a city.    All true, all true.    But if caught unawares, they could be knocked out by   
little tin flying crates.    The evidence was before his eyes. 
 
The twenty-year argument was over. 
 
The setting sun cast a rosy glow on the canted superstructure of the California. She listed   
about seven degrees to port, spouting thick streams of filthy water in rhythmic pumped spurts.   
The smoke.-streaked, flameblistered, oil-smeared steel wall, leaning far over Pug's head as the   
motor launch drew up,to the accommodation ladder, gave him a dizzy, doomed feeling.    The   
climb up the canted and partly submerged ladder was dizzying, too. 
 
What an arrival! In bad moments in Kuibyshev, on Siberian trains, in Tokyo streets, in the   
Manila club, Pug had cheered himself with pictures of his reception aboard this ship: side boys   
in white saluting, honor guard on parade, boatswain's pipe trilling, commanding officers   
shaking hands at the gangway, a sweet triumphant tour of a great ship shined up to holiday   
beauty and brilliance.for the eye of a new captain.    Often he had played a minor part in such   
rituals.    But to be the star, the center, the incoming 'old man"I It was worth a lifetime of the   
toughest drudgery. 
 
And now this!    A vile corrupt stink hit Victor Henry in the face as he stepped on the sloping   
quarterdeck of the California, and said, "Request permission to come aboard, sir 'Permission   
granted, sir."    The O.O.D's salute was smart, His sunburned boyish face attractive.    He wore   
grease-streaked khakis, with gloves and a spyglass.    Five corpses lay on the quarterdeck, under   
sheets stained with water and oil, their soggy black shoes projecting, their noses poking up the   
cloth, water trickling from them down the slanted deck toward the O.O.D's stand. 
 
The smell came partly from them, but it was a compound of reeks-seeping smoke, gasoline   
fumes from the pumps, burnt oil, burnt wood, burnt paper, burnt flesh, rotted food, broken   
waste lines; a rancid mildewy effluvium of disaster, of a great machine built to house human   
beings, broken and disintegrating. Unshaven sailors and officers in dirty clothing wandered   
about.    Above the filth and mess and tangled hoses and scattered shells and ammo boxes on the   
main deck, the superstructure jutted into the sunset sky, massive, clean, and undamaged.    The   
long sixteen-inch guns were trained neatly fore and aft, newly and smoothly painted gray,   
tampions in place, turrets unscathed.    The ship bristled with A.A. guns.    The old Prune Barge   
was tantalizingly alive and afloatwounded, but still mighty, still grandiose. 
 
'I'm Captain Victor Henry." 
 
"Yes, sir? Oh! Yes, sir' Captain Wallenstone's been expecting you for quite a while." He   
snapped his fingers at a messenger in whites, and said with a winning sad grin, "It's awful that   
you should find the ship like this, sir.    Benson, tell the C.O. that Captain Henry is here." 
 762 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"One moment.    Where's your C.O.?" 
 
"Sir, he's with the salvage officers down in the forward engine room." 
 
'I know the way." Walking familiar decks and passageways that were weird in their fixed   
slant, climbing down tipped ladders, choking on smoke, gasoline, and oil fumes, and a   
gruesome smell of rotting meat, penetrating ever deeper into gloom and stench, realizing that   
these fume-filled spaces were explosive traps, Victor Henry got himself down to the forward   
engine room, where four officers huddled on a high catwalk, playing powerful hand lights on a   
sheet of oil-covered water. 
 
By an optical illusion, the water half-drowning the engines appeared slanted, rather than the   
listing bulkheads. 
 
With little ceremony, Victor Henry joined in the engineering talk about saving the ship.    The   
quantity of water flooding through the torpedo holes was more than the pumps could throw   
out, so the ship was slowly settling.    It was that simple.    Pug asked about more pumps, about   
pumping by tugs and auxiliary vessels; but all over the anchorage the cry was for pumps.    No   
more pumping was to he had, not in time to keep the battleship off the mud.      Captain   
WaUenstone, haggard and untidy in greasy khalds and looking about sixty years old, reeled off   
sad answers to Pug's other ideas.    Patching the holes would take months of underwater work.   
They stretched over a dozen frames.    Sealing off the damaged spaces by sending in divers and   
closing them off one by one could not be done in time.    In short, the California, though not yet   
on the bottom, was done for. The talk was about cofferdams and cement patches, about a   
complete refitting in the States, about return to service in 1943 or 1944. 
 
Wallenstone took Victor Henry up to his cabin.    It was a blessed thing to smel) fresh air again   
streaming in through windward portholes, and to see the evening star bright in the apple-green   
sky.    The commanding    officer's    quarters    were intact,    spacious, shipshape,    glamorous,    and   
beautiful, on this battleship sinking uncontrollabjy to the bottom.    A Filipino steward brought   
them coffee, which they had to hold on their laps, for it would have slid off the tilted tables. 
 
Mournfully, the captain told Pug his experiences of the Japanese attack. 
 
Pug had never encountered this officer before, but Wallenstone appeared to know a lot about   
him.    He asked Victor Henry what President Roosevelt was really like, and whether he thought   
the Russians could hold out much longer against the Germans. 
 
'Oh.    by the way," he said, as he started to accompany Pug out, 'quite a bit of mail accumulated   
here for you.      I'm not sure that"-he opened and closed desk drawers-"yes, here it is, all   
together."    Victor Henry tucked the bulky envelope under his arm and picked his way with the   
captain across the cluttered, stinking main deck in the twilight. 
 
'You wouldn't believe what this ship looked like two days ago." 
 
The captain shook his head sadly, pitching his voice above the whine and thud of the pumps   
and the metallic hammering everywhere.    'We had the word from Manila to expect you.    I ran   
 763 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
off a captain's inspection on Saturday. 
 
I was at it for five hours.    What a job they'd done!    You could have eaten your dinner off the   
engine room deck.    It gleamed.    She was the smartest ship in this man's Navy, Henry, and she   
had the finest crew that everoh well, what's the use?    What's the use?"    At the quarterdeck the   
bodies were gone. The captain looked around and said, "Well, they took those poor devils   
away.    That's the worst of it. 
 
At the last muster forty-seven were still missing. They're down below, Henry, all drowned.   
Oh, God! These salvage fellows say this ship will come back and fight one day, but God   
knows!    And God knows where I'll be then' Who would think the sons of bitches could sneak   
all the way to Hawaii undetected Who'd think they'd be screwy enough to try?    Where was our   
air cover?"    'Is that the Enterprise?"    Pug pointed at a black rectangular shape moving down   
channel, showing no lights. 
 
Wallenstone peered at the silhouette.    "Yes.    Thank Christ she wasn't in port Sunday morning." 
 
"My son's a flier on board her.    Maybe I'll get to see him.    First time in a long while." 
 
"Say!    'That should cheer you up some.    If anything can.    I know how you must feel.    All I can   
say is, I'm sorry, Henry.    Sorry as a human being can be." 
 
Captain Wallenstone held out his hand.    Victor Henry hesitated. 
 
In that tiny pause, he thought that if this man had been wiser than all the rest, had held the ship   
in readiness condition Zed or even Yoke -after all, be too had received a war warning-and had   
ordered a dawn air alert, the California might be the most famous battleship in the Navy now,   
afloat and ready to fight.    Wallenstone then would be a national hero with a clear red carpet to   
the office of Chief of Naval Operations, and he would be turning over a fighting command to   
his relief.    Instead, he was one of eight battleship captains conferring with salvage officers and   
saying how unfortunate it all was; and he was offering a handshake to the man who would   
never relieve him, because he had let the enemy sink his ship. 
 
But could he, Pug Henry, have done any better?    A battleship captain who roused his crew for   
dawn general quarters in port, while half a dozen other battleships slept, would have been a   
ridiculous eccentric. The entire fleet from Cincpac down had been dreaming. That was the   
main    and forever unchangeable    fact of history.    The sinking of the California    was    a tiny   
footnote nobody would ever pay attention to. 
 
He shook Wallenstone's hand, saluted the colors, and made his way down the ladder-which   
leaned nauseatingly over the water-to the luxurious and unharmed captain's gig that the O.O.D   
had summoned. 
 
The gig ran darkened to the landing.    In the dim dashboard light of the car, Pug glanced over   
the envelopes of his piled-up mail; official stuff for the most part, with a couple of letters from   
Rhoda and one from Madeline.    He did not open any of them. 
 764 
 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'Dad!"    Warren not only was at home, he had already changed into slacks and a flowered loose- 
hanging shirt. He came lunging into the living room, and threw an arm around his father,   
holding the other stiff at his side.    One ear was plastered with surgical tape.    "Well, you finally   
made it!    Some haul, dear from Moscow!    How are you, Dad?" 
 
"I've just visited the California." 
 
"Oh, Jesus.    Bourbon and water?" 
 
'Not that much water, and damned rich on the bourbon.    What happened to your arm?" 
 
"Jan told you about how I ran into those japs, didn't she?" 'She didn't tell me you    were   
wounded." 
 
"It's just a few stitches.    I'm still flying, that's the main thing. Come, it's cooler out here, Dad."   
In the shadowy screened porch, Pug bitterly described the California's    state. Warren was   
scornful. The battleship Navy had been a lot of sleepy fat cats primed for defeat, he said;   
obsessed by promotions and competition scores, ignorant of the air, and forever drilling to fight   
the Battle of Jutland against the japs.    But the Japs had grasped naval aviation and had made a   
slick opening play. "We'll get 'em," he said, "But it'll be a long hard pull, and the naval   
aviators'll do it.    Not the battlewagons, Dad." 
 
"Seems to me a few airplanes got caught on the ground," Pug growled, -feeling the bourbon   
comforting and radiant inside him. 
 
"Sure, I admit that.    This whole base was all unbuttoned.    Dad, I'll tell you one thing, if Halsey   
had been Cincpac, none of it would have happened.    He's been so ready and eager for war, his   
tongue's been hanging out.    He'd have kept this goddamn fleet in condition Zed, and on dawn   
and dusk GQ's for a year.    He'd have run patrols till the planes fell apart. 
 
He'd have been the most hated son of a bitch in Hawaii, but by God, when they came he'd have   
been waiting for 'em!    Why, we stripped ship in November.    We've run darkened ever since,   
with warheads in our torpedoes, and bombs in the planes, and depth charges on ready. Of   
course he does go galloping about like an old mule with a bee up its ass."    Warren 'described   
Halsey's futile dart south of Oahu looking for Japanese carriers. The direction had seemed   
dead wrong to Warren Henry and the other fliers.    The only place for the japs to be lurking was   
north, where they could dash straight for home    after the strike. But Halsey-so they later   
learned-had received a direction-finder report of heavy radio signa to the south, so southward   
he had roared, launching all his torpedo Planes and dive bombers.    For hours the planes had   
scoured over empty wen, dE the Enterprise had sheepishly summoned them back.    The report   
had the commons been st of direction-finder errors, a reciprocal bearing.    The japs had lain in   
the exact opposite direction-north.      By then, of course, catching up with them had been   
hopeless. 
 
His father grunted incredulously. 'Is that what happened? God Almighty, that's nearly as   
stupid as the battleship performance." 
 
 
 765 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Well, yes, somebody on that big staff should have thought of the reciprocal bearing. But   
nobody's head was too clear, and I don't know -it was one carrier against four or five, anyway.   
Maybe it was for the best.    At least he did try to find a fight.    Listen, Dad, our own A.A. 
 
shot down many of our planes, and they sure peppered me. It was just a his toric snafu all   
around.    Tell me how's Briny?    Did you see him in Manila?" 
 
The bourbon helped Victor Henry's sickened spirit, but talking to Warren was better medicine.   
Slanting light from the living room on his son showed him changed: older, more relaxed, rather   
hard-bitten, the dangling cigarette almost a part of his features.    He had fought with the enemy   
and survived.    That edge was in his bearing, though he deferred carefully to Pug. 
 
'I'll tell you, Dad," he said, bringing him a refill from the other room, "I'm not saying this   
wasn't a defeat.    It was the worst defeat in our history. 
 
The Navy will be a hundred years living down the shame of it. But by God, the Congress   
voted for war today with one dissenting vote! 
 
Only one!    Think-what else could have accomplished that?    The japs were stupid not to move   
south and dare Roosevelt to come on.    He'd have been in trouble."    Warren took a deep drink of   
bourbon.    "What's more, operationally they blew this attack.    They had us flattened with the   
first wave.    All they did the second time was paste the wagons some more and bomb a few   
smaller ships.    What good was that?    Our oil farm was sitting behind the sub base, wide open.   
Dozens of fat round juicy targets you couldn't miss with your hat.    Why, if they'd gotten the   
oil-and nothing could have stopped them-we'd be evacuating Hawaii right now. The fleet   
couldn't have operated from here.      We'd be staging a Dunkirk across two thousand five   
hundred miles of ocean.    Moreover, they never hit the subs.    They'll regret that!    They never   
touched our repair shops-" 'I'm convinced," Pug said.    "I'm sure that jap admiral is committing   
hara-kiri    right    now over    his    disgraceful    failure."    'I    said    it was    a defeat, Dad."    Warren, 
unoffended, came back sharply but pleasantly.    "I say they achieved surprise at high political   
cost, and then failed to exploit it.    Say, it's another quarter of an hour to dinner. 
 
How about one more shortie?" 
 
Pug wanted to examine his mail, but Warren's acumen was rejoicing his heavy heart, and the   
strong drink was working wonders. "Well, very short." He told Warren about his meeting   
with Achniral Kimmel.    The young aviator flipped a hand at the complaint of too much war   
material going to Europe.    'Jesus, him too?    just a feeble excuse.    It's got to cost several million   
lives to stop the Germans.    Whose lives?    Could be ours!    The Russians made one deal with   
Hitler, and they could make another one.    The Communists signed a separate peace in 1917,   
you know. 
 
It was the first thing Lenin did on taking over. The whole game here is to keep the Soviet   
Union fighting. That's so obvious!" "You know, you ought to go over in your spare time,   
Warren, an(i straighten out Cincpac." 
 
"I'd be glad to, but I'll have to move fast to catch him while He's Cincpac." 
 766 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Oh?    You got some inside scoop?" 
 
"Dad, the President isn't going to resign, and somebody's head's got to row." 
 
"Dinner, fellas," Janice's voice called. 
 
"The only thing is," Warren said, as they walked in, "those Russians are going to exact   
payment for all those lives one day. 
 
They'll get to annex Poland, or Czechoslovakia, or some damn thing. 
 
But that's fair enough, maybe.    Russia keeps swallowing and then puking up Poland every half   
century or so.    What was it like in Moscow anyway, Dad?    What are the Russkis like?    How   
much did you see?" 
 
Pug talked straight through dinner about his adventures in Russia. 
 
Janice had provided several bottles of red wine.    It wasn't very good wine, and he wasn't much   
of a wine drinker, but tonight he poured down glass after glass, thinking that red wine was   
really remarkably fine stuff. Continuous talking, another unusual thing for him, eased his   
heart. 
 
Janice asked questions about Pam Tudsbury, which led him to relate his experiences in   
England too, and his flight over Berlin.    Warren pressed his father for details of the bomb racks   
and release mechanisms, but Pug could tell him nothing. Warren interrupted Pug's flow of   
words to describe his run-in with the Bureau of Ordnance over the bombing assembly of his   
plane, and the improved rack he had manufactured in the shipfitter's shop, which the Bureau   
was now grudgingly examining for possible use in all planes.    Pug tried to keep surprise and   
pride out of his face, saying, "You'll get no thanks from anybody, boy.    Especially if it works!   
just a reputation as a troublemaker." 
 
"I'll get what I want-bombs that fall straight and hit." 
 
Over brandy, back on the dark'screened porch, Pug, now fairly close to being drunk, asked his   
son what he thought he should do, with the California command gone. It was an honest   
question.    His son impressed him, and he thought Warren might give him good advice. 
 
Warren laughed and said, "Dad, learn to fly." 
 
"Don't think I haven't thought of it." 
 
"Well, seriously, you'd better go back to Cincpac's staff tomorroland pound desks till you get a   
command.    They probably believe that you draw a lot of water with the President.    You'll get   
what you ask for.    But you have to move fast.    If Mr.    Roosevelt remembers that you're on the   
loose again, he'll send you on some other mission. 
 
Although I don't know, it must be very interesting work, at that." 
 
"Warren, I hope you believe me-thanks, thanks, boy, just a little more, this is damn good   
 767 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
brandy-nearly everything I've been doing in the past two years has given me a swift pain in the   
ass.    I don't know why Mr. Roosevelt chose in his wisdom to make a sort of high-octane errand   
boy out of me. I've talked to great men face to face, and that's a privilege, sure. If I were   
planning to write a book or go into politics, or something along that line, it would be dandy.   
But the bloom soon comes off the rose. 
 
You're a zero to these people.    It's in their manner.    You have to watch every sentence you utter   
and keep your eyes and ears peeled for every move, every word, every tone of some b ird who   
may go down in history, but he's just another man, basically, and maybe even a big criminal,   
like Stalin or Hitler.    I think you have to have a taste for associating with great men.    There are   
people who do, God knows, who crave it, but I'm not one of them.    I never want to get out of   
sight of ships and the water again, and I never want to see the inside of another embassy."   
"How did it ever start, Dad?    Here, have some more." 
 
"No, no, Warren, I'm feeling no pain at all as it is.    Well, okay, just wet the bottom of the glass- 
thanks, boy.    How did it start? 
 
Well-" Pug recounted his prediction of the Nazi-Soviet pact, his visits to the President, his   
assembling of the planes for England, and his reports from Berlin. He felt he was getting   
loose-tongued.    "Well, that's the idea. 
 
I've never discussed these things before with anybody, Warren. 
 
Not even your mother.    You strike me now as a thoroughgoing professional officer. 
 
It does my heart good and it gives me pleasure to confide a little in you. 
 
Also, I'm drunk as a fiddler." 
 
Warren grinned.    "Ha!    You haven't told me a thing.    That story about the planes for England   
cropped up in Time a couple of months ago." 
 
"I'm well aware of that" said his father, 'but I wasn't the one who spilled the beans.    You didn't   
see my name in that story."    'I sure didn't.    Dad, don't you know why the President likes you?  
 
You've a keen mind, you get things done, you don't talk-a rare enough combination-and added   
to all that, you don't want the job.    He must be up to his nates in these people you describe who   
keep shoving to get near him.    He must find You refreshing, as well as useful. 
 
There can't be many patriots in Washington." 
 
"Well, that's an interesting thought.    I don't know why you're buttering me up, but thanks for   
calling me a patriot with a keen mind. 
 
I do try to be as keen as the next guy, Warren.    Possibly I was a wee bit mistaken in that small   
dispute about carriers versus battleships. 
 
If I'd been ordered to the Enterprise, for instance, instead of the California-which Might well   
have been, had I ever learned to fly-I would have a command right now, instead of a skinful of   
 768 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
booze. 
 
Thank" Warren. Thanks for everything, and God bless You. Sorry I did so much talking.   
Tomorrow I want to hear all about your tangle with the Zeroes.    Now if my legs will support   
me, I think I'll go to bed." 
 
He did not stir till noon.    Janice was out on the back lawn, playing with the baby on a blanket,   
when her father-in-law emerged yawning on the screen porch in a white silk kimono, carrying   
a manila envelope. 
 
"Hi, Dad," she called.    "How about some breakfast?" 
 
He sat in a wicker chair. "You mean lunch. No thanks, I'm still off 'Schedule from the   
travelling, Your maid's making me coffee.    I'll have a look at my mail, then mosey on down to   
Cincpac." 
 
A few minutes later Janice heard a loud clink.    Victor Henry sat upright staring at a letter in his   
lap, his hand still on the coffee cup he had set down so hard. 
 
'What's the matter, Dad?" 
 
"Eh?    What?    Nothing." 
 
"Bad news from home?" 
 
"That coffee's mighty hot.    I burned my tongue.    It's nothing. 
 
Where's Warren, by the way?" 
 
'Went to the ship.    He expects to be back for dinner, but I guess we can never be sure about   
anything any more." 
 
"That's exactly right." 
 
His voice and his manner were strained and queer, she thought. 
 
Covertly she watched him read and reread two handwritten letters, looking from one to the   
other, leaving a pile of office mail unopened. 
 
" Say, Jan."    He stood, stuffing the mail back in the big envelope. 
 
"Yes, Dad.    You're sure you won't eat something?" 
 
"No, no.    I don't want to eat.    I'm a little tireder than I figured. I may even crawl back in the   
sack for a bit." 
 
When night fell, his bedroom door was still shut.    Warren came home after seven.    Janice told   
him what had been happening.    He cautiously rapped at his father's door.    'Dad?" 
 
Rapping louder, he tried the knob and went into the black room. 
 769 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Soon he came out with an empty brandy bottle.    The cork and foil lay in his palm.    "It was a   
fresh bottle, Janice.    He opened it and drank it all." 
 
"Is he all right?" 
 
"He's just out.    Out cold." 
 
"Maybe you should look at his mail." 
 
Warren gave her a frigid glare, lighting a cigarette. 
 
"Listen," she said with mixed timidity and desperation, "those letters, whatever they were,   
upset him.    You'd better find out what the trouble is."    "If he wants me to know, he'll tell me." 
 
"What are you going to do?" 
 
"Eat my dinner."    Warren did not speak again until he finished his meal. He sat silent, looking   
straight ahead when food was not before him. "Dad's taking the California thing hard," he   
finally said. 
 
"That's the whole trouble." 
 
"Well, I hope that's all." 
 
He said, "Did you listen to the evening news?" 
 
"No." 
 
'Big air strike on Manila. They made a mess of the Cavite Navy Yard. That's all the news   
Washington put out.    But the communicator on the Enterprise told me two submarines were   
bombed, and one was sunk. 
 
That one was the Devilfish."    "Oh God, no!" 
 
"And there's no word on survivors." 
 
"Maybe it's a mistaken report." 
 
"Maybe." 
 
'Warren, I feel in my bones that Byron is all right." 
 
His chilly grim face looked much like his father's.    "That's comforting. 
 
Till we get some more definite information." 
 
o military specialists, "Clark Field" is the name of a United States Tdefeat as grave as Pearl   
Harbor.    With this catastrophe at the main -Army airfield on Luzon, the Philippines lost their   
air cover; the Asiatic Fleet had to flee south; and the rich south sea islands and archipelagoes   
were laid bare at a stroke for conquest.    There has never been a rational explanation for what   
happened there. Yet Congress did not investigate it. Nobody was relieved. History still   
 770 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
ignores Clark Field, and remembers Pearl Harbor.      Clark Field was half a day late for   
immortality.    Two great disasters five thousand miles apart in one day are boring, and like any   
good editor, history has cut the repetition. 
 
Clark Field occurred half a day later than Pearl Harbor because the Japanese could not, for all   
their clever planning, arrange for the dawn to come up everywhere at once.    They gave up hope   
of surprising the Philippines, for the sunrise took five hours to traverse the bulge of ocean from   
Hawaii.    Their bombers waited for good weather in starting from Formosa, and droned straight   
in over the main island of Lazon just before high noon, expecting alert and violent opposition. 
 
The ground observers, on a war footing after the Pearl Harbor news, sent a spate of reports to   
the command center, tracking the attackers from the coast all the way to their objective.    They   
got there unopposed, nevertheless, and found the fighterb and bombers of the Far East Air   
Force-a formidable armada, built up in recent weeks as the hard core of resistance to japan- 
lined up on the ground. This ignominious occurrence remains unaccounted for. It was the   
Japanese, this time, who were surprised, very pleasantly so.    They laid utter waste to General   
Douglas MacArthur's air force, and flew away. 
 
Thus ended, in a quarter of an hour, any hope of stopping the Japanese in the south seas.    No   
course remained for the American forces there but last-ditch stands and surrenders. 
 
The Japanese at once set about to cash in on this startling success. 
 
Step one was to make Manila Bay uninhabitable for the United States Navy.    Two days after   
Clark Field a horde of bombers came in and carefully,    painstakingly destroyed the Cavite   
Naval Base at their leisure, having no air defenders to worry about.    The Devilfish and Byron   
Henry were at dead center of this attack. 
 
When the attack actually began, Byron was ashore with a working party, drawing torpedoes.   
The terrifying wail of the siren broke out not far from the big open shed of the torpedo shop.   
The overhead crane clattered to a halt.    The echoing clanks and squeals of repair machinery   
quieted down. Chiefs, torpedomen, and machinists' mates in greasy dungarees trotted away   
from their benches and lathes to take battle stations. 
 
Byron's party had four torpedoes in the truck.    He decided to load two more before leaving.   
His orders called for six, and false alarms had been plentiful ever since Clark Field.    But with   
the overhead crane shut down, it was slow work moving an assembled Mark 14 torpedo, a ton   
and a half of steel cylinder packed with explosives, propellant, and motor. 
 
The sweating Devilfish sailors were rigging one to the guy chains of a small cherry-picker   
crane when Byron's leading torpedoman glanced out at the sky.    "Mr.    Henry, here they come." 
 
Hansen had the best eyes on the Devilfish.    It took Byron half a minute to discern the neat V of   
silvery specks shining in the blue, far higher than the German planes he had seen over Poland.   
The old Warsaw feeling overwhelmed him-the fear, the exhilaration, the call to look sharp and   
act fast. 
 771 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"God, yes, fifty or sixty of 'em," he said. 
 
I ' I 'I counted fifty-seven.    They're headed this way, sir. Target angle 
 
zero. 
 
"So I see.    Well, let's hurry." 
 
The sailor at the wheel of the cherry picker began gunning the motor, tightening the chains on   
the torpedo. "Hold it!" Byron exclaimed,    hearing a distant explosion. More CRUMPS!   
sounded closer. 
 
The cement floor trembled.    Now for the first time since Warsaw Byron's ears caught a familiar   
noise-a high whistle ascending in pitch and getting louder. 
 
"Take cover!" 
 
The sailors dove under the truck and a heavy worktable nearby.    An explosion blasted close to   
the shed, then a cataract of noise burst all around, the floor shook and heaved, and Byron too   
threw himself under the table onto rough cement coaled with sandy grease. Quarters were   
narrow here and his face was jammed against somebody's    scratchy dungarees. Byron had   
never endured a bombing like this. Over and over he winced and gritted his teeth at the   
cracking blasts that shook the ground.    It seemed to him a fifty-fifty chance that he would get   
killed in the next minute. 
 
But at last the noise lessened as the bombing moved along to another part of the base. He   
crawled free and ran outside. Flame and smoke were billowing all around and walls were   
starting to crash down. 
 
The serene blue sky was flecked with A.A. bursting impotently far below the bombers, which   
were quite visible through the smoke. The Devilfish sailors came huddling around Byron,   
brushing themselves off and staring at the fires. 
 
'Hey, Mr.    Henry, it looks kind of bad, don't it?" 
 
'Are we going back aboard?"    'Should we finish loading the fish?" 
 
"Wait." 
 
Byron hurried through the smoky shed to see the situation on the other side.    Hansen came with   
him. Hansen was an old able submariner, a fat Swede from Oregon more than six feet tall,   
with a bushy blond beard and a belt pulled tight under a bulging paunch.    Hansen had failed to   
make chief because once in Honolulu he had resisted arrest by three manne shore patrol men,   
had given one a brain concussion, and had broken another's arm. He liked Byron and had   
taught him a lot without seeming to; and Byron had grown his beard partly in sympathy with   
Hansen, because the captain had been harrying the stubborn Swede to trim it or remove it. 
 
On the other side of the torpedo shop, large fires also roared and crackled, fanned by a sea   
wind.    In the street a bomb had blown a large crater water was' shooting up out of a broken   
 772 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
main, and fat blue sparks were 'Hashing among the torn and twisted underground cables. 
 
Three heavy Navy trucks stood halted by the smoking pit, and their Filipino drivers, chattering   
in Tagalog, were peering down into the hole. 
 
Byron shouted above the chaotic din, "Looks like we're stuck, maybe, Hansen.    What do you   
think?" 
 
"I don't know, Mr.    Henry.    If these trucks would move clear we could probably get out by   
doubling back around the Commandancia." 
 
One of the drivers called to Byron, "Say, can we drive through this shop?    There a way through   
to the wharf?" 
 
Byron shook his head and raised his voice over the shrieking siren and the yells of fire fighters   
dragging hoses along the street.    "All blocked on that side!    Solid fire, and some walls down!" 
 
Squinting up at the wind-driven smoke and flame, Hansen said, "Mr. 
 
Henry, the fire's gonna spread to this shop and all these fish are gonna go."    Byron understood   
the pain in the torpedoman's voice. 
 
Without torpedoes, what good was a submarine squadron? The shortage was already well   
known and acute. 
 
He said, "Well, if you could operate that overhead crane, maybe we could still pull out a few." 
 
Hansen scratched his balding head.    "Mr.    Henry, I'm not a crane man." 
 
Standing by the flooding crater was a lean civilian in overalls and a brown hard hat.    He said,   
'I'm a crane operator.    What's your problem?" 
 
Byron turned to the Filipino driver.    "Will you guys give us a hand? 
 
We want to move some torpedoes out of here." 
 
After    a rapid exchange    in    Tagalog    with the    other drivers,    the Filipino    exclaimed,    "Okay!   
Where we go?" 
 
'Come on," Byron said to the civilian.    "In this shop.    It's an overhead crane."    'I know, sonny. " 
 
In the bay off Sangley Point, meanwhile, a gray speedboat swooped alongside the Devilfish,   
which was under way, fleeing the Navy Yard and heading for the submarine base at Bataan.    It   
was Red Tully's speedboat, and he was bringing the skipper of the Devilfish back from the   
base. 
 
Branch Hoban jumped from the speedboat to the forecastle of his vessel, as Captain Tully   
yelled up at the bridge through a megaphone, "Ahoy the Dlfishl What about Seadragon and   
Sealion?"    Lieutenant Aster cupped his hands around his mouth.    "They were all right when we   
left, sir.    But they're stuck alongside.    No power." 
 773 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Oh, Christ.    Tell Branch to lie off here.    I'll go have a look." 
 
'Shall we pull the plug, sir?"    'Not unless you're attacked." 
 
Hoban arrived on the bridge as the speedboat thrummed away. 
 
'Lady, what about Briny and the working party?" 
 
Aster gestured back toward the Navy Yard, which appeared solidly afire under towering pillars   
of smoke.    "They never showed. I figured I'd better    get away from alongside, Captain."   
"Damn right. Glad one of us was aboard." In a short time the speedboat returned. The   
coxswain swerved it alongside and Tully came aboard the Devilfish white-faced and hoarse. 
 
"Bad business.    They got straddled with bombs.    I think the Sealion's a goner-she's on fire, her   
after    engine room's    flooded, and she's    sinking fast." "Ye gods," Hoban said. "We were   
outboard of her." 
 
"I know.    Damn lucky." 
 
'The Pigeon's trying to tow the Seadragon clear.    Better go back in there, Branch, and see if you   
can help."    'Aye aye, sir." 
 
A sooty motor whaleboat was puttering toward the Devilfish. 
 
"Who's this now?"    Tully said. 
 
Hoban shaded his eyes.    "Say, Lady, is that Pierce?" 
 
"Yes, it's Pierce, sir," Lieutenant Aster said, glancing through binoculars. 
 
Sailors ran out on the forecastle to help the young seaman scramble aboard.    He came to the   
bridge,    his    eyes    showing    white    and    his    mouth    red as    a    minstrel's    in    a soot-
covered    face.   
-Captain, Mr.    Henry sent me to tell you the working party's all right." 
 
"Well, thank God!    Where are they?" 
 
"They're taking torpedoes out of the shop." 
 
Tully exclaimed, "The torpedo shop?    You mean it's still standing?" 
 
"Yes, sir.    The fire sort of blew away in another direction, so Mr. 
 
Henry and Hansen got these trucks and-" 
 
"You come with me," Tully said.    'Branch, I'm going back in there." 
 
But when the squadron commander and the sailor reached the blazing Navy Yard, there was no   
way to get to the torpedo shop.    Fallen buildings and smoking debris blocked every route into   
the wharf area. 
 
Tully circled in vain through drifting smoke in a commandeered jeep, avoiding bomb craters,   
 
 
 
 
 
 
rubble, and careering, screaming ambulances. 
 
"Captain Tully, sir, I think I see them trucks," said Pierce.    He pointed to a grassy area on the   
other side of a small bridge crowded with cars, ambulances, and foot traffic.    'See?    Over there   
by the water tower." 
 
'The big gray ones?" 
 
"Yes, sir.    I think that's them, sir." 
 
Tully pulled the jeep out of the road and shouldered his way over the bridge.    He found Byron   
Henry sitting on top of heaped torpedoes in a truck, drinking a Coca-Cola.    Byron was almost   
unrecognizable,    for his    hands, face, and beard were sooty.    The three    trucks    were full of   
torpedoes, and two cherry-picker crane trucks held more.    A small army truck was piled high   
with stencilled c,rates and boxes.    The Filipino drivers sat on the grass, eating sandwiches and   
cracking jokes in Tagalog.    The Devilfish working party lay sprawled in exhausted attitudes,   
all except Hansen, who sat smoking a pipe with his back to a huge tire of the truck on which   
Byron perched. 
 
"Hello there, Byron," Tully called. 
 
Byron turned around and tried to jump up, but it was hard to do on the heap of long cylinders.   
"Oh, good afternoon, sir." 
 
"How many did you get?"    "Twenty-six, sir.    Then we had to leave. 
 
The fire was closing in." 
 
'I see you scooped up a truckload of spare parts, too." 
 
'That was Hansen's idea, sir." 
 
"Who's Hansen?"    Byron indicated the torpedoman, who had leaped to his feet on recognizing   
Captain Tully. 
 
"What's your rating?" 
 
"Torpedoman first class, sir."    'That's where you're wrong. 
 
You're a chief torpedoman." 
 
Hansen's beard opened in an ecstatic smile, and his eyes gleamed at Ensign Henry. Tully   
looked around at the trove of rescued torpedoes. 
 
"You    got exploders?"    "Yes,    sir."      "Well, good.    Suppose you drive this haul around to   
Mariveles."    'Aye aye, sir." 
 
'I'll want a report on this, Byron, with the names and ratings of your working party and of these   
drivers."    "Yes, sir." 
 775 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Any chance of getting more fish out of there?" 
 
'Depends on what the fire leaves, sir.    The shop hadn't caught when we left, but now-I don't   
know." 
 
"All right.    I'll see about that.    You get going." 
 
Next morning Byron presented himself to Captain Tully.      The squadron commander was   
working at a desk in a Quonset but on the beach at Mariveles Harbor, a deep cove in the   
mountainous Bataan peninsula. 
 
Behind Tully's tanned hairless pate a large blue and yellow chart of Manila Bay covered most   
of the plasterboard wall.    Byron handed him a twopage report.    Tully glanced through it and   
said, 'Pretty skimpy document." 
 
'It has the facts, Captain, and all the names and ratings."    Tully nodded and dropped the sheets   
in a basket.    'Branch told me you're allergic to paperwork."    "It's not my strong point, sir.    I'm   
sorry." 
 
"Now!    did he tell you what I want you for?" 
 
"Just something about salvage, sir." 'Byron, the japs are bound to land soon. We probably   
can't hold Manila, but as long as MacArthur hangs on to Bataan, the squadron can go on   
operating out of Mariveles. 
 
This is a hell of a lot closer to japan than any other sub base we've got now, or will have for a   
good long while."    Tully stood, and gestured at the wall.    "So-the idea is to clean out Cavite,   
what's left of it, and Manila, of every single item we can use, and fetch it here. 
 
You seem to have a sort of scavenger instinct."    Tully laughed, and Byron responded with a ] 
polite smile. "You'll work on this until the Devilfish goes out on operations. Lieutenant   
Commander Percifield is in charge, and    you'll report to him now over at Admiral Hart's   
headquarters in Manila.    He's expecting you." 
 
"Aye aye, sir." 
 
"While you're there, look in on Admiral Hart.    He's an old submariner, you know.    I told him   
about those torpedoes.    He appreciated it, and is writing a letter of commendation." 
 
'Yes, Captain."    "Oh, and incidentally, I've written your father about your exploit, though Lord   
knows when and how it'll catch up with him." Tully irresolutely,took off his glasses, looked at   
the erect impassive ensign, and swiveled to and fro.    "Now, Byron.    Do you still want to go to   
the Atlantic?    With all hell busting loose out here?" 
 
"Yes, sir.    I do want that."    "You do?    When there's only our squadron now to oppose the japs   
on the sea?    When this is where the fighting is?" 
 
Byron did not reply. 
 776 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'As for your wife and baby in Italy-that's unfortunate, but you know, she'll be an enemy alien   
now." 
 
"Sir, we're not at war with Italy.    Not yet."    "Oh, that's inevitable. Hitler's scheduled to make   
this big speech today, you know.    Everybody expects him to declare war, and old Musso will   
just follow suit, p.d.q. Your wife will be interned, but that's no cause for alarm.    After a while   
she'll be exchanged.    The Italians are civilized people.    I'm sure she'll be all right."    "Captain   
Tully, my wife's Jewish." 
 
The squadron commander looked surprised, and turned a bit red. 
 
He avoided Byron's eye.    "Well now, that I didn't know." 
 
"My captain knows.    I've told him.    The Italians-and what's more to the point, the Germans-will   
class my baby son as Jewish, too." 
 
Blowing out a long audible breath, Tully said, "Okay.    That's a problem. I still don't see what   
you can do about it.    Our submarine operations in the Atlantic will be minor for a long, long   
time.    Here's where we need you."    He looked up at the ensign, who stood at attention, blank- 
faced. 
 
"However, Byron, I'm going to send a dispatch, recommending your transfer to Submarine   
Force Atlantic-as and when the Devilfish gets a replacement for you.    Not before." 
 
Byron Henry showed no sign of the relief that filled him.    "Thank you, Captain Tully." 
 
The squadron commander opened a desk drawer.    "One more thing. 
 
Your commanding officer concurs in this, so congratulations." 
 
He laid on the desk before Byron a gold pin, the dolphins of a submariner. 
 
(from WORLD EMPIRE LOST) Hitler's Blowup On December 11, the final calamity   
occurred.    Adolf Hitlerafter pausing for four days in which History herself must have held her   
breath-summoned the Reichstag and declared war upon the United States.    Franklin Roosevelt,   
in his war speech to Congress on December 8, had not so much as mentioned Germany. 
 
And with good reason!    The surge of war spirit in his country was directed one hundred percent   
against "infamous" Japan. 
 
As usual, the wily President did not stick his neck out one inch beyond the stretch of public   
opinion. 
 
For four anxious days it appeared to some of our staff that the Pearl Harbor attack might prove   
the great break of the war for us. 
 
Conceivably America might turn its back entirely on Europe to cope with Japan; the hysterical   
war pressure built up by Roosevelt would all vent itself ihto the Pacific Ocean, drying up Lend- 
Lease; and we would at last have the breathing space in which to strangle England and knock   
 777 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
out the Soviet Union, after which we could deal with the USA in our own time and fashion. 
 
However, the Fuhrer was under violent Japanese pressure to "honor" the so-called Tripartite   
Pact. 
 
A Pact Becomes    a Trap This pact was mainly a propaganda sham,    like the Pact of Steel   
between Germany and Italy. Japan joined the Pact of Steel in 1940, and so it became the   
Tripartite Pact, and the chimera of the worldwide "Axis" was born.    It was a hollow bluff.    Italy   
of course was a zero. Japan wanted to threaten the Americans with Germany,    and Hitler   
wanted to threaten them with Japan. By uniting in a pact, the two poor nations hoped to   
paralyze into inactivity the rich notion that lay between them. 
 
But the earth is round, and another powerful notion lay between them in the other direction-the   
Soviet Union.    This was a different matter! Germany and Russia were linked by Ribbentrop's   
nonaggression pact. Therefore    our diplomats    had written    a clause into the Tripartite    Pact,   
saying that relations with the Soviet Union would not be affected by the new treaty. 
 
When we began operations against Russia, the Japanese found this clause of ours a very lucky   
escape hatch. They politely cited it and the neutrality pact they had meantime signed with   
Russia, and declined to march.    They might do so later when conditions permitted, they said- 
meaning, when Germany had done all the fighting and bleeding, and the winnings were about   
to be raked in. But with Pearl Harbor, global conditions suddenly reversed; and now Japan   
demanded that Germany come to her aid against America, though she had failed Germany   
against Russia! 
 
It is self-evident that Adolf Hitler owed the Japanese nothing. 
 
The pact obliged the partners to assist each other only if one was attacked by a third party.    To   
call Pearl Harbor an "attack" by America on Japan was stretching language, even in Oriental   
rhetoric.    Hitler certainly had the right to demand at least that Japan should now as a quid pro   
quo declare war on the Soviet Union.    The news of such a Japanese act would have raised the   
spirits of our snowbound troops in Russia beyond all measure. it might have changed the   
whole picture. 
 
But Hitler never made the demand.    He allowed Japan to stay on neutral terms with Russia,   
while he plunged the German people into war with America. 
 
With this one mystifying blowup, the Fuhrer threw away his historic gains and the future of the   
Reich. 
 
Why? 
 
I myself was on an inspection tour by air of the Moscow front when the Fuhrer journeyed to   
Berlin to declare war. 
 
When I saw him again at Wolf's Lair in mid-December, he was very unconcerned and airy- 
fairy about the United States.    In dinner table talk one evening when I was present, he called   
 778 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
America a mongrel nation, half Jewified and half Negrified, incapable of making serious war.   
The United States would have its hands full just with Japan, he crowed, and would probably be   
defeated. 
 
There was no chance that it could intervene in Europe.    So he said; but I believed then, and still   
do, that this was cheerful blather for his subordinates, or narcotic self-deception.    Unlike the   
Japanese leaders, Hitler knew at heart the one crucial military fact about America: that nothing   
must be done to    awaken and unite that confused, quarrelsome, luxury-rotted titan.      Pearl   
Harbor had done it. 
 
This war was at bottom a chess game with men and nations played between two wills and two   
world views, which had been competing since 1933-between Adolf Hitler and Franklin D.   
Roosevelt.    Hitler started with a handicap of rook and two pawns, as it were, in industrial plant,   
population, allies, and natural resources.    These odds compelled his flamboyant and desperate   
style. 
 
The man in the wheelchair could afford the cautious game, waiting for his opponent to defeat   
himself by unsound gambles. 
 
Hitler appeared to outplay Roosevelt brilliantly, year after year. 
 
His bloodless victories before 1939, his swift conquest of Poland and western Europe, and his   
breathtaking seizure of European Russia in 1941, turned the game heavily in his favor.    Adolf   
Hitler was within sight of checkmate, when Japan attacked Pearl Harbor.    That was the break   
Roosevelt had been waiting for. 
 
" am well aware of the conventional explanation that Hitler felt we had a de facto war going   
with America anyway in the Atlantic, and wanted to beat Roosevelt to the punch with his   
declaration, for reasons of prestige.    It is even contended that declaring war on America was a   
clever move to boost our morale, by taking the public mind Off our halts and setbacks on the   
Eastern Front. 
 
But these conjectures ignore the fatal failure to demand Japanese action against Russia, and   
also the text of the actual war declaration. 
 
This unstatesmonlike document is one long scream of despair and rage, all directed against   
Roosevelt.    My judgment will always be that Hitler saw the game unexpectedly go glimmering,   
and In anger kicked over the board. 
 
Finis Germaniae 
 
Other writers follow Churchill and place the turning point of the war a year later, in the triple   
cluster of events-Stalingrad, El Alamein, and the North African landings-when the turn became   
visible in the field. But the true turn was Pearl Harbor. 
 
We scored our greatest successes, without question, and expanded our short-lived German   
empire to its amazing farthest reach only in 1942, long after Pearl Harbor and the halt at   
 779 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Moscow.    Our    U-boats    almost mastered    the    Atlantic,    sending    whole    fleets    of    British   
and   
American ships to the bottom.    Our armies marched to the Caucasus Mountains,. the Caspion   
Sea, and the Nile.    Our energetic ally, Japan, captured her East Asian empire in swift blazing   
victories. 
 
But one memory haunted me during all those victories: the airplane trip I had made to the   
Moscow front right after Pearl Harbor. From the air I saw German tanks, trucks, and gun   
carriages straggled over hundreds of miles of desolate plains, frozen in mud or bogged in snow   
under the gloomy low Russian sun. 
 
I saw dead horses lying in the snow, and our soldiers hacking at their frozen carcasses for meat   
to eat.      We landed often among man and boys shivering in ragged green-gray summer   
uniforms, building fires under their vehicles to keep the radiators from bursting and the oil   
from getting too viscous to flow.    Endless were the complaints I heard then about the lack of   
boots, heavy socks, gloves, antifreeze,    and the solve that was supposed to free the tanks'   
telescopic sights. 
 
When the telescopes froze stuck without the salve, the tankists could not see to maneuver and   
protect themselves. Pathetic were the shivering soldiers wearing ladies' fur coats and boas,   
collected by Goebbels and sent to the front. 
 
My trip took me within sight of Moscow's barrage balloons and antiaircraft flashes.    There I   
tasted the full bitterness of that tantalizing halt, and there I first heard that we were at war again   
with America.    In my heart I knew that spelled, once and for all, finis Germaniae. 
 
Germany after 1941 was like a charging elephant with a bullet in its brain, trampling and   
killing its tormentors with its last momentum before falling.    The bullet was Pearl Harbor. 
 
World Empire Lost With these comments, I conclude Volume I of my operational analysis of   
the Second World War, and a word of summary is in order. 
 
General George Marshall, in his 1945 victory report, called Germany, Japan, and Italy "three   
criminal nations bent on easy loot." 
 
But if we had won, as we almost did, the leaders who would have hung would have been   
Stalin, Churchill, Roosevelt, and Mr.    Marshall. 
 
The criminal nations would have been the Allies, who tried to keep their plutocratic loot of   
previous    centuries by murdering German and Japanese    women and    children    from    the    air.   
Hitler did not order Hiroshima and Dresden!    There is no morality in world history.    There are   
only tides of change borne on violence and death. The victors write the history, pass the   
judgments, and hang or shoot the losers. 
 
In truth history is an endless chain of hegemony shifts, based on the decay of old political   
structures    and the rise of new ones. Wars are the fever crises    of those shifts. Wars are   
inevitable; there will always be wars; and the one war crime is to lose.    That is the reality, and   
the rest is sentimental nonsense. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We went on following Adolf Hitler to the last, to unbelievable triumphs    and unparalleled   
disasters, from Pearl Harbor to the fall of Berlin, because he was our national destiny. A   
romantic idealist, an inspiring leader, dreaming grand dreams of new heights and depths of   
human possibilities, and at the same time an icy calculator with iroti willpower, he was the soul   
of Germany.    We are a romantic people, and Hitler was German Romance incarnate. No   
truthful history of our nation will ever be written which does not face that fact.    He had his   
faults, including a definite taste for cruelty, a certain ingrained petit bourgeois vulgarity, an   
exaggerated opinion of his military acumen, and the well-known, regrettable tendency to anti- 
Semitism.    Such were the blemishes of this worldhistorical individual, but no human being is   
perfect. 
 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTE: Armin von Roon properly breaks his two-part operational analysis   
of the Second World War at Pearl Harbor. In the period covered by World Empire Lost, a   
European war like World War I raged, with much the same lineup; for that reason Winston   
Churchill co/led it a continuation after a truce, and both conflicts together a new Thirty Years'   
War.    But all that time, the United States was out of it.    After Pearl Harbor, we were in it up to   
our necks, and it become the Rest global war.    That is another story. 
 
Roon's summaries from his second volume have recently appeared in Germany under the title   
World Holocaust.    Analyzing mainly Germany's defeats and downfall, it has not been much of   
a success. 
 
His concluding estimate of Hitler overlooks one or two small points. This able and resolute   
homicidal maniac, using modern Germany as his murder instrument, directly caused between   
twenty-five and thirty-five million human deaths; the exact figure will never be known. 
 
To stop him cost the world billions, maybe trillions, of dollars. 
 
Had the German people shut this strange individual away in an insane asylum,    instead of   
setting him up as their adored leader and throwing their full strength behind him for twelve   
years, these deaths and this waste would not have occurred. 
 
On the historical record Adolf Hitler was certainly the worst liar, doublecrosser, destroyer, and   
mass murderer in the world's amnals. Roon might have mentioned these facts among Hitler's   
blemishes.-V.Him door stood open to Natalie's bedroom, and Hitler's screeching Twoke the   
baby. In the sitting room Natalie had the radio turned low, but at the Fuhrer's sudden   
shriek-'ROOSEVELTI'-she and Aaron looked at each other in alarm, and Louis began sobbing. 
 
'He is a maniac, after all."    Slumped in an armchair in a bathrobe and muffler, his sunken red- 
shadowed eyes watering, Aaron Jastrow shook his head and lifted a trembling teacup to his   
mouth, as Hitler went on with his hoarse bellows, sneers, whispers, and yells. "Extremely   
clever, persuasive, and forceful, but a maniac.    I confess I never grasped it before.  
 
I thought he playacted." 
 
With a faintly contemptuous glance at her uncle, Natalie went to the baby. 
 781 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Fuhrer's speech, starting with the usual complaints of injustices endured by Germany and   
himself, had worked up to the naming of the one supreme war criminal responsible for all the   
bloodshed and misery that he, the Fuhrer, had worked so hard to avert, the insane hypocrite   
who had sold out his country and himself to the Jews, thwarted Germany at every turn, and   
loosed destruction on mankind. 
 
After a strangely long pause, came the wild scream that woke the child: "Roo-oo-ss-felt!' And   
this bitter hate-filled animal cry somehow woke Aaron Jastrow, too. 
 
In recent years, Jastrow had listened to few Hitler speeches. 
 
They bored him.    He was a historian, and history's pages were crowded with such flamboyant   
tyrants who had strutted their brief seasons, done their damage, bunt their grandiose   
monuments, and passed away.    So it would be with Hitler, he had once written after a visit to   
Germany, in a cool meditative essay in Harper's entitled "Der Fuhrer: Thoughts Before   
Midnight." 
 
In this essay, Jastrow had pigeonholed the Nazi boilup with other brief violent mass upheavals   
which through the ages had come and gone. 
 
Sometimes they changed the order of things, like the Crusades and the French Revolution;   
sometimes they left only destruction, like the flashflood massacres of Alaric and Tamerlane.   
Perhaps this weirdly glorified little beggar had something to contribute to the world.    His call   
for a new unified order in Europe made a certain sense.    He might start a world war; he might   
win it or he might lose it; but in any case he wouldd at last die, and the world would wag on. 
 
God-Jastrow used the term with arch irony to denote the blind drift of events-like a good   
roadside juggler, did his act with whatever objects came to his hand.    If Hitler triumphed and   
brought a tyrannic German unity to Europe, or even to the whole earth, lasting a century or   
two, perhaps that meant he had been needed at this time on our tiny earth. What happened,   
after all, was only what had to happen.    There were no dice in, heaven.    The human spirit in its   
unending quest for freedom would either soften and tame its Teuton masters at last, or would   
crack the prison Of tyranny, as a grass blade cracks a concrete pavement. 
 
Having thus boxed the German dictator away in some neat paragraphs, Aaron Jastrow had   
mentally shelved the man.    Hitler broke from Aaron Jastrow's mental box on this day, with his   
scream of Roosevelt's name. 
 
As the dictator went on with his long, almost raving, yet mordant comparison between   
Roosevelt and himself-he the poor son of struggling parents, Roosevelt the pampered only   
child of a millionaire; he the common soldier of the First World War, enduring rain and gunfire   
and muck for four years, Roosevelt the highborn insider, enjoying a safe cushy desk job in the   
Navy Department; he the gassed veteran, lying penniless in a hospital, Roosevelt the tricky   
postwar financial speculator doubling his inherited wealth; he the restorer and rebuilder of a   
defeated, prostrate nation, Roosevelt the economic tinkerer, the wrecker of a rich country with   
his crackpot New Deal schemes; he the valiant fighter of old wrongs, the messianic unifier of   
 782 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Europe, Roosevelt the master war cnal, seeking to stave off the future and preserve the world   
hegemony of the Jews -listening to this ferocious, crazed, queerly coherent fantasy, Aaron   
Jastrow wavered in his philosophic stance, and finally became scared. 
 
The Italians had already cancelled the exit visas of Americans. 
 
The charge had told Jastrow that this was just a precautionary move, and that they should still   
plan to leave on the fifteenth if meantime war was not declared.    For days Jastrow had slept   
and eaten little. 
 
Now Hitler's speech, as he listened, seemed to be clanging shut an iron door. 
 
"Well?"    Natalie said, carrying in the blanket-wrapped squalling baby. 
 
"Is there any hope?" 
 
"He hasn't declared war yet.    Not in so many words." 
 
In an absent practiced way, without much effort at modesty,    she opened her sweater, suit   
jacket, and blouse, flashed a white breast, and drew the brown sweater over the baby.    'y is it so   
much colder in this room? It's icy, and the more-"- Jastrow put a finger to his lips. 
 
Hitler was whipping himself up to a crescendo.    His audience, hushed for a long time, broke   
out in applause, cheers, and roars of 'Sieg Heil!" "Now what was that, Aaron?" 
 
Jastrow raised his voice over the raucous noises of the crowd. 
 
"I'm afraid that was it.    He said he's called in the United States diplomats and given them their   
papers.    That started the cheering." 
 
"Well, all I can say is, I couldn't be less surprised."    Natalie stroked the baby's cheek with a   
finger, and dolefully smiled as it quieted and began sucking. "You're just hungry, monkey,   
aren't you?" 
 
Her uncle said 'Mussolini still has to talk. We'll know in another hour or so." 'Oh, Aaron,   
what choice has he?" 
 
He shut off the radio.    "Well, that's that.    I believe I'll have a glass of sherry.    You, too?" 
 
"No, no.    I'd better keep my wits about me today, what's left of them." 
 
Jastrow poured and gulped a glassful, then took another, and shrank in his armchair, sipping it,   
looking vacantly around at the high long frigid room paed with suitcases and wooden boxes.   
The hotel was silent and the street outside was silent. 
 
'Don't despair, Natalie.    In 1939 E Duce did manage to squirm out of it, you know.    He's no use   
to Hitler militarily.    The Italians are sick and sour and beaten.    If he declares war against the   
United States, he might be assassinated, and Hitler surely doesn't want that. 
 
Besides, he's wily. 
 783 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
He may well find some weaseling formula, and we may yet be on that plane on the fifteenth." 
 
'Oh, Aaron, quit it, for God's sake.    He'll declare war." 
 
Jastrow sighed heavily.    'I suppose so.    Natalie, I'm sorry, deeply and tragically sorry." 
 
She held up a hand, palm out.    "No, no.    Don't.    What's the use?" 
 
"let me have my say.    I simply can't bear the way I've involved you and your baby.    I've never-" 
 
"Aaron, I did it myself.    Don't rake it over now.    Don't.    I can't stand that."    A long silence,   
except for the baby making loud sucking noises. Jastrow sipped the sherry, glancing at his   
niece with a hang&g expression. 
 
"I might telephone the embassy, my dear, and ask if there are any plans afoot for the   
diplomatic n."    "That's a good idea, if you can get through.    Otherwise we'd better go there." 
 
"I'm planning to," Jastrow said, "in any case."    He made the call, but the embassy lines were   
busy.    Pouring more sherry, he spoke slowly, coughing now and then.    "One thing wrong with   
being a historian is the way it distorts one's view of the present.    I seem to see current events   
through the wrong end of a telescope.    The figures look small and comical.    The happenings   
seem so trivial, so repetitious, so banal! 
 
I can read the past fairly well, I think, and I also have some clarity about the future.    Only in   
the present am I so dense.    Hitler and Mussolini don't have the resources to last, my dear.    This   
gaudy shabby    militaristic madhouse in central Europe will fall.      Russia and America are   
awesome, and between them they will crush Nazism.    The only question is how soon.    Well, I'd   
better dress." 
 
"Yes, do that, Aaron." 
 
"I'll just finish my wine first."    Natalie impatiently arose and took the baby into the bedroom to   
avoid a row with her uncle.    She had no store of kindness left for this garrulous, vain, cranky   
old man, whose Olympian irony and willfully blinkered optimism had mired her and her baby   
in this peril; though in the end-she always came back to this-she herself was most responsible. 
 
Natalie Henry had thought and thought about her predicament until she could no longer bear   
the self-probing.    Where had she committed the fatal stupidity?    In coming back?    in marrying   
Byron? In not taking the German plane out of Zurich? In not following Herb Rose to the   
Palestine ship?    No, something deep was wrong with her; she was in some Ultimate sense, for   
all her apparent cleverness, a terrible fool. She was nothing and nobody; she had no real   
identity; all her life she had been floating like dandelion fuzz on the wind.    She was 'Jewish,"   
but the label meant nothing to her beyond the trouble it caused. She had had her first love   
affair with an intellectual heathen Gentile.    She had married a Christian without giving the dash   
of backgrounds much thought; his youth and lack of learning had bothered her more.    What a   
queer, random, disjointed chain of happenings had created this sleepy blue-eyed little living   
thing at her breast!    In the past weeks, Natalie had started dreaming at night that none of it had   
 784 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
happened.    In these dreams time reeled back, sometimes to Paris, sometimes to college, most   
often to her childhood on Long Island.    Relief and joy would fill her in her sleep at finding that   
she was out of the nightmare; cold sinking sadness would follow when she woke to discover   
that the wrong side of the dream-line was the real side. But at least on this side the baby   
dwelled. 
 
The baby was becoming her anchor to life.    At the moment the most real tung on earth was the   
warm little mouth at her chest: alive, sweet, and sublimely good.    Beyond it-in the hotel suite,   
in Rome, in Europe -all was squalor, danger, uncertainty, and darkening horizons. 
 
The diplomatic train was the very last chance.    Natalie tucked the infant away when he dropped   
asleep, and dressed to go to the embassy. 
 
'Ah, my dear, you look very well."    In the sitting room Aaron now reclined rather grandly on a   
couch, in the handsome blue cape that the Searles had given him for his sixty-second birthday,   
his best dark suit, and a large bow tie.    He was still drinking sherry. 
 
'Balderdash.    If I ever get home safe, one of my first orders of business will be to burn this   
damned dress, and I'll never wear brown again." 
 
Waving his half-full glass at her with stiff jauntiness, Aaron laughed merrily.    "It's grand that   
you've kept your sense of humor," he said, although Natalie had been quite serious.    "Sit down,   
my dear. 
 
Don't pace." 
 
'Aren't we going to the embassy?"    She perched on the arm of a couch. 
 
"Tell me, Natalie, did you ever meet Father Enrico Spanelli?" 
 
"That Vatican librarian?    No." 
 
He gave her the squinting teasing smile that appeared in late evenings when he had taken too   
much brandy.    "But I thought we all had dinner one evening together." 
 
'We were supposed to.    Louis got sick." 
 
"Oh yes.    I remember now.    Well, Enrico is coming in a little while to drive us to the Piazza   
Venezia.    He knows all the newspapermen, and we'll hear and see Mussolini from the press   
section." 
 
'What!    Good Lord, I don't want to go there with the baby in that Fascist mob!    What about-"   
Jastrow held up a cautionary hand and began scrawling on a pad, talking at the same time.   
"Well, my dear, it's visible history.    Since we're in a tight spot, we may as well have the good   
of it."    The sheet he passed to her read: If it's war he'll take us straight to the embassy.    That's   
the idea.    We'll be out of the hotel, where we might be picked up. 
 
She wrote underneath, Why do you trust him?    They did not know for certain that microphones   
had been planted in their suite, but they sometimes wrote notes as a precaution. 
 785 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jastrow blinked at her, took off his glasses, and polished them with a handkerchief.    This was   
his unconscious signal, long familiar to Natalie, of a harangue.    Softly he said, "Natalie, do you   
know that I am a Catholic?" 
 
"What!    What do you mean?" 
 
"Ah, then you don't know.    I thought perhaps you were being tactful, all these years, Well, it's   
quite true." 
 
Aaron often made    odd remarks    over brandy or wine, but he had never said anything this   
strange.    Puzzled and disconcerted, Natalie shrugged, "What am I supposed to say?    Are you   
serious?" 
 
"Oh, very.    It's the family skeleton, my dear.    I'm a bit surprised that they never told you.    I   
converted when I was twenty-three."      He gave her a red-eyed, twisted, sheepish grin,   
scratching his beard.    "It never took.    I fear I'm the wrong blood type for that or any religion,   
At the time the act was sincere." Aaron now told her about a Radcliffe girl whom he had   
tutored in history and aesthetics, a girl of a wealthy Catholic family.    After a stormy year and a   
half the love affair had collapsed.    He had left Cambridge and finished up his doctorate at Yale,   
to put behind him the girl and his memories. 
 
His conversion had been a very private matter.    He had been discreet and stealthy about taking   
instruction, for many Jewish friends in Boston had been kind to him and he did not want to   
upset or argue with them. By the time he departed from Harvard, he had decided that the   
conversion was a mistake, having painfully worked his way to the skeptical naturalism that was   
his settled view.    Thereafter, whenever the question of his religion came up, he had mentioned   
his self-evident Jewish    origin    and    said no    more.      He    had    done nothing further    about   
the   
Catholic episode; he had simply let it lapse from his life. 
 
But he had made one bad mistake, very early in the affair.    He had discussed it with his family.   
What I've always    regretted," he said gloomily.    "It Probably shortened my father's life-my   
mother by then was dead -and your parents certainly never got over the shock. We were   
estranged for good, though I once told your father that that phase was over, that I considered   
myself a non-practicing Jew and nothing else. 
 
It didn't help. 
 
They dropped me. 
 
'When the Book-of-the-Month Club chose A Jew's Jesus, Louis did write me a stiff little letter.   
His rabbi wanted me to come and lecture at his temple.    He phrased it so that I could hardly   
accept.    I thought his letter was cruel.    I replied very warmly, but I declined. 
 
That was that.    I never saw either of them again.    I've only discussed this with one other person   
beside Yourself in more than thirty years, Natalie, and that other person is Enrico Spanelli.  
 
"I told him in September, when I was turned back from Switzerland. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I thought it might prove useful.    He's an excellent fellow and a fine classical scholar, though   
rather weak on early Byzantium. Well, he has beer, Marvelously sympathetic. He never   
argued my religious position, but simply wrote to the United States for verification.    He's got   
the documents, and I have copies. So-we have friends in the Vatican, my dear. I hope we   
won't need them, but it is a sort of insurance." 
 
Natalie, who could think only of the possible effect on her baby, was pleased and amazed.   
This was like finding a forgotten rusty key to a dungeon cell.    Aaron's youthful religious flip- 
flops were his own business; but the technicality might indeed bring help and refuge, or even   
escape in an emergency!    This disclosure also explained, at long last, her parents' peculiarly   
strained and glum attitude about Aaron. 
 
Deep down, she herself felt a small involuntary stirring of disdain for her uncle. 
 
She said, "Why, Aaron, I'm gasping a bit, but I think it's most amazingly clever of you to have   
stopped being a Jew more than forty years ago. 
 
What foresight!" 
 
"Oh, I'm still a Jew.    Don't make that mistake.    So was Paul after his conversion, you know.   
You're not disgusted with me, then, as your parents were?    How nice." 
 
A satirical smile wrinkled her mouth.    "A jew's Jesus, indeed. 
 
You fraud." 
 
"He was a Jew's Jesus." Aaron Jastrow straightened up inside the heavy cape and raised a   
bearded proud chin.    "I insist on that.    The book is the fruit of a bitter wrestle with myself.    I   
was frankly swept away by the whole opulent Christian structure of thought and art that I   
discovered in college, all built on what that Palestinian fellow called a murdered Jew. We   
Jews pretend that structure doesn't exist, Natalie-that is, Jews like your parents and mine do-but   
that won't wash, you know. 
 
It's there.    In the end I probed past the religious metaphors and came to grips with Jesus as he   
was, trying to grasp the historical reality. That was the essence of my wrestle for a year. I   
found an extraordinarily winning and magnetic personality, a talented and tragic poor relative   
of mine, who lived in Palestine in olden days.    So the book really-" The telephone rang.    "Ah,"   
Jastrow said, pushing himself out of his chair, "that's bound to be Enrico.    Get the baby, dear." 
 
Natalie hesitated, then said, "All right.    Let's go." 
 
At the wheel of a rusty, faded little car outside the hotel, a man wearing a clerical hat, and an   
overcoat with a ratty fur collar, waved a smoking cigarette at them in a thick peasant hand.   
"Professorel" The librarian/priest had a face strangely like Mussolini's-prominent brown eyes,   
big curved jaw, and wide fleshy mouth.    But glasses and a sweet placid expression under the   
flat black hat, as well as his indoor pallor, much reduced the ominoui; resemblance.    "You look   
tired, Professors," he said, after greeting Natalie in charming Roman Italian, and admiring the   
 787 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
heavily wrapped, almost invisible baby.    The car started with rheumatic wheezings. 
 
"I've not slept well." 
 
The priest's glance was Mild and kind.    'I understand.    As you requested, I've made inquiries   
about your taking refuge in the Vatican. 
 
It's not impossible, but the concordat pathetically limits our freedom of action. 
 
I would offer you one word of caution.    Such exceptional expedients can have negative results.   
One calls attention to oneself. 
 
One becomes a special case.", He drove carefully down the almost deserted boulevard and   
turned into a street where people were crowding toward the Piazza Venezia, with placards   
swaying above their heads. 
 
"The trouble is," said Jastrow, 'I already am one." 
 
The priest pursed His lips and tilted his head in a most Italian way. 
 
"True.    Well, your cloudy nationality might be an advantage.    If you are actually stateless, then   
clearly you are not an enemy alien." 
 
Spanelli glanced around at Natalie with drooping eyes.      'This is not true of your niece,   
naturally.    One assumes your embassy will somehow provide for her-" 
 
"Father, pardon me.    Whoever gives me refuge must take her in too." 
 
The priest pursed his lips again and was silent.    The crowd thickened as they neared the piazza:   
quiet sad-looking people in shabby winter clothes.    The blackshirts carrying the placards were   
trying to hold up their chins and glare like 11 Duce. 
 
'These I signs are viler than usual," Jastrow said. Beside the car, a fat red-faced blackshirt   
marched with a crude cartoon of Mrs. 
 
Roosevelt sitting on a chamber pot, squawking obscenities about her husband.    Ahead of the   
car, on another sign, a bag of money with a Roosevelt grin walked on crutches, smoking a   
cigarette in an uptilted holder. 
 
'When the pot boils, the scum comes to the surface," said the priest. 
 
He slipped the car through narrow side streets, parked in a rubbishfilled archway, and guided   
them down an alley into the Piazza Venezia. 
 
The thronged square was surprisingly still.    People stood around saying nothing, or chatting in   
low tones. The sky was gray, the wind strong and cold. Flag-bearing schoolchildren were   
huddled in front of the balcony in a docile mass, not laughing or playing pranks, just holding   
their flapping flags up and fidgeting. 
 
The priest brought Jastrow and Natalie into a roped-off section near the balcony, where   
 788 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
photographers clustered with reporters, including a few Americans, as well as the grinning   
happy Japanese correspondents Natalie had met at the party. Somebody produced a folding   
chair for her.    She sat holding the sleeping baby tightly in her lap, now and then shuddering,   
though she wore a heavy sweater under her coat.    The raw wind seemed to cut through to her   
skin. 
 
they waited a long time before Mussolini ruddenly stepped out on the balcony and raised a   
hand in salute.    A crowd roar cascaded and reechoed in the square: "Duce!    Duce!    Duce!"    It   
was a strange effect, since all the people were looking up silently, with blank or hostile faces,   
at the tubby figure in the gold-eagled, tasselled black hat, and the black and gold jacket, a get- 
up more like an opera costume than a uniform. Under the balcony, a few blackshirts were   
diligently manufacturing the cheers, huddled around microphones.    A tall man in the uniform   
of the German Foreign Service appeared next, with a Japanese in a cutaway coat and high hat.   
They flanked the dictator, who was even smaller than the Oriental; and Mussolini looked as   
though he were between guards come to arrest him.    The blackshirts quit their noise and turned   
their oval, sallow faces up at the balcony, a pack of waiters and harbors, Natalie thought, in   
sloppy pseudomilitary masquerade. 
 
The brief erh was belligerent, the tone was belligerent, the gestures were very familiar and very   
belligerent, but it all came out ridiculous. The sound did not fit the gestures Mulini Hailed his   
flet when he dropped his voice, and shouted fiercely some inn()cuotis prepositions and   
conjunctions,    and at the    most    inappropriate-. points    he    griinned    The old ptif.Fv    dictator,   
already defeated in CTeece and shorn of much of his North African empire, seemed to be   
having a highly irrelevant good time, as he declared war on the United States of America.   
While the blackshirts at random moments cheered and shouted "Doo-cha-vi' the crowd began   
to leave.    Mussolini bellowed his last sentences at thousands of departing backs-an incredible   
sight in this dictatorship-an old ham actor scorned by the audience: 'Italians, once more arise   
and be ivorthy of this historic hour.    We shall WIN!"    And again he smiled. 
 
To blackshirt cheers, the three figures on the balcony withdrew; Mussolini came out twice to   
bow, but the mob was dispersing as though a cloudburst had started. 
 
The little knot of Americans stayed together, talking excitedly in low tense tones.    Though the   
thing was no surprise, it felt strange now that it had happened; they stood on the soil of an   
enemy country.      The debate among the correspondents, who kept glancing at policemen   
hovering nearby, was whether to go to their offices to clear out their desks, or head straight for   
the embassy.    Several decided for the office first, arguing that once in the embassy they might   
be holed up for a long time, perhaps even until the diplomatic train left. 
 
This put Aaron Jastrow in mind of his manuscript.    He asked Father Spanelli to take them to   
the hotel before going on to the embassy.    The priest was agreeable, and Natalie did not argue.   
She was in a shocked state. The baby was beginning to cry, and she thought of picking up   
some diapers and supplier, for him.    They' returned to the car and drove to the Excelsior, but   
the priest suddenly braked, a block from the hotel; and he pointed through the windshield at   
two Police cars pulled into the entrance driveway.    Turning large, moist, worried brown eyes at   
 789 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aaron Jastrow, he said, "Of course the manuscript is precious, Pr'ofessore. Still, all things   
considered, had you not better go to your embassy first?    If the worst comes to the worst, I can   
get your manuscript for you." 
 
"The embassy, the embassy," Natalie said.    "He's right.    The embassy." 
 
Jastrow nodded sadly. 
 
But again, a couple of blocks from the embassy, Spanelli halted the car. A cordon of police and   
soldiers stood in front of the building. Across the street a small crowd of spectators stood   
waiting for some melodramatic occurrence. At the moment, from this distance, all looked   
quiet. 
 
"Let us walk," said the priest.    "You should pass through that line with no trouble, but let us   
see." 
 
Natalie was sitting in back of the car.    Jastrow turned to her and put a comforting hand over   
hers.    His face was settling into a stony, weary, defiant expression.    "COme, my dear.    There's   
not much choice now." 
 
they walked up the side of the street where the spectators were standing.    On the edge of the   
crowd they encountered the Times man who had taken Natalie to the Japanese party.    He was   
frightened and bitter; he urged them not to try to crash the cordon.      The United Press   
correspondent had just attempted it, not five minutes earlier; he had been stopped at the gate,   
and after some argument a police car had appeared and had carried him off. 
 
"But how can that be?    That is not civilized, that is senseless," exclaimed Father Spanelli.    "We   
have many correspondents in the United States.    It is idiotic behavior.    It will be corrected." 
 
"When?"      said the Times man.      'And what wig happen to Phil meantime? I've heard   
disagreeable things about your secret service." 
 
Holding her baby close, fighting off a feeling of walking in black waters, a feeling like the   
worst of bad dreams, Natalie said, "What now, Aaron?" 
 
"We must try to go through.    What else is there?"    He turned to the priest.    "Or-Enrico, can we   
go to the Vatican now?    Is there any point to that?" 
 
The priest spread his hands.    "No, no, not now.    Don't think of it. 
 
Nothing is arranged.    It might be the worst of things to do. 
 
Given some time, something may be worked out.    Surely not now." 
 
'Jesus Christ, there you are," said a coarse American voice. 
 
"We're all in big trouble, kids, and you'd better come with me." 
 
Natalie looked around into the worried, handsome, very Jewish face of Herbert Rose. 
 790 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
For a long while after that, the overpowering actuality was the smell of fish in the truck that   
was taking them to Naples, so strong that Natalie breathed in little gasps.    The two drivers were   
Neapolitans whose busin was bringing fresh fish to Rome.    Rabinovitz had hired the truck to   
transport a replacement part for the ship's old generator; a burnt-out armature had delayed the   
sailing. 
 
Gray-faced with migraine, the stocky Palestinian now crouched swaying on the floor of the   
truck beside the burlap-wrapped armature, eyes closed, knees hugged in his arms. He had   
spent two days and nights hunting for the armature in Naples and Salemo, and then had tracked   
down a used one in Rome. He had brought Herbert Rose along to help him bargain for it.   
When Rose had first brought Jastrow and Natalie to the truck, parked on a side street near the   
embassy, the Palestinian had talked volubly, though he had since lapsed into this stupor-, and   
the story he had then told had convinced Natalie to climb into the truck with her baby. 
 
After a few last agonized words with Father Spanelli about the manuscript, Aaron had followed   
her. 
 
This was the Palestinian's story.    He had gone to the Excelsior at Herb Rose's urging, to offer   
Jastrow and Natalie a last chance to join them. There in Aaron Jastrow's suite he had found two   
Germans waiting. 
 
Well-dressed, well-spoken men, they had invited him inside and closed the door.    When asked   
about Dr. Jastrow they had begun questioning him in a tough manner, without identifying   
themselves, Rabinovitz had backed out as soon as he could, and to his relief they had simply let   
him go. 
 
During the first hour or so of the bouncing, rattling ride. in this dark, malodorous truck,   
Jastrow vainly talked over all the possible benign explanations for the presence of Germans in   
his hotel suite.    It was almost a monologue, for Natalie was still dumb with alarm, Rabinovitz   
appeared sunk in pain, and Herbert Rose was bored. 
 
Obviously the men were Gestapo agents, Rose said, come to pick up the '%.    lue chip," and   
there was nothing more to discuss.    But Dr. 
 
Jastrow was having second thoughts about this precipitate decision to go with Rabinovitz, and   
he was having them aloud.      Finally, diffidently, he mentioned the diplomatic train as a   
possibility that still existed. This roused Natalie to say, "You can go back to Ro me, Aaron, and   
try to get on that train.    I won't.    Good luck."    Then Jastrow gave up, curled himself in a corner   
in his thick cape, and went to sleep. 
 
The fish truck was not halted on the way to Naples.    A familiar sight on the highway, it was a   
perfect cover for these enemy fugitives. 
 
When it reached the port city, night had fallen.    As it slowly made. 
 
its way through blacked-out streets toward the waterfront, policemen repeatedly challenged the   
drivers, but a word or two brought laughter and permission to go on. 
 791 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Natalie heard all this through a fog of tension and fatigue.    The sense of everyda' reality had   
quite left her.    She was riding the whirlwind. 
 
The truck stopped.      A sharp rapping scared her, and one of the drivers said in hoarse   
Neapolitan accents, "Wake up, friends.    We're here." 
 
They descended from the truck to a wharf, where the sea breeze was an intensely sweet relief.   
In the cloudy nigh the vessel alongside the wharf was a shadowy shape, where shadowy people   
walked back and forth. It appeared no larger to Natalie than a New York harbor sightseeing   
boat. 
 
Dr.    Jastrow said to Rabinovitz, "When will you sail? 
 
Immediately?" 
 
With a grunt, Rabinovitz said, "No such luck.    We must install this unit and test it.    That'll take   
time.    Come.    aboard, and we'll find a comfortable place, for you."    He gestured at the narrow   
railed gangway. 
 
"What's the name of this boat?"    Natalie asked. 
 
"Oh, it has had many names.    It's old.    Now it's called the Redeemer. 
 
It's Turkish registry, and once you're aboard you will be secure. 
 
The harbor master and the Turkish consul here have an excellent understanding." 
 
Holding her baby close, Natalie said to Aaron Jastrow, "I'm beginning to feel like a jew." 
 
He smiled sourly.    "Oh?    And I've never stopped feeling like one. 
 
I thought I'd gotten away from it. Obviously I haven't. Come along, this is the way now."   
Aaron set foot on the gangway first.    She followed him, clutching her baby son in both arms,   
and Rabinovitz plodded up behind them. 
 
As Natalie set foot on the deck, the Palestinian touched her arm. 
 
in the gloom she could see him wearily smile.    "Well, relax now, Mrs. 
 
Henry. 
 
You're in Turkey.    That's a start."    AmcE was awakened by the sound of a shower starting full   
force. Her luminous    bed clock read five minutes    past five. She showered too, put on a   
housecoat, and combed her hair. In the living room Victor Henry sat buttoned up in white and   
gold, reading Navy correspondence by lamplight.    His close-shaved face was ashen, which she   
more or less expected, after his dispatching a quart of brandy and passing sixteen hours in a   
stupor. 
 
Pencilling a note on a letter, he cleared his throat and said placidly, "Good morning, Jan.    Did I   
disturb you?    Sorry."    'Morning, Dad.    No, Vic often gets me up around now.    Is it too early for   
 792 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
some bacon and eggs?" 
 
'Matter of fact, that sounds pretty good. Warren get back last night?" 'Yes. He's in there."   
Janice wanted to tell him about the loss of the Devilfish, but he scared her, sitting there livid   
and cool in his starched uniform.    He would find out, she thought, soon enough. 
 
She made coffee, fed the baby, and started breakfast. As usual, the smell of frying bacon   
brought Warren out, humming and brushing his hair, dressed in a khaki uniform.    He grinned at   
his father, and Janice realized that he was putting on an act and would not disclose the   
Devilfish news.    "Hi, Dad. 
 
How're you doing?"    'Not badly-all things considered."    Brushing a fist against his forehead,   
Pug ed ruefully.    "I seem to have slept around the clock." 
 
"Yes.    Well, travel will do that to a fellow."    "Exactly.    Funny effect travel has.    Did I empty   
the bottle?" 
 
Warren laughed.    "Bone dry."    "I only remember drinking the first half." 
 
"Dad, it was just what the doctor ordered.    How about a hair of the dog?" 
 
Pug raised a hand.    'That's the road to perdition.    This coffee's excellent." 
 
Pouring himself a cup, Warren said, "You picked a good day to sleep through.    Lots of news,   
none of it good." 
 
"For instance?" 
 
"Hitler and Mussolini declared war on us." 
 
"They did?    Then the lineup's complete.    They're fools, making it easier for the President.    Is   
that the worst of it?" 
 
"Before you sacked out, had you heard about the Prince of Wales and the Repulse?    The japs   
got them both off Singapore." 
 
"What!"    "Air attack.    Battleships versus airplanes again, Dad, and they sank em both." 
 
"God in heaven, Warren, they got the Prince of Wales?    Did the British confirm that?" 
 
"And the Repulse.    Churchill admitted it.    The Limeys are through in this ocean, right at the   
start.    Australia's naked.    Looks like it's all up to us out here." 
 
Victor Henry half buried his face in a hand. That great ship in its splashy camouflage, he   
thought, that dark elegant wardroom, those tired, gallant officers and sailors, that deck where   
Winston Churchill and Franklin Roosevelt had sung hymns under the guns-gone, gone, sunk in   
the far Pacific!    He said in a low mournful tone, "The changing of the guard." 
 
"That's about the size of it." 
 793 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Have they hit the Philippines yet?" 
 
Warren took a moment to sip coffee.    He knew little about Clark Field; the American command   
in Luzon was muffling information that might panic the people.    Even the official account of   
the Cavite raid had been skimpy.    He had picked up the DeAfish news from a secret dispatch,   
and he was booing the report might prove wrong; or if not, that a later dispatch would at least   
show Byron among the survivors. 
 
"Well, they sort of plastered Cavite." 
 
"Oh, they did?" 
 
Staring at his son, Pug said, "Any dope?" 
 
"Not much.    They apparently went for the shore installations." 
 
The Devilfish was alongside."    'So you told me." 
 
Warren was relieved when Janice called them to the table. Pug picked at the food. It was   
embarrassing, with his son and daughter-in-law eating heartily, but his throat was almost shut,   
and he had to force down the mouthfuls he ate. 
 
What's the plan of the day, Dad?"    Warren said, as the lack of talk grew awkward. 
 
"Huh?    Oh, I thought I might scare up a tennis game at the club." 
 
"Tennis?    Are you serious?" 
 
"Why not?    Start getting back in some kind of shape." 
 
"What about going down to Cincpac Personnel?"      "Well, I'll tell you, Warren, I've been   
wondering about that.    At this point a thousand officers are looking for new asignments.    Every   
Tom, Dick, and Harry of the battleship force must be warming chairs down at Personnel.    The   
Navy will find work for me in due course, and maybe at this point I'd just better take what   
comes." 
 
"You're dead wrong." In his life Warren had never heard his father talk this way, and he   
reacted immediately and forcibly. "You've had a bad break, but you're not Tom, Dick, or   
Harry.    You're entitled to the best ship command they've got left in this fleet.    You've already   
lost a day. The Navy's not going to come looking for you, Dad. 
 
You play tennis for a few days and you'll end up back in War Plans. 
 
Is that what you want?"    Warren's energetic tone and thinking, so much like his own younger   
self, drew a smile from Pug.    "Jan, hand me the Cincpac roster.    It's there on top of that pile of   
mail."    She passed him the mimeographed sheets and he leafed through them.    'Hell. 
 
Interesting.    'Personnel Section-Captain Theodore Prentice Larkin, Il." 
 
"Know him?"    Warren asked. 
 794 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Jocko Larkin? Biggest boozer in my Academy class. I pulled him out of the Sevem once   
when he fell off a sailboat dead drunk.    Quite a wingding-Thanksgiving, I think-and I was the   
only sober one aboard.    I didn't drink then."    "Dad, our squadron's got an officers' meeting at   
0700- I'll drop you off at Cincpac.    Let's go." 
 
"Well, okay.    jocko sure won't throw me out." 
 
At the overlook point where Janice had watched the Japanese onslaught, Warren halted the car.   
The sun had not yet risen.    In the grayish-pink morning light far down in the harbor, there lay   
the incredible picture: seven United States battleships in a double row, canted, sunk, or turned   
turtle.    Smoke rising from the wrecks still drifted heavily over the black Hat oily water. 
 
Bitterly Victor Henry muttered, looking out through the mindshield, "The game board after the   
game." 
 
'After the first move," Warren retorted.    "Have you heard what Halsey said when they told him   
aboard the Enterprise about the attack? 
 
'Before we're through with them, the Japanese language will be spoken only in hellf" With a   
cynical grunt, Pug asked, "Did that impress you?" 
 
"It gave the crew a big charge.    Everyone was quoting it." 
 
"Yes.    Good talk for sailors.    Beating the Japanese now is a tough battle problem.    Especially   
with a bigger war on our hands in Europe." 
 
"Dad, we ought to do it handily, with the stuff we've got building." 
 
Pug said, 'Maybe.    Meantime we're in for a rugged couple of years. 
 
How much stomach do the people back home have for defeat?    Because they're going to take   
plenty in this ocean.    Maybe they'll pressure the President to quit and make a deal.    They don't   
really give a damn about Asia, they never have." 
 
Warren started the car.    His father's low mood disturbed him. 
 
"They won't quit.    Not now.    Not after this.    Let's get you down to Cincpac." 
 
He drove in his usual breakneck fashion.    His father appeared to take no notice.    Neither spoke.   
In this lame silence they arrived at the Cincpac building and pulled into a parking space. 
 
"Well!"    Pug Henry roused himself from a listless abstraction. 
 
"Here we are.    Now, what about you?    Will I be seeing you again?" 
 
"Why, I hope so.    Sometime during this war." 
 
"I mean tonight." 'It's hard to say. We were supposed to sortie yesterday. Maybe we will   
today.    There's a rather headless feeling in this fleet." 
 795 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"I completely understand.    I feel sort of headless myself."    "It's still there on your shoulders,   
Dad." 
 
"Well, I wouldn't want to give an emphatic nod." 
 
This made Warren laugh. It was more like his father. 'Don't take no from Captain Larkin,   
now.    Better keep these car keys, in case I & leave." 
 
"Right.    And in case you do-good luck and good hunting, Warren." 
 
The father and son looked each other in the face, and parted without more words. Victor   
Henry went straight to the Cincpac communications office and looked through the dispatches.   
In the long garbled battle report of the evening before about Cavite, he saw the Devilfish listed   
as sunk. 
 
He went to Jocko Larkins office to wait.    It was a quarter to seven, and nobody was there yet,   
not even the yeoman. Pug unceremoniously took a lounge chair in the inner office; Larkin   
would have done the same in an office of his.      The large wide-windowed room had a   
panoramic view-the sunny sugarcane slopes, the blue ocean beyond the anchorage, and the   
hideous black-coated harbor, with its grotesque fringe of defeat and damage. 
 
Victor Henry felt ill: nauseous, chilly, yet greasily perspiring. 
 
Consuming a bottle of brandy in a few hours had done this, of course; but after the letters from   
Rhoda and Madeline, the only safe immediate recourse had been oblivion.    The news that the   
Devilfish was lost had struck an almost numb man, scarcely surprising him.    As soon as he had   
heard of the Cavite attack, he had half expected evil tidings about his son.    when things went   
bad, his long experience told him, they went very bad; and he seemed to be falling into a gulf   
of bad luck without a bottom. 
 
But there was always a bottom to hit; meantime, he groggily thought, the main thing was to   
hold himself together.    He did not know, after all, that Byron was really dead or injured.    The   
Devilfish might not even be sunk. An excited first report was unreliable. The idea was to   
brace himself and hang on to hope until the straight word came. 
 
On his wife and his daughter, however, the straight word was in. 
 
Rhoda wanted to divorce him and marry Fred Kirby; and his daughter had entangled herself   
with her employer, had probably been committing adultery, and it all might be in the   
newspapers any day.    These were unchangeable facts, however hard to grasp.    He had to absorb   
them and somehow act on them. 
 
Far from harboring any relieved notion that he might be free for Pamela Tudsbury, Pug now   
first understood how hopeless his romance with the English girl had been, and what a strong   
bond tied him to his wife. 
 
That Rhoda did not feel this tie too-that she could write and mail such a letter with her usual   
breezy exclamation marks and underlinings, cheerily blaming herself and her long dislike of a   
 796 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Navy wife's stence, praising Pug up almost as a saint, yet telling him that after more than   
twenty-five years she wanted out, to go to another man-this was a stab from which it would be   
difficult to recover.    He felt it in his gut, a throbbing, weakening wound.    Rhoda's letter was   
coy about the big question: exactly what had been going on between her and Fred Kirby? 
 
Here Victor Henry was torn two ways: by his hard good judgment, which told him that of   
course his wife had been opening naked thighs to the other man, probably for a long time; and   
by his love for his wife and his own self-love, which protested that such a thing was   
impossible. 
 
He clung to the dim fact-it was a fact-that Rhoda hadn't said it in so many words. 
 
Because what Victor Henry now wanted was to get her back.    He felt himself desperately in   
love with Rhoda.    Much of this was injured ego-he well understood that-but not all.    She was   
half of him, for better or worse; the weld was a quarter of a century old; she was irreplaceable   
in his life, with her arms, her mouth, her eyes, her sweet particular graces and ways; she was   
beautiful, desirable, and above all capable of surprising him. It had taken a nasty shock to   
drive these blunt truths home.    He would have to court this woman again!    He could not greatly   
blame her for the affair; he had already decided that in a brandy-soaked fog before passing out.   
How close had he not come to writing exactly the same kind of letter? 
 
Nor, strangely, did he have strong feelings about Fred Kirby.    The thing had happened to those   
two people, much as it had to him and Pamela; only Rhoda had gone over the edge. The   
pictures in his mind made him sick with revulsion; but in cold honesty he had to look at the   
event in this rational way. 
 
Rage at Madeline's boss'perhaps did him some good.    One reason for surmounting this crisis   
was to seek out and confront Hugh Cleveland. 
 
Regret cut at Pug for his softness in letting her stay in New York. At least he could have tried   
to order her back to Washington; she might have gone. 
 
Now this celebrated swine's wife was threatening to sue him for divorce, naming his twenty- 
one-year-old assistant-unjustly, Madeline swore in a long vehement paragraph, but that was   
hard to swallow. 
 
Unlike Rhoda's letter, Madeline's was no bombshell.    What could have been more predictable   
for a girl adrift alone in New York; if not with Cleveland, then with some other man?   
Madeline had been shot down like a dove flying over a rifle range. 
 
'Tug!    I tried all yesterday afternoon to find you.    Where the hell were you hiding!" 
 
Jocko Larkin came striding in, a scarlet-faced freckled fat four-striper indistinguishable from   
twenty others.    He closed his door, tossed his cap on a book, and said into his squawk box, "No   
calls, Amory." 
 
"Aye aye, sir." 
 797 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Well!"    Larkin sat back in his swivel chair, fat hands locked behind his head, survpying his   
classmate with a penetrating eye.    "Good to see you. 
 
That's hell about the California.    She'd have had a great skipper." 
 
"Well, jocko, I'd say my misfortune's lost in the shuffle." 
 
"Pug, who gave you my message?    I left it at half a dozen places." 
 
"What message?    Nobody.    I came here to see you." 
 
"What about?" 
 
"Orders."    That's what I wanted to see you about."    Larkin looked over his shoulder, though   
nobody else was in the room, and turned off his intercom box.    "Pug, Admiral Kimmel is going   
to be relieved.    At his own request."    jocko almost whispered this, adding with a sarcastic little   
grin, 'Like Louis the Sixteenth had himself shortened by a head, at his own request. His   
successor will be Admiral Pye-for how long, we don't know, but Pye wants to start shaking up   
the staff.    Let's face it, something smells here.    Luckily, the personnel section has nothing to do   
with war alerts.    It didn't happen on my watch but it happened. 
 
Admiral Pye wants you for Operations-now hold it, Pug!" 
 
jocko Lukin held up a hand as Victor Henry violently shook his head. 
 
"Let me give you my judgment.    This is as great a break as a man in our class can have.    just   
remember there are six Iowa class battleships building now, due for commissioning in twelve   
to twenty months.    The greatest warships in the world.    You'll probably get one after this." 
 
"Jocko, give me a ship." 
 
"I'm telling you, you'll undoubtedly get one. 
 
"Now.    Not in 1943-" 
 
"No can do, Pug. listen to me. You don't say no to Cincpacl Operations is a Marvelous   
opening for you." 
 
"Where's Admiral Pyes office?"    Henry got to his feet. 
 
"Sit down, Pug."    Larkin rose too, and they stood glaring at each other. Larkin said, "You son   
of a bitch, you never could play football or tennis, and you can't think straight, either." 
 
'I can and am pretty good."    Larkin looked nonplussed, then he burst out laughing.    "Oh, sit   
down, Pug."    "Do I get a ship?" 
 
"Sit down." 
 
Pug sat. 
 798 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'What's the matter, Pug?      You look green around the gills, and you don't act right.      Is   
everything okay?" 
 
"I drank too much brandy last night." 
 
"You did?    You?"    "I didn't like losing the California." 
 
"I see.    How's Rhoda?" 
 
"Just fine." Victor Henry thought he brought the words out calmly, but Larldn raised his   
eyebrows.    Folding fat fingers over his white-clad paunch, Larkin stared thoughtfully at Henry. 
 
"Let's see.    You have a boy on the Enterprise, don't you?    Is he all right?"    submariner, too.   
"He's fine.    I have a es on the Devilfish. Or w 'The Devilfish, eh?"    Larkins calm tone was very   
forced. 
 
"Yes." Opening a folder on his desk, Larkin studied several sheets clipped inside. "The   
Northampton might conceivably be available.    I say might. 
 
Most likely not." "The Northampton? God love you, jocko, that's about the heaviest thing   
we've got left here." 
 
"Pug, I don't care.      A cruiser command doesn't compare to Cincpac's Deputy Chief for   
Operations.    You know that!    Tim Saunders came out of that job last year with two stars, junior   
as hell.    Even if I could get you the Northampton, you'd be making the mistake of your life." 
 
You don't know the mistakes I've made.    Now you listen to me, jocko. 
 
"I've shuffled all the high-strategy paper I ever want to in this Navy. Four years in War Plans,   
nearly three years in Europe.    I'm not bucking for two stars, not any more.    I'm a sailor and a   
gunner, and there's a war on." Victor Henry swept an arm at the window and the shattered   
battle fleet.    "If you can't find me anything else, I'll take a squadron of minesweepers.    Okay?"   
I want to go to sea." 
 
"I hear You, loud and clear."    Heaving a sigh that turned into a groan, Jocko Larkin said, "One   
more Hap I'll have with the admiral, that's all." 
 
'The hell with that.    I want him to know this is my doing.    Where is he?" 
 
"Listen, Pug, if you talk to the admiral the way you've been talking to me, you'll get sent to the   
States on a medical.    You look like death warmed over, and you're acting shell-shocked.    I'll   
see what I can do here. 
 
Get some sleep, lay off the brandy, and whatever's bothering you, put it on ice.    I'll try to find   
something." 
 
"Thanks, jocko.    If you want to call me, I'll be at my son's house." 
 
He gave Larkin the number. 
 799 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
As they shook hands over the table, Captain Larkin said with odd softness, "When you write   
Rhoda, give her my love.") Naval Officers Club Pearl Harbor Dear Rhoda: 12 December, 1941  
 
I'm somewhat stymied by the problem of answering your astounding letter, but putting it off   
won't give me any inspiration.    I don't think I should waste your time setting down my feelings   
on paper. 
 
Anyway, I'm not sure I can do it, not being very good at that sort of thing, at best, If I really   
believed this move would make you happy, maybe I could endure it better.    However, it strikes   
me as a calamity for you as well as for me; and I am expressing this opinion though it hasn't   
been asked for. 
 
I know I'm no Don Juan, and in fact have been pretty much of a pickle-face around you a good   
part of the time.    The reasons for this are complicated, and it might not be too helpful to go into   
them now. 
 
The basic point is that, taking the rough with the smooth, you and I have made it this far.    I still   
love you-a lot more than I've showed, perhaps-and in your letter you've managed to say a few   
kind things about me. 
 
I'm compelled to believe that at the moment you're lovesick as a schoolgirl," and that you can't   
help it, and all that part.      I guess these things will happen, though one's always caught   
unawares when the roof falls in. 
 
Still, you're not really a schoolgirl, are you?    Getting used to anybody new at our age is a very   
hard job.    If you're a widow, that's different. Then you have no choice.    But here I am still. 
 
The life we've been leading in recent years has put a strain on our marriage.    I recognize that,   
and I've certainly felt the strain myself. In Manila I said to Byron that we've become a family   
of tumbleweeds. That's the truth, and lately the winds of war have been blowing us all around   
the world.    Right now it strikes me that those same winds are starting to flatten civilization.   
All the more reason for us to hang on to what we have-namely each other, and our family-and   
to love each other to the end. 
 
That's the way I've worked it out.    I hope that on, further thought you will, too. 
 
I'll probably be at sea most of the time for the next year or two; so I can't make the immediate   
effort to mend matters that seems urgently called for.    Here's how I'm compelled to leave it.   
I'm ready to forget-or try to-that you ever wrote the letter; or to talk it over with you on my   
next Stateside leave; or, if you're absolutely certain you want to go ahead with it, to sign the   
papers and do what you wish. 
 
But I'll put up a helluva fight first about that.    I have no intention of simply letting you go.    In   
plain words I want two things, Rhoda: first, your happiness; second, if at all possible, that we   
go on together. 
 
I've seen a bit of Warren.    He's turned into a splendid officer. 
 800 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
He has everything.    His future is limitless.    He has the brains, drive, acuteness, toughness, and   
sheer ability to become Chief of Naval Operations.    Byron has come along too.    We've been   
fortunate in our sons. 
 
I know they're facing hazards, but the whole world's in hazard, and at least my boys    are   
serving. 
 
I don't know what went wrong with Madeline.    I'm kind of sick about that, and don't propose to   
dwell on it.    If the fellow wants to marry her, that may clean the mess up as much as anything   
can.    If not, he'll be hearing from me. 
 
You were right to say that your news would hurt less because of my orders to the California.   
In a peculiar fashion it's working out that way. 
 
Ever since I flew into Pearl Harbor on the Clipper, after seeing Wake and Midway in flames,   
I've been living on a straight diet of disaster. Your letter almost fitted in as something nominal.   
Almost. 
 
I'm a family man, and a one-woman man, Rhoda.    You know all that. 
 
Maybe I'm a kind of fossil, a form that's outlived its time.    Even so, I can only act by my lights   
while I last. My impression was, and remains, that Fred Kirby-despite what's happened-is   
much the same sort of fellow. 
 
If I'm right about that, this thing will not work out for you in the long run, and you had better   
extricate yourself now, That's as honest a judgment as I can give you. 
 
Victor is a handsome baby, and Janice is a good mother, and very pretty. Our other grandson   
looks unbelievably like Briny as an infant. 
 
I'm enclosing a snapshot I picked up in Moscow from Natalie's old friend Slote.    I hate to part   
with it, but you'll want to see it, I know. Let's hope to God she got herself and that kid safely   
out of Italy before Mussolini declared war. 
 
jocko Larkin sends his love.    He's fat and sleek. 
 
That's about it.    No, I'm going to start earning my salary-I trust-by fighting a war. 
 
Love, Pug It was nearly lunchtime when Victor Henry finished writing this letter, and the   
officers' club lounge was becoming crowded and noisy.    He read the letter twice, thinking how   
meager and stiff it was, but he decided against rewriting it.    The substance was there. 
 
One could revise some letters a hundred times without improving them. 
 
The letter he had posted to Pamela Tudsbury (how long ago that seemed!) had been more   
clumsy and barren than most of the discarded ones.    He sealed the envelope. 
 
"Say, Pug!"    jocko Larkin, walking past with three younger officers, halted, and told them to   
go ahead and secure a table.      "I've been trying to call you.      Do you know about the   
 801 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Devilfish?"No."    Pug's heart thumped heavily.    "What about it?" 
 
"Well, it was the Sealion that was sunk at Cavite.    The follow-up report came in a little while   
ago.    The Devilfish was undamaged." 
 
"Really?"    Pug had to clear his throat twice.    'That's definite, now?" 
 
"Couldn't be more definite.    The dispatch says the DeHlfish report was erroneous'."    it I see.   
I'm sorry about the Sealion, but you're a bearer of good news. 
 
"My other news isn't so hot, Pug.    The thing we talked about-I'm trying but that looks like a   
pipe dream."Well, you warned me. 
 
That's all right." 
 
"I'm Still scratching around for something, though.    join us for lunch." 
 
"Another time, jocko." 
 
Dropping the letter in the club mailbox, Pug went out into the sunshine. A stone had rolled off   
his heart; Byron was all right! And one way or another, Jocko would get him out to sea.   
Strolling aimlessly through the Navy Yard, digesting these sharp turns of fortune, he arrived at   
the waterfront.      there alongside the fuel dock, with thick oil hoses pulsing, was the   
Northampton. 
 
On leaving Larkin's office, Pug had fought off a temptation to visit the cruiser, deciding that it   
might be a jinx to set foot on board before knowing his orders. 
 
Now it didn't matter.    He thought of mounting the gangway and having a look around.    But   
what for?    He had served a year and a half in a sister ship, the Chester.    These were handsome   
vessels, he thought,    strolling    along    the dock beside    the    bustling    Northampton,    which was   
loading ammunition and frozen food stores as well as fuel for battle patrol-handsome vessels,   
but half-breed bastards, spawned by a sickly cross of politics and warship-building. 
 
The Washington Treaty, which Pug considered a preposterous folly, had bound the United   
States back in 1922 to limit its cruisers to less than ten thousand tons, and to guns of eight-inch   
caliber.      There had been no limit on length- These hybrids were the result-overblown   
destroyers, with the length of battleships but a quarter the weight of metal, with slender beams,   
light armor, and medium punch.    Their mission was to act as scouts and merchant raiders, and   
to fight enemy cruisers.    Any one of japan's out of the water; nor could ten battleships could   
blow the Northampton t with perfect damage control. 
 
After the she survive a torpedoing, excep California, the Northampton was a relatively   
shrunken affairStill, pug thought, he would have been glad enough to get her.    It was exc iting   
to see the cruiser taking on beans, bullets, and oil for a combat mission. jocko was right,   
Operations was the inside track.    But, for the good of his soul right now, Pug felt he needed to   
be loading beans, bullets, and oil on his own ship. 
 802 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
He drove back to the house.    On the desk in his bedroom, a handwritten note was clipped to a   
wrinkled Western Union cable: From: Janice. 
 
To: Dad-in-law. 
 
Sub: Nhscellaneclus- am at the Gillettes with Vic.    Home for dinner in case anything comes   
UP, back.    They sortie at dawn. 
 
2. Warren phoned.    Won't be 3. Yeoman from California delivered the attached.    says it's been   
kicking around the base for days, and just came to their office on the beach. 
 
4. Love. 
 
He opened the cable. 
 
lo OF JAP DEAREST JUST TMS iNsTANT HEARD ON no RAD ANESE ATTACK AM   
UTTERLY KOF-RIFIED FRIGHTFULLY WORT-MD Tg ABOUT YOU DESPERA LY   
ASHAMED OF THAT RIDirULOUS MIOTIC LETTER WORST POSSIBLE TimicNG   
FORGET rr PLEASE PLEASE ANd FORGIVE HOPE YOURE SAF]3    WELL CABLIR ME   
LOVE RHO He sat nodding grimly as he read it.      Rhoda to the life!      He could hear   
FPJGrMULLY worried about her telephoning it: 'Am urmy horrified, IDIOTIC letter. Worst 
 
you, DESPERATELY ashamed of that MICIJLOUSI 
 
POSSIBLE timing    Pug suspected    it    was a bone to the    dog. He kneA, Rhoda's    bursts    of   
contrition.    She was never so sweet as immediately after some disgusting behavior- This saving   
grace had gotten her over many rough spots; and her impulse in sending the cable might well   
have been sincere.    But the process of repair would be long, if indeed it was even beginning.   
Their marriage now was a salvage job like the California.    He did not know what to reply, so   
he tossed the cable into the desk drawer, beside the letter for which it apologized. 
 
That    night at dinner Pug drank a lot of wine, and a lot of brandy afterward; Janice kept   
pouring, and he gratefully accepted. He knew he would not sleep otherwise. The alcohol   
worked; he scarcely remembered turning in.    At four in the morning, he snapped wide awake,   
and it occurred to him that he might as well watch the sortie of the Enterprise. 
 
He dressed quietly, closed the outside door without a sound, and drove to the overlook point. 
 
The darkness was merciful to Pearl Harbor.    The smashed battleships were invisible.    Overhead   
a clear starry black sky arched, with Orion setting in the west, and Venus sparkling in the east,   
high above a narrow streak of red.    Only the faintest smell of smoke on the sea breeze hinted at   
the gigantic scene of disaster below.    But the dawn brightened, light stole over the harbor, and   
soon the destruction and the shame were unveiled once more. At first the battleships were   
merely vague shapes; but even before all the stars were gone, one could see the Pacific Battle   
Force, a crazy dim donble line of sunken hulks along Ford Island-and first in the line, the   
U.S.S. California. 
 
Victor Henry turned his face from the hideous sight to the indigo arch of the sky, where Venus   
 803 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the brightest stars still burned: Sirius, Capella, Procyon, the old navigation aids. The   
familiar religious awe came over him, the sense of a Presence above this pitiful little earth. He   
could almost picture God the Father looking down with sad wonder at this mischief. In a   
world so rich and lovely, could his children find nothing better to do than to dig iron from the   
ground and work it into vast grotesque engines for blowing each other up?    Yet this madness   
was the way of the world.    He had given all his working years to it.    Now he was about to ri-,k   
his very life at it.    y? 
 
Because the others did it, he thought.    Because Abel's next-door neighbor was Cain.    Because   
with all its rotten spots, the United States of America was not only his homeland but the hope   
of the world. 
 
Because if America's enemies dug up iron and made deadly engines of it, America had to do   
the same, and do it better, or die.    Maybe the vicious circle would end with this first real world   
war.    Maybe it would end with Christ's second coming.    Maybe it would never end. 
 
But he was living in 1941.    Below in the brightening dawn lay his own sunken ship and his   
own destroyed fleet.    The professional sailors and fliers who had done this thing, and done a   
damned smart job of it, had obeyed orders of politicians working with Hitler.    Until the life was   
beaten out of that monster, the world could not move an inch toward a more sane existence.   
There was nothing to do now but win the war. 
 
So Victor Henry meditated as the Enterprise moved down channel in the sunrise and out to sea   
under the escort of destroyers and cruisers, taking his firstborn son into battle. 
 
Back at the house, he found Janice all dressed.    "Hi.    Going somewhere?" he said.    'I thought   
you'd still be asleep." 
 
"Oh, it's Vic's cough.    It bangs on and on.    I'm taking him to the clinic down at the base for a   
checkup.    You just missed a call from Captain Larkin." 
 
"Jocko?    This early?" 
 
"Yes.    He left a message for you.    He said, 'She's all yours 12 
 
Victor Henry dropped in a chair, with a blankly startled look. 
 
'Good news, I hope?"    Janice asked, "He said you'd understand." 
 
"She's all yours'?    That's the whole message?" 
 
"That's it.    He said he wouldn't be in his office till noon, but he thought you'd want to know   
right away."    "I see.    Well, it's pretty fair news.    Is the coffee on?" 
 
"Yes.    Anna May will make you breakfast." 
 
'No, no, coffee's all I want, thanks.    Look, Janice, you'll be passing by Western Union.    Can   
you send Rhoda a cable for me?" 
 804 
 
 
  805 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
'Sure. 
 
Victor Henry reached for the memo pad by the telephone, and scrawled: LE=ROOMING AM   
F HAV]3 JUST BEGUN TO FIGHT.    GlanCing at the little sheet he handed her, Janice curved   
her mouth in an indulgent female grin. 
 
"What's the matter with that?"    Pug said. 
 
"How about 'Love'?" 
 
"By all means.    Thanks, Jan.    You add that." 
 
When she left with the baby, he was on the telephone, trying to reach Commander, Cruisers   
Pacific.    He responded to her farewell wave with a bleak preoccupied smile.    Janice thought,   
closing the door on him, that nothing could be more like her austere, remote father-in-law than   
the little business of the cable.    You had to remind this man that he loved his wife. 
 
The End 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 805 
 
  805 
   
