P E R S U A S I ON 
JANE  A U S T EN 
E D I T ED  BY  P A T R I C IA  M E Y ER  S P A C KS 
A  N O R T ON  C R I T I C AL 
E D I T I ON 
P E R S U A S I ON 
The  text  of this  Norton  Critical  Edition  is  that 
of  the  first  edition  (dated  1818  but  probably 
issued 
late  1817),  which  was  published 
posthumously.  The  editor  has  spelled  out  amper02
in 
sands  and  made  superscript 
letters  lowercase. 
The  novel,  which  is  fully  annotated,  is  followed  by 
Persuasion's 
the  two  canceled  chapters  that  comprise 
original  ending. 
"Backgrounds  and  Contexts"  collects  contemporary  assess02
ments  of Jane Austen  as  well  as  materials  relating  to  the  social 
issues  of  the  day.  Included  is  an  excerpt  from  William  Hayley's 
1785  "Essay  on  Old  Maids"; Austen's  letters  to  Fanny  Knight, 
which  reveal  her  skepticism  about  marriage  as  the  key  to  happi02
ness;  Henry  Austen's  memorial  tribute  to  his  famous  sister;  as02
sessments  by  nineteenth-century  critics  Julia  Kavanagh  and 
Goldwin  Smith,  who  saw  Austen  as  an  unassuming,  sheltered, 
"feminine,"  rural  writer;  and  the  perspective  of Austen's  biogra02
pher,  Géraldine  Edith  Mitten. 
"Modern  Critical  Views" reflects  a  dramatic  shift  in  the  way 
that  scholars  view  both  Austen  and  Persuasion. 
Increasingly,  the 
focus  is  on  Austen's  moral  purposefulness  and  political  acumen 
and  on  Persuasions 
historical,  social,  and  political  implications. 
A  variety of perspectives  are  provided  by A.  Walton  Litz,  Marilyn 
Butler,  Tony Tanner,  Robert  Hopkins,  Ann  W. Astell, Claudia  L. 
Johnson,  and  Cheryl Ann  Weissman. 
A  Selected Bibliography is  included. 
A B O UT  T HE  S E R I E S:  Each  Norton  Critical  Edition  includes  an  authoritative 
text,  contextual  and  source  materials,  and  a wide  range  of  interpretations― 
from  contemporary  perspectives  to  the  most  current  critical theory―as  well 
as  a  bibliography  and,  in  many  cases,  a  chronology  of  the  author's  life  and 
work. 
C O V ER  I L L U S T R A T I O N:  Thomas  Hearne,  "View of  Bath  from  Spring  Garden," 
Yale Center  for  British Art,  Paul  Mellon Collection. 
A U T H O R 'S  P O R T R A I T:  Watercolor sketch  of  Jane Austen  by Cassandra  Austen. 
Reproduced  by courtesy  of the  National  Portrait  Gallery,  London. 
ISBN-10:  0-393-96018-8 
9 0 0 00  > 
W.W.NORTON 
LONDON 
NEW  YORK 
\_ 
7 8 0 3 9 3 " 9 6 0 1 81 
The  Editor 
PATRICIA  MEYER  SPACKS  is  Edgar  F.  Shannon  Professor  of 
English  at  the  University  of  Virginia.  She  is  the  author  of 
eleven  books  including  An Argument  of Images:  The  Poetry  of 
Alexander  Pope,  The  Female 
Imagination,  The  Adolescent 
Idea:  Myths  of  Youth  in  the  Adult  Imagination,  Desire  and 
Truth:  Functions  of  Plot  in  Eighteenth-Century  English  Nov02
els,  and  Boredom:  The  Literary  History  of  a  State  of  Mind. 
Professor Spacks is a contributing editor of  The  Norton  Anthol02
ogy of World  Masterpieces. 
PERSUASION 
AUTHORITATIVE  TEXT 
BACKGROUNDS  AND  CONTEXTS 
CRITICISM 
W.  W.  N O R T ON  &  C O M P A N Y,  I N C. 
Also 
Publishes 
T HE  NORTON  ANTHOLOGY OF AFRICAN  AMERICAN  LITERATURE 
edited  by Henry  Louis  Gates  Jr.  and  Nellie  Y.  McKay  et  al. 
T HE  NORTON  ANTHOLOGY OF AMERICAN  LITERATURE 
edited  by Nina  Baym  et  al. 
T HE  NORTON  ANTHOLOGY OF  CHILDREN'S  LITERATURE 
edited  by Jack  Zipes  et  al. 
T HE  NORTON  ANTHOLOGY OF  CONTEMPORARY  FICTION 
edited  by  R.V.  Cassill  and Joyce  Carol  Oates 
T HE  NORTON  ANTHOLOGY OF  ENGLISH  LITERATURE 
edited  by M.  H. Abrams  and  Stephen  Greenblatt  et  al. 
T HE  NORTON  ANTHOLOGY OF  LITERATURE  BY WOMEN 
edited  by  Sandra  M.  Gilbert  and  Susan  Gubar 
T HE  NORTON  ANTHOLOGY OF  MODERN  AND  CONTEMPORARY  POETRY 
edited  by Jahan  Ramazani,  Richard  Ellmann,  and  Robert  O'Clair 
T HE  NORTON  ANTHOLOGY OF POETRY 
edited  by Margaret  Ferguson,  Mary Jo  Salter,  and Jon  Stallworthy 
T HE  NORTON  ANTHOLOGY OF  SHORT  FICTION 
edited  by  R.V.  Cassill  and  Richard  Bausch 
T HE  NORTON  ANTHOLOGY OF  THEORY AND  CRITICISM 
edited  by  Vincent  B.  Leitch  et  al. 
T HE  NORTON  ANTHOLOGY OF  WORLD  LITERATURE 
edited  by  Sarah  Lawall  et  al. 
T HE  NORTON  FACSIMILE  OF  THE  FIRST  FOLIO  OF  SHAKESPEARE 
prepared  by  Charlton  Hinman 
T HE  NORTON  INTRODUCTION  TO  LITERATURE 
edited  by Alison  Booth,  J.  Paul  Hunter,  and  Kelly J.  Mays 
T HE  NORTON  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SHORT  NOVEL 
edited  by Jerome  Beaty 
T HE  NORTON  READER 
edited  by Linda  H.  Peterson  and John  C.  Brereton 
T HE  NORTON  SAMPLER 
edited  by  Thomas  Cooley 
T HE  NORTON  SHAKESPEARE,  BASED ON  THE  OXFORD  EDITION 
edited  by  Stephen  Greenblatt  et  al. 
For  a  complete  list  of  Norton  Critical  Editions,  visit 
www.wwnorton.com/college/english/nce_home.htm 
A  N O R T ON  C R I T I C AL  E D I T I ON 
Jane  08usten 
P E R S U A S I ON 
AUTHORITATIVE  TEXT 
BACKGROUNDS  AND  CONTEXTS 
CRITICISM 
Edited  by 
PATRICIA  MEYER  SPACKS 
U N I V E R S I TY  OF  V I R G I N IA 
W.  W.  Norton  & Company  New  York  London 
Copyright  08  1 9 95  by  W . W.  Norton  &  C o m p a ny 
All  rights  reserved 
Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America 
First  Edition 
T he  text  of  this  book  is  composed  in  Electra 
with  the  display  set  in  Bernhard  Modern 
Composition  by  Vail  Composition 
Manufacturing  by  Maple-Vail 
Book  design  by  Antonina  Krass 
Library  of  Congress  Cataloging-in-Publication  Data 
Austen,  Jane,  1 7 7 5 - 1 8 1 7. 
Persuasion  : an  authoritative  text,  backgrounds,  and  contexts, 
reviews  and  essays  in  criticism  /  Jane  Austen 
;  edited  by  Patricia 
Meyer  Spacks. 
p. 
c m . ― (A  Norton  critical  ed.) 
Includes  bibliographical  references. 
1.  England―Social  life  and  customs ― 1 9 th  century―Fiction. 
2.  Man-woman  relationships―England―Fiction. 
1 7 7 5 - 1 8 1 7. 
I.  Spacks,  Patricia  Ann  Meyer. 
3.  Austen,  Jane, 
II.  Title. 
Persuasion. 
P R 4 0 3 4 . P4 
1 9 94 
8 2 3 ' . 7 - d c 20 
9 4 - 4 5 10 
I S BN  0 - 3 9 3 - 9 6 0 1 8 -8 
W.  W.  Norton  &  C o m p a n y,  Inc.,  500  Fifth  Avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.  1 0 1 10 
W.  W.  Norton  &  C o m p a ny  Ltd., Castle  House,  7 5 / 76  Wells  Street, 
London  W IT  3 QT 
567890 
ix 
1 
1 68 
1 81 
1 87 
1 87 
1 89 
1 91 
1 96 
2 06 
2 08 
2 11 
2 12 
2 17 
2 24 
Contents 
Preface 
The  Text  of  Persuasion 
[The  Original  Ending  of Persuasion] 
Backgrounds  and  Contexts 
[William  Hayley] 61 [On  Old  Maids] 
Jane Austen  61 Letters about  Persuasion 
To  Fanny  Knight (March  1 3,  [ 1 8 1 7 ]) 
To  Fanny  Knight (March  2 3, [ 1 8 1 7 ]) 
Henry  Austen  61 Biographical Notice of the  Author 
[Richard Whateley] 61 [A New  Style of Novel] 
Anonymous  61 [Austen's  Characters] 
Julia  Kavanagh  61 [The Language  of Feeling] 
Goldwin  Smith  61 From  Life  of Jane Austen 
Géraldine  Edith  Mitton  61 From  Jane Austen  and  Her Times 
Modern  Critical  Views 
A.  Walton  Litz 61 New  Landscapes 
Marilyn  Butler 61 [On  Persuasion] 
Tony Tanner 61 In Between: Persuasion 231 
Robert  Hopkins  61  Moral  Luck  and  Judgment 
Persuasion 265 
Ann  W.  Astell 
Romance in Persuasion 275 
Claudia  L. 
of the Present Day" 286 
Cheryl 
Ann  Weissman 
in Jane Austen's Persuasion 307 
61  Persuasion:  The 
Johnson 
Doubleness 
61 
Jane Austen: A Chronology 
Selected Bibliography 
vii 
in  Jane  Austen's 
"Unfeudal  Tone 
and 
Refrain 
3 13 
3 15 
61  Anne  Elliot's  Education:  The  Learning  of 
Preface 
Jane  Austen  wrote  Persuasion,  her  last complete  novel,  while  suffering 
from  the  illness (Addison's disease) that  would  kill her.  She began  work 
on  it  in  1815,  finishing  her  alterations  of the  final  chapters  on  July 18, 
1816,  precisely a  year before  she  died.  Her  brother  Frank  published  it, 
along  with  Northanger  Abbey  and  his  own  biographical  notice  of  his 
sister,  at the end  of  1817. 
Certain  critics (including  some whose  work  is excerpted  in  the  Back02
grounds and  Contexts and  Criticism sections of this volume) have  found 
in  the  novel  a  melancholy  strain,  attributable,  in  their  view,  to  the 
author's  illness.  Early  commentators  on  Persuasion―and 
some  fairly 
recent  ones―glimpsed  in  the  book the  sadness  of mortality,  comment02
ing on  its elegiac tone and  on  a new kind of seriousness in its imagining. 
Those  with  a  literary-historical  bent  have  noted  the  incursion  of  atti02
tudes and  assumptions  that  we associate with  romanticism: the  novelist 
who  once  mocked  Marianne's  enthusiasm  for  dead  leaves  (Sense  and 
Sensibility)  now  allows  her  heroine,  without  overt  criticism,  to  take 
pleasure  in  evidence  of the  "declining  year."  Social  critics have  found 
splendid  material  for  investigation  in  the  novel's  new  emphasis  on  the 
life and  values of the  Royal Navy,  discovering that Austen  not only drew 
on  knowledge  gained  from  two  admiral-brothers  but  appeared  to  criti02
cize the aristocracy and  welcome the  accession to social power  of a  new 
class.  Persuasion, 
in  short,  contains  something  for  everybody,  a  fertile 
field for  varied  sorts of critical  investigation. 
The  documents  collected in  the Backgrounds and  Contexts and  Criti02
cism  sections of this  volume  suggest  a  range  of possibilities and  adum02
brate  changing  attitudes  and  trends  in  critical  discourse.  The  excerpt 
from  William Hayley's Essay  on Old  Maids  (1785),  for instance, implic02
itly  sketches the  social context in  which  Austen  chose to  investigate  the 
emotional  situation  of a  twenty-seven-year-old  unmarried  woman.  For 
Austen,  at  least  in  her  role  as  fiction  maker,  as  for  Hayley,  marriage 
constituted  the  happy  ending  of a woman's  youth.  Within  this concep02
tual  framework,  however,  Austen  found  it possible to  imagine a  woman 
neither  preoccupied  with  marriage  nor  initially  convinced  that  no 
female  fulfillment  can  exist  outside  it.  Her  letters  to  Fanny  Knight 
remind  us  of Jane Austen's  comic skepticism  about  marriage  as consti02
tuting inevitable female bliss; Persuasion  helps elucidate that skepticism. 
ix 
X 
PREFACE 
In  his memorial  notice her brother describes Jane Austen  as a  woman 
of  notable  piety  and  familial  devotion.  That  woman's  last  completed 
novel  reminds  us  how  rich  an  emotional  life  may  underlie  exemplary 
female  conduct.  One  of  Austen's  communications  to  Fanny  Knight 
describes  Anne  Elliot,  the  heroine  of  Persuasion,  as  "almost  too  good 
for  me."  Henry  Austen's  characterization  of his  sister  makes  goodness 
sound  like a simple  matter.  Persuasion 
tells us otherwise.  Goodness can 
include  resistance  as  well  as  persuadability―and  it  by  no  means  pre02
cludes  private  judgment. 
If such  commentators  on  the  social scene as Hayley and  such  observ02
ers  of character  as  Henry  Austen  call  attention  to  components  of con02
ventional female compliance in the late eighteenth  and  early  nineteenth 
centuries,  nineteenth-  and  early twentieth-century  commentary  on  Per02
suasion 
tends  to  stress  other  stereotypically  feminine  elements  of  the 
novel,  notably  its  alleged  emphasis  on  feeling  and  its  concern  for  the 
everyday.  Such  commentary  supports  a  view  of Austen  that  has  long 
survived; as an  unmarried  woman  living in a village, she knew and  cared 
little  about  problems  and  experience  beyond  her  immediate  setting. 
Limited  in  imaginative  range,  according  to  this  view,  Austen  evinced 
sharp  observation,  acumen  about  a  fairly  restricted  realm  of emotions, 
and  a  gift  for  sharp,  often  comic,  characterization.  Twentieth-century 
criticism,  however,  heavily represented  in the present volume,  considers 
the  Austen  of Persuasion  a serious moralist and  a significant commenta02
tor on  social,  even  political, issues. 
My  decision  to  emphasize  recent  criticism of Persuasion 
reflects  my 
conviction  that  the  current  critical  shift  has  enormous  importance  for 
our  comprehension  of Austen's  achievement.  New ways of  approaching 
the  novels  make  it  possible  for  the  first  time  to  think  complexly  about 
Austen  in  the  context  of  her  contemporaries―not  only  her  literary 
peers,  but  all the  other  men  and  women  living through the  Napoleonic 
Wars  on  the  Continent  and  their  political  repercussions  in  England. 
Persuasion 
speaks  of  more  than  life  in  a  village,  or  even  in  Bath.  It 
sharply  ironizes  Austen's  well-known  profession  to  her  brother  about 
"the  little bit  (two  Inches wide) of Ivory on  which  I work  with  so fine a 
Brush,  as produces  little effect  after much  labour." Devoted readers  have 
always  denied  the  claim  that  Austen  works  to  "little  effect";  the  notion 
of  her  two  inches of ivory is equally  questionable. 
"Pictures  of  perfection 
.  .  .  make  me  sick  and  wicked,"  Austen 
observed,  in the letter containing her claim that Anne Elliot was "almost 
too good" for  her.  Good  though  she  is, the  heroine  of Persuasion  never 
runs  the  danger  of  "perfection."  She  plays  music  so  that  others  may 
dance,  cares for  a  sick  child  so that  her  sister and  brother-in-law  can  go 
out to dinner,  changes residence in  response to the  real or fancied  needs 
of  her  relatives.  Behaving  like  the  very  model  of a  well-bred  spinster, 
she  nonetheless  vibrates  with  passion  and  preserves  a  will  of her  own. 
PREFACE 
XI 
The  early  commentators  who  praised  Austen's  characterization  and 
noted  the  high  degree  of feeling  in  Persuasion  had  it  right.  Thus  Julia 
Kavanagh,  in  1862, observes that  the  portrayal  of Anne  constitutes  "the 
first  genuine  picture  of that  silent  torture  of an  unloved  woman."  Just 
so: Austen  makes her  readers  experience vicariously the  full  intensity of 
such  torture. 
But  those interested  in the social and political implications of Austen's 
fiction  get  it  right  too.  The  special  brilliance  of  Persuasion  depends 
partly on  its combined focus on the private experience of a sharply  imag02
ined  individual  and  the social actualities that  necessarily inform  individ02
ual  experience.  As  in  her  other  fiction,  Austen  here  provides  a 
penetrating  study  of  self-love  in  its  varied  manifestations.  The  Elliot 
family  supplies  numerous  examples,  from  the  comic  to  the  simply 
appalling.  Anne's  sister  Mary,  her  state  of health  varying  according  to 
the degree of attention  others pay her,  has found  an  appropriate mate  in 
Charles,  concerned  mainly  with  his  hunting,  his  dogs,  and  his  guns. 
Elizabeth,  the  other  Elliot  sister,  resembles her  father  in  vanity  and  in 
self-referential  snobbery.  Sir Walter, for whom  his own  appearance  and 
rank  constitute  the  primary  standard  of value  against  which  he  judges 
others  (usually  to  their  disadvantage),  cares  not  at  all  for  the  welfare of 
his daughter Anne,  whom  he considers plain  and  unlikely to marry well. 
He  and  Elizabeth  decide,  as  an  economy  measure,  to  bring  Anne  no 
gift  from  their  visit to  London.  The  tiny  episode  epitomizes  their  utter 
self-absorption,  which  signifies  a  widespread  and  dangerous  social 
malady. 
Less dramatic  but  more  sinister  in  his  self-preoccupation  is William 
Elliot, who calculates his every move in relation to selfish interest.  Anne 
condemns  him  for lack of "openness" well before she learns of his  more 
openly  destructive  behavior.  He  acts  like  a  man  of the  world―if  one 
defines  the  world  as  a  place  where  everyone  is  out  for  him-  or  herself 
and  where  success  entails  winning  place,  power,  and  wealth  at  the 
expense of others.  Persuasion  raises the question  of whether  any  alterna02
tive conception of the  world  can  prove viable. 
It does not treat this question  as a simple one.  As Alexander Pope  had 
recognized  ("Self-love,  the  spring  of  motion,  acts  the  soul;  /  Reason's 
comparing  balance  rules  the  whole"),  self-interest  energizes  everyone 
and  provides  a  fundamental  engine  of social progress.  Anne,  to  whom 
her family denies the  right of openly expressed self-concern, experiences 
the omnipresence of individually  focused perspectives as she moves from 
one  small  social  environment  to  another,  to  find  that  the  concerns of 
one  household  mean  nothing  at  all  to  residents  of another  only  a  few 
miles  away.  Driving  down  a  Bath  street  with  Lady  Russell, Anne  sees 
only the presence of the  man  she loves on  the  sidewalk.  What will Lady 
Russell  say  about  him?  she  wonders.  Lady  Russell,  of course  preoccu02
pied  with  her  own  affairs,  comments  instead  on  the  window  curtains 
Xll 
PREFACE 
she has been  contemplating.  Anne  appropriately  recognizes the  irony of 
conflicting  personal  assignments  of  significance,  but  the  recognition 
does  not  protect  her―even  her―from  seeing  in  the  light  of her  own 
feelings,  thoughts,  and  obsessions. 
Yet  Persuasion 
suggests  the  possibility  of  surmounting  narrow  self-
concern,  not  only  through  the  self-sacrificing "goodness" that  Anne  at 
first appears  to  embody  but  through  a kind  of "openness" antithetical  to 
William  Elliot's calculation  and  promising  new  social  horizons.  Pope 
went  on  from  his  observation  of self-love as  energizing  principle  to  the 
Utopian  hope  that  self-love and  social  might  ultimately  merge.  Austen 
adumbrates less Utopian versions of that merging in  the members of the 
navy  she  depicts,  Admiral  and  Mrs.  Croft,  Captain  Wentworth,  and 
Anne  herself,  who  becomes Mrs.  Wentworth.  The  Crofts  and  Captain 
Wentworth  exhibit  healthy  self-concern.  Admiral  Croft  does  not  feel 
shy about  drawing  his own  conclusions as to the  character of Sir Walter 
Elliot;  Mrs.  Croft  speaks her  judgments  and  attitudes  forthrightly.  Cap02
tain  Wentworth,  in  worldly  terms  successful,  has  indeed  gained  his 
wealth  at others' expense,  triumphing  in  naval  combat,  capturing  ships, 
winning  promotion  presumably  over  other  people's  heads.  To  some 
extent,  then,  the  world  operates  as William Elliot assumes,  by clamber02
ing competition.  Yet these people who have won  status and  money  have 
not  had  to  sacrifice personal  feeling.  The  Crofts  exemplify  cooperative 
and  satisfying  marriage.  Wentworth,  despite  his  hurt  feelings  over 
Anne's  earlier rejection and  his determination  to marry  anyone but  her, 
finally  faces  the  truth  of his  emotions  and  risks  rejection  once  more  for 
the  sake  of  his  newly  discovered,  long-enduring  devotion.  If we  take 
Anne  and  her  lover as exemplary,  it is not  quite  accurate to generalize, 
as Anne  does,  that  women  love longest when  all hope  is gone.  Men  can 
love  just  as  long―they  just  have  more  trouble  acknowledging  the  fact 
about  themselves. 
One  need  not  conclude  that  the  navy  will  replace  the  aristocracy as 
center of social power.  But the  navy epitomizes a better moral  as well as 
social  order,  specifically in  the way its representatives  embody a  produc02
tive  union  between  self-directed  and  outward-directed  interest.  Anne, 
marrying  Wentworth,  can  abandon  self-sacrifice  for  self-fulfillment― 
which  is not  to say that  she at all abandons  her  concern  for others.  The 
novel's  final  sentences  direct  the  reader's  attention  both  to  the  life  of 
personal  feeling  and  to  the  navy's  symbolic connection  with  private  as 
well  as  public  virtue.  "Anne  was  tenderness  itself,  and  she  had  the  full 
worth  of it  in  Captain  Wentworth's  affection.  .  .  .  She gloried  in  being 
a  sailor's wife,  but  she  must  pay  the  tax of quick alarm  for belonging  to 
that  profession  which  is,  if possible,  more  distinguished  in  its domestic 
virtues  than  in  its national  importance. " The  language  of  finance  ("the 
full  worth  of it," "pay the  tax") applied  to emotions calls attention  to  the 
processes  of  exchange  involved  in  virtually  every  human  transaction. 
PREFACE 
xiii 
Ideally  one  achieves balance  between  what  is given  and  what  received; 
one does not,  like William  Elliot,  aspire  only to take.  Being a sailor,  or 
a  sailor's  wife,  allows  for  intricate  balances,  between  loving  and  being 
loved,  between  pride  and  fear,  but  also  between  personal  absorption 
and  public  responsibility.  The  private  satisfaction  Wentworth  receives 
corresponds  to  the  national  service he  gives; Anne  pays  for  her  pride  in 
his  public  role  by  fear  for  the  possibility  of her  private  deprivation.  At 
any  moment  such  precarious  balances can  tip,  but  the  novel  concludes 
with  the  imagining  of their  preservation  and  of their  moral  resonance. 
Such  preservation,  such  resonance signify  for national  life  as well as for 
a  couple's  marriage. 
The  text  of Persuasion  here  printed  is that  of the  first  edition,  dated 
1818  but  probably  issued  in  late  1817. The printing of the  two canceled 
chapters  follows  the  edition  of  R.  W.  Chapman.  Ampersands  that 
appeared  in  the  original  texts  have  been  spelled  out,  and  superscript 
letters have been  lowered. 
The  Text  of 
PERSUASION 
Persuasion 
Chapter  I 
Sir  Walter  Elliot,  of  Kellynch-hall,  in  Somersetshire,  was  a  man 
who,  for  his own  amusement,  never  took  up  any  book but  the  Baronet 
age; 1  there  he  found  occupation  for  an  idle  hour,  and  consolation  in  a 
distressed  one;  there  his  faculties  were  roused  into  admiration  and 
respect,  by  contemplating  the  limited  remnant  of the  earliest  patents;2 
there any  unwelcome  sensations,  arising from  domestic affairs,  changed 
naturally  into  pity  and  contempt.  As he  turned  over  the  almost  endless 
creations3 of the last century―and  there,  if every other  leaf were  power 
less,  he could  read  his own  history with  an  interest which  never failed― 
this was the  page at which  the  favourite  volume always  opened: 
E L L I OT  OF  KELLYNCH-HALL. 
Walter  Elliot,  born  March  1,  1760,  married,  July  15,  1784, 
Elizabeth,  daughter  of James Stevenson, Esq. of South  Park,  in  the 
county  of Gloucester; by  which  lady  (who  died  1800)  he  has  issue 
Elizabeth,  born  June  1,  1785;  Anne,  born  August  9,  1787; a still 
born  son,  Nov.  5,  1789; Mary,  born  Nov.  20,  1791. 
Precisely  such  had  the  paragraph  originally  stood  from  the  printer's 
hands; but  Sir Walter had  improved  it by adding,  for the  information  of 
himself  and  his  family,  these  words,  after  the  date  of  Mary's  birth― 
"married,  Dec.  16,  1810, Charles,  son  and  heir  of Charles  Musgrove, 
Esq.  of Uppercross,  in the county  of Somerset,"―and  by inserting  most 
accurately the  day  of the  month  on  which  he  had  lost his wife. 
Then  followed the history and  rise of the ancient and  respectable fam 
ily,  in  the  usual  terms:  how  it  had  been  first  settled  in  Cheshire;  how 
mentioned  in  Dugdale―4  serving  the  office  of High  Sheriff,  represent 
ing a  borough  in  three  successive parliaments,  exertions of loyalty,  and 
dignity  of baronet,  in  the first year of Charles II., with  all the  Marys  and 
1.  Presumably!. Debrett's Baronetage  of  England  (1808). 
2.  Titles (of nobility). 
3.  New peerages. 
4.  Sir William Dugdale,  The Ancient  Usage in Bearing  of Such  Ensigns  of Honour  as Are  Com 
.  .  .  Scotland  .  .  . 
monly  Ca0707d  Arms,  with a  Catalogue  of  the Present Nobility  of England 
and  Ireland 
(mi). 
3 
4 
CHAPTER  I 
Elizabeths they had  married;  forming  altogether two handsome  duodec02
imo  pages,  and  concluding  with  the  arms  and  motto:  "Principal  seat, 
Kellynch  hall,  in  the  county  of Somerset," and  Sir Walter's hand-writ02
ing again  in  this  finale: 
"Heir  presumptive,  William  Walter  Elliot,  Esq.,  great  grandson  of 
the  second  Sir Walter." 
Vanity was the  beginning and  the end  of Sir Walter Elliot's character; 
vanity of person  and  of situation.  He had  been  remarkably handsome  in 
his youth; and,  at  fifty-four,  was still a very fine man.  Few women  could 
think  more of their personal  appearance  than  he did; nor could the valet 
of  any  new  made  lord  be  more  delighted  with  the  place  he  held  in 
society.  He considered the blessing of beauty as inferior only to the bless02
ing of a baronetcy; and  the  Sir Walter Elliot,  who united  these gifts, was 
the  constant  object  of his warmest  respect and  devotion. 
His  good  looks  and  his  rank  had  one  fair  claim  on  his  attachment; 
since  to  them  he  must  have  owed  a  wife  of very  superior  character  to 
any  thing  deserved  by  his  own.  Lady  Elliot  had  been  an  excellent 
woman,  sensible  and  amiable;  whose  judgment  and  conduct,  if  they 
might  be  pardoned  the  youthful  infatuation  which  made  her  Lady 
Elliot,  had  never required  indulgence afterwards.―She  had  humoured, 
or softened,  or concealed his failings, and  promoted  his real respectabil02
ity  for  seventeen  years; and  though  not  the  very  happiest  being  in  the 
world  herself,  had  found  enough  in  her  duties,  her  friends,  and  her 
children,  to  attach  her  to  life,  and  make  it  no  matter  of indifference  to 
her  when  she  was  called  on  to  quit  them.―Three  girls,  the  two  eldest 
sixteen  and  fourteen,  was  an  awful  legacy for  a  mother  to bequeath;  an 
awful  charge  rather,  to  confide  to the  authority  and  guidance  of a con02
ceited,  silly father.  She had,  however,  one very intimate  friend,  a sensi02
ble,  deserving  woman,  who  had  been  brought,  by strong  attachment  to 
herself,  to  settle  close  by  her,  in  the  village  of  Kellynch; and  on  her 
kindness  and  advice,  Lady  Elliot  mainly  relied  for  the  best  help  and 
maintenance  of the  good principles and  instruction  which  she had  been 
anxiously giving her  daughters. 
This friend,  and  Sir Walter, did  not  marry,  whatever might have been 
anticipated  on  that  head  by  their  acquaintance.―Thirteen  years  had 
passed  away  since  Lady  Elliot's  death,  and 
they  were  still  near 
neighbours  and  intimate friends; and  one remained  a widower,  the  other 
a  widow. 
That  Lady  Russell,  of steady  age  and  character,  and  extremely well 
provided  for,  should  have  no  thought  of a  second  marriage,  needs  no 
apology  to  the  public,  which  is  rather  apt  to  be  unreasonably  discon02
tented  when  a  woman  does  marry  again,  than  when  she  does  not;  but 
Sir  Walter's  continuing 
in  singleness  requires  explanation.―Be  it 
known  then,  that  Sir Walter,  like a  good  father,  (having  met  with  one 
or two private disappointments  in very unreasonable applications) prided 
CHAPTER 
I 
5 
himself on  remaining single for his dear daughter's sake. For one daugh02
ter,  his  eldest,  he  would  really  have  given  up  any  thing,  which  he  had 
not been very much  tempted  to do.  Elizabeth had succeeded, at sixteen, 
to  all  that  was  possible,  of her  mother's  rights  and  consequence;  and 
being  very  handsome,  and  very  like himself,  her  influence  had  always 
been  great,  and  they  had  gone  on  together  most happily.  His two  other 
children  were of very inferior  value.  Mary had  acquired  a little artificial 
importance,  by  becoming  Mrs.  Charles  Musgrove; but  Anne,  with  an 
elegance  of mind  and  sweetness  of character,  which  must  have  placed 
her high  with  any  people  of real  understanding,  was nobody  with  either 
father  or sister: her  word  had  no  weight; her  convenience was always  to 
give way;―she was only Anne. 
To  Lady Russell, indeed,  she was a most dear and  highly valued  god02
daughter,  favourite  and  friend.  Lady  Russell loved  them  all; but  it  was 
only  in Anne that  she could  fancy the  mother  to revive again. 
A  few  years  before,  Anne  Elliot  had  been  a  very  pretty  girl,  but  her 
bloom  had  vanished  early;  and  as  even  in  its  height,  her  father  had 
found  little to  admire  in  her,  (so totally  different  were  her  delicate  fea02
tures  and  mild  dark eyes from  his own); there  could  be nothing  in  them 
now  that  she  was  faded  and  thin,  to  excite  his  esteem.  He  had  never 
indulged  much  hope,  he  had  now  none,  of ever  reading  her  name  in 
any  other  page  of his  favourite  work.  All  equality  of alliance  must  rest 
with  Elizabeth;  for  Mary  had  merely  connected  herself  with  an  old 
country  family  of  respectability  and  large  fortune,  and  had  therefore 
given  all  the  honour,  and  received  none:  Elizabeth  would,  one  day  or 
other,  marry  suitably. 
It  sometimes  happens,  that  a  woman  is  handsomer  at  twenty-nine 
than  she was ten  years before; and,  generally speaking,  if there  has  been 
neither  ill  health  nor  anxiety,  it  is a  time  of life  at  which  scarcely any 
charm  is  lost.  It  was  so  with  Elizabeth; still  the  same  handsome  Miss 
Elliot that  she had  begun  to be thirteen  years ago; and  Sir Walter  might 
be excused, therefore,  in  forgetting  her age, or,  at least, be deemed  only 
half  a  fool,  for  thinking  himself  and  Elizabeth  as  blooming  as  ever, 
amidst  the  wreck  of  the  good  looks  of  every  body  else;  for  he  could 
plainly  see  how  old  all  the  rest  of  his  family  and  acquaintance  were 
growing.  Anne  haggard,  Mary  coarse,  every face  in  the  neighbourhood 
worsting;5  and  the  rapid  increase of the  crow's foot about  Lady Russell's 
temples had  long been  a distress to  him. 
Elizabeth  did  not  quite  equal  her  father  in  personal  contentment. 
Thirteen  years  had  seen  her  mistress  of  Kellynch  Hall,  presiding  and 
directing  with  a  self-possession  and  decision  which  could  never  have 
given the  idea of her being younger than she was.  For thirteen  years had 
she been doing the honours,  and  laying down the domestic law at home, 
5.  Worsening. 
6 
CHAPTER  I 
and  leading  the  way  to  the  chaise and  four,6  and  walking  immediately 
after  Lady Russell out  of all the drawing-rooms  and  dining-rooms  in  the 
country.  Thirteen  winters'  revolving  frosts  had  seen  her  opening  every 
ball  of  credit  which  a  scanty  neighbourhood  afforded;  and  thirteen 
springs  shewn  their  blossoms,  as  she  travelled  up  to  London  with  her 
father,  for  a  few  weeks  annual  enjoyment  of the  great  world.  She  had 
the  remembrance  of all  this; she  had  the  consciousness of being  nine-
and-twenty,  to give her  some  regrets and  some apprehensions.  She was 
fully  satisfied  of being  still  quite  as  handsome  as  ever; but  she  felt  her 
approach  to  the  years  of danger,  and  would  have  rejoiced to be certain 
of  being  properly  solicited  by  baronet-blood  within  the  next  twelve02
month  or two.  Then  might  she again  take up  the  book of books with  as 
much  enjoyment as in  her early youth; but  now she liked it not.  Always 
to  be  presented  with  the  date  of  her  own  birth,  and  see  no  marriage 
follow  but  that  of a  youngest  sister,  made  the  book  an  evil; and  more 
than  once,  when  her  father  had  left  it  open  on  the  table  near  her,  had 
she closed it,  with  averted  eyes, and  pushed  it away. 
She had  had a disappointment,  moreover, which that book, and espe02
cially the history of her own  family,  must ever present the  remembrance 
of.  T he  heir  presumptive,  the  very  William Walter  Elliot,  Esq.  whose 
rights  had  been  so  generously  supported  by  her  father,  had  disap02
pointed  her. 
She  had,  while  a  very  young  girl,  as  soon  as  she  had  known  him  to 
be,  in  the  event  of her  having  no  brother,  the  future  baronet,  meant  to 
marry  him;  and  her  father  had  always  meant  that  she  should.  He  had 
not been  known  to them  as a boy, but  soon  after  Lady Elliot's death Sir 
Walter  had  sought  the  acquaintance,  and  though  his overtures  had  not 
been  met  with  any  warmth,  he  had  persevered  in  seeking  it,  making 
allowance  for  the  modest  drawing  back  of youth;  and  in  one  of  their 
spring  excursions  to  London,  when  Elizabeth  was  in  her  first  bloom, 
Mr.  Elliot had  been  forced into the  introduction. 
He  was  at  that  time  a  very  young  man,  just engaged  in  the  study of 
the  law; and  Elizabeth found  him  extremely agreeable,  and  every  plan 
in  his  favour  was  confirmed.  He  was  invited  to  Kellynch Hall; he  was 
talked  of and  expected all the  rest of the  year; but  he  never  came.  The 
following  spring  he  was  seen  again  in  town,  found  equally  agreeable, 
again  encouraged,  invited  and  expected,  and  again  he  did  not  come; 
and  the  next  tidings  were  that  he  was  married.  Instead  of pushing  his 
fortune  in  the  line  marked  out  for  the  heir  of the  house  of Elliot,  he 
had  purchased  independence  by  uniting  himself  to  a  rich  woman  of 
inferior  birth. 
Sir  Walter  had  resented  it.  As the  head  of the  house,  he  felt that  he 
ought  to  have  been  consulted,  especially after  taking the  young  man  so 
6.  A light, open carriage drawn by four horses. 
CHAPTER  I 
7 
publicly  by  the  hand:  "For  they  must  have  been  seen  together,"  he 
observed,  "once  at  Tattersal's,7  and  twice  in  the  lobby  of the  House  of 
Commons." His disapprobation  was expressed,  but  apparently  very little 
regarded.  Mr.  Elliot  had  attempted  no  apology,  and  shewn  himself  as 
unsolicitous of being longer noticed by the family,  as Sir Walter consid02
ered  him  unworthy  of it: all acquaintance  between  them  had  ceased. 
This  very awkward  history  of Mr.  Elliot,  was still, after  an  interval of 
several  years,  felt  with  anger  by  Elizabeth,  who  had  liked  the  man  for 
himself,  and  still  more  for  being  her  father's  heir,  and  whose  strong 
family pride could see only in him,  a proper  match  for Sir Walter Elliot's 
eldest  daughter.  There  was  not  a  baronet  from  A to  Z,  whom  her  feel02
ings could  have so willingly acknowledged  as an  equal.  Yet so miserably 
had  he conducted  himself,  that  though  she was at this present  time,  (the 
summer  of  1814,)  wearing  black  ribbons  for  his  wife,8  she  could  not 
admit  him  to  be  worth  thinking  of again.  The  disgrace  of his  first  mar02
riage  might,  perhaps,  as  there  was  no  reason  to  suppose  it  perpetuated 
by offspring,  have  been  got over,  had  he  not done  worse; but  he  had,  as 
by the accustomary intervention  of kind friends  they had been  informed, 
spoken  most disrespectfully  of them  all, most slightingly and  contemptu02
ously  of the  very  blood  he  belonged  to,  and  the  honours  which  were 
hereafter  to be his own.  This could  not  be pardoned. 
Such were Elizabeth Elliot's sentiments and  sensations; such  the cares 
to alloy, the  agitations to vary,  the  sameness and  the  elegance, the  pros02
perity  and  the  nothingness,  of  her  scene  of  life―such  the  feelings  to 
give interest to a long,  uneventful  residence in  one country  circle,  to  fill 
the  vacancies which  there  were  no habits  of utility  abroad,  no  talents  or 
accomplishments for home,  to occupy. 
But  now,  another  occupation  and  solicitude  of mind  was  beginning 
to be  added  to these.  Her  father  was growing  distressed  for  money.  She 
knew,  that  when  he  now  took  up  the  Baronetage,  it  was  to  drive  the 
heavy  bills of his  tradespeople,  and  the  unwelcome  hints  of Mr.  Shep02
herd,  his  agent,  from  his  thoughts.  T he  Kellynch  property  was  good, 
but  not  equal  to  Sir Walter's  apprehension  of the  state  required  in  its 
possessor. While Lady Elliot lived, there  had been method,  moderation, 
and  economy,  which  had  just kept him  within  his income; but  with  her 
had  died  all  such  right-mindedness,  and  from  that  period  he  had  been 
constantly  exceeding  it.  It  had  not  been  possible  for  him  to  spend  less; 
he  had  done  nothing  but  what  Sir Walter  Elliot  was  imperiously  called 
on  to  do; but  blameless  as  he  was,  he  was  not  only  growing  dreadfully 
in  debt,  but  was  hearing  of it  so  often,  that  it  became  vain  to  attempt 
concealing  it  longer,  even  partially,  from  his  daughter.  He  had  given 
her  some  hints  of it the  last  spring  in  town;  he  had  gone  so  far  even  as 
to  say,  "Can  we  retrench?  does  it  occur  to  you  that  there  is  any  one 
7.  A center for betting, located in Grosvenor Crescent. 
8.  Tokens of mourning: his wife had died recently. 
8 
CHAPTER 
II 
article  in  which  we  can  retrench?"―and  Elizabeth,  to  do  her  justice, 
had,  in the first ardour of female alarm,  set seriously to think what  could 
be  done,  and  had  finally  proposed  these  two  branches  of economy: to 
cut  off some  unnecessary  charities,  and  to  refrain  from  new-furnishing 
the  drawing-room;  to  which  expedients  she  afterwards  added the  happy 
thought  of their  taking  no present down to Anne,  as had  been  the  usual 
yearly  custom.  But these  measures,  however  good  in  themselves,  were 
insufficient  for the  real extent of the evil, the whole of which  Sir Walter 
found  himself  obliged  to  confess to  her  soon  afterwards.  Elizabeth  had 
nothing to propose of deeper  efficacy.  She felt herself ill-used and  unfor02
tunate,  as  did  her  father;  and  they  were  neither  of them  able  to  devise 
any  means  of lessening their  expenses without  compromising  their  dig02
nity,  or relinquishing  their  comforts  in  a way not to be borne. 
There was only a small part of his estate that  Sir Walter could  dispose 
of;  but  had  every  acre  been  alienable,9  it  would  have  made  no  differ02
ence.  He  had  condescended  to mortgage as far as he had  the power,  but 
he  would  never  condescend  to  sell.  No;  he  would  never  disgrace  his 
name  so  far.  The  Kellynch  estate  should  be  transmitted  whole  and 
entire,  as he  had  received it. 
Their  two  confidential  friends,  Mr.  Shepherd,  who  lived  in  the 
neighbouring  market  town,  and  Lady  Russell, were  called on  to  advise 
them;  and  both  father  and  daughter  seemed  to  expect  that  something 
should  be struck out by one or the other to remove their  embarrassments 
and  reduce  their  expenditure,  without  involving  the  loss of any  indul02
gence of taste or  pride. 
Chapter  II 
Mr.  Shepherd,  a  civil,  cautious  lawyer,  who,  whatever  might  be  his 
hold  or  his  views  on  Sir  Walter,  would  rather  have  the 
disagreeable 
prompted  by  any  body  else,  excused  himself  from  offering  the  slightest 
hint,  and  only begged  leave to  recommend  an  implicit deference  to  the 
excellent  judgment  of Lady Russell,―from whose known  good sense he 
fully  expected to have  just such  resolute  measures  advised,  as he  meant 
to see  finally adopted. 
Lady  Russell was  most  anxiously  zealous  on  the  subject,  and  gave  it 
much  serious  consideration.  She was a  woman  rather  of sound  than of 
quick  abilities,  whose  difficulties  in  coming  to  any  decision  in  this 
instance  were  great,  from  the  opposition  of two  leading  principles.  She 
was  of strict  integrity  herself,  with  a  delicate  sense  of honour;  but  she 
was as desirous  of saving Sir Walter's feelings, as solicitous for the  credit 
of  the  family,  as  aristocratic  in  her  ideas  of what  was  due  to  them,  as 
9.  Sellable (i.e.,  not prevented by legal restriction from being sold). 
CHAPTER 
II 
9 
any  body  of sense  and  honesty  could  well  be.  She  was  a  benevolent, 
charitable,  good  woman,  and  capable  of strong  attachments;  most  cor02
rect in  her  conduct,  strict in  her  notions  of decorum,  and  with  manners 
that  were  held  a standard  of good-breeding.  She had  a cultivated  mind, 
and  was, generally speaking,  rational  and  consistent―but  she had  preju02
dices on  the  side of ancestry; she had  a value  for  rank  and  consequence, 
which  blinded  her  a  little  to  the  faults  of those  who  possessed  them. 
Herself,  the widow  of only a knight,  she gave the  dignity  of a baronet  all 
its due;1  and  Sir Walter,  independent  of his  claims as  an  old  acquain02
tance,  an  attentive  neighbour,  an  obliging landlord,  the  husband  of her 
very  dear  friend,  the  father  of Anne  and  her  sisters,  was,  as  being  Sir 
Walter,  in  her  apprehension  entitled  to  a great  deal  of compassion  and 
consideration  under  his present  difficulties. 
They  must  retrench;  that  did  not  admit  of a  doubt.  But she  was  very 
anxious  to  have  it  done  with  the  least  possible  pain  to  him  and  Eliza02
beth.  She drew up  plans  of economy,  she  made  exact calculations,  and 
she  did,  what  nobody  else thought  of doing,  she  consulted  Anne,  who 
never  seemed  considered  by  the  others  as  having  any  interest  in  the 
question.  She  consulted,  and  in  a  degree  was  influenced  by  her,  in 
marking  out  the  scheme  of retrenchment,  which  was  at  last  submitted 
to  Sir  Walter.  Every  emendation  of  Anne's  had  been  on  the  side  of 
honesty  against  importance.  She  wanted  more  vigorous  measures,  a 
more complete reformation,  a quicker release from  debt,  a much  higher 
tone  of indifference  for every thing  but  justice and  equity. 
"If we can persuade  your father  to all this," said Lady Russell, looking 
over her  paper,  "much  may  be done.  If he  will adopt these  regulations, 
in  seven  years  he  will  be  clear; and  I  hope  we  may  be  able  to  convince 
him  and  Elizabeth,  that  Kellynch-hall  has  a  respectability  in  itself, 
which  cannot  be  affected  by  these  reductions;  and  that  the  true  dignity 
of  Sir Walter Elliot will be very far from  lessened,  in the eyes of sensible 
people,  by his acting like a man  of principle.  What will he  be doing,  in 
fact,  but  what  very  many  of our  first  families  have  done,―or  ought  to 
do?―There  will  be  nothing  singular  in  his  case;  and  it  is  singularity 
which  often  makes  the  worst  part  of our  suffering,  as  it  always  does of 
our  conduct.  I  have  great  hope  of our  prevailing.  We  must  be  serious 
and  decided―for,  after  all,  the  person  who  has  contracted  debts  must 
pay  them;  and  though  a  great  deal  is due  to  the  feelings  of the  gentle02
man,  and  the  head  of a  house,  like your  father,  there  is still  more  due 
to the  character of an  honest  man." 
This  was  the  principle  on  which  Anne  wanted  her  father  to  be  pro02
ceeding,  his  friends  to  be  urging  him.  She  considered  it  as  an  act  of 
indispensable  duty  to  clear  away  the  claims  of  creditors,  with  all  the 
expedition2  which 
the  most  comprehensive  retrenchments  could 
1.  A knight ranked immediately below a baronet in the peerage. 
2.  Speed. 
10 
CHAPTER  II 
secure,  and  saw  no  dignity  in  any  thing  short  of it.  She wanted  it to  be 
prescribed,  and  felt as a duty.  She rated  Lady Russell's influence  highly, 
and  as  to  the  severe  degree  of self-denial,  which  her  own  conscience 
prompted,  she  believed there  might  be  little more  difficulty  in  persuad02
ing  them  to  a  complete,  than  to  half  a  reformation.  Her  knowledge of 
her  father  and  Elizabeth,  inclined  her  to think  that  the  sacrifice of one 
pair  of  horses  would  be  hardly  less  painful  than  of both,  and  so  on, 
through  the  whole  list of Lady Russell's too gentle  reductions. 
How Anne's  more  rigid requisitions  might  have been  taken,  is of little 
consequence.  Lady Russell's had  no success at all―could not be put  up 
with―were  not  to  be  borne.  "What!  Every comfort  of life  knocked off! 
Journeys,  London,  servants,  horses,  table,―contractions  and  restric02
tions every where.  To live no longer with  the decencies even of a  private 
gentleman!  No,  he  would  sooner  quit  Kellynch-hall  at  once,  than 
remain  in  it on  such  disgraceful  terms." 
"Quit  Kellynch-hall." The  hint  was  immediately  taken  up  by  Mr. 
Shepherd,  whose  interest  was  involved  in  the  reality  of  Sir  Walter's 
retrenching,  and  who  was  perfectly  persuaded  that  nothing  would  be 
done  without  a  change  of abode.―"Since the  idea  had  been  started  in 
the very quarter  which  ought  to dictate,  he  had  no scruple," he said,  "in 
confessing  his  judgment  to be  entirely  on  that  side.  It did  not  appear  to 
him  that  Sir Walter could  materially  alter  his  style of living  in  a  house 
which  had  such  a  character  of hospitality  and  ancient  dignity  to  sup02
port.―In  any  other  place,  Sir  Walter  might  judge  for  himself;  and 
would  be  looked  up  to,  as regulating  the  modes  of life,  in  whatever  way 
he  might  choose to model  his  household." 
Sir Walter would  quit  Kellynch-hall;―and after  a very few days  more 
of doubt and  indecision,  the great question  of whither  he should  go, was 
settled,  and  the first outline  of this  important  change  made  out. 
There  had  been  three  alternatives,  London,  Bath,  or  another  house 
in  the  country.  All Anne's wishes had  been  for the latter.  A small  house 
in  their  own  neighbourhood,  where  they  might  still have  Lady Russell's 
society,  still  be  near  Mary,  and  still  have  the  pleasure  of  sometimes 
seeing the  lawns and  groves of Kellynch,  was the object of her  ambition. 
But the  usual  fate  of Anne attended  her,  in having something very oppo02
site  from  her  inclination  fixed  on.  She disliked  Bath, and  did  not  think 
it agreed  with  her―and  Bath was to be her  home. 
Sir  Walter  had  at  first  thought  more  of London,  but  Mr.  Shepherd 
felt that  he could  not be trusted  in  London,  and  had  been  skilful  enough 
to  dissuade  him  from  it,  and  make  Bath  preferred.  It was  a  much  safer 
place for a gentleman  in  his predicament:―he  might there be  important 
at  comparatively  little expense.―Two material  advantages  of Bath over 
London  had  of course  been  given  all their  weight,  its more  convenient 
distance  from  Kellynch,  only  fifty  miles,  and  Lady  Russell's  spending 
some part of every winter  there; and  to the very great satisfaction of Lady 
CHAPTER  II 
11 
Russell,  whose  first  views  on  the  projected  change  had  been  for  Bath, 
Sir  Walter and  Elizabeth were  induced  to believe that  they  should  lose 
neither consequence nor enjoyment  by settling there. 
Lady  Russell felt obliged to oppose  her  dear  Anne's known  wishes.  It 
would  be too  much  to expect Sir Walter to descend  into  a  small  house 
in  his own  neighbourhood.  Anne  herself would  have found  the  mortifi02
cations  of  it  more  than  she  foresaw,  and  to  Sir  Walter's  feelings  they 
must  have been dreadful.  And  with  regard  to Anne's dislike of Bath,  she 
considered  it  as  a  prejudice  and  mistake,  arising  first  from  the  circum02
stance of her  having  been  three  years at school there,  after  her  mother's 
death,  and,  secondly,  from  her  happening  to  be  not  in  perfectly  good 
spirits the only winter which  she had  afterwards  spent there with  herself. 
Lady Russell was fond  of Bath in  short,  and  disposed  to think  it  must 
suit them  all; and as to her young friend's health,  by passing all the  warm 
months with  her at Kellynch-lodge,  every danger  would  be avoided;  and 
it  was,  in  fact,  a  change  which  must  do  both  health  and  spirits  good. 
Anne  had  been  too  little from3  home,  too  little seen.  Her  spirits  were 
not  high.  A  larger  society would  improve  them.  She wanted  her  to  be 
more  known. 
The  undesirableness  of any  other  house  in  the  same  neighbourhood 
for  Sir Walter, was certainly much  strengthened  by one part,  and  a very 
material  part  of the  scheme,  which  had  been  happily  engrafted  on  the 
beginning.  He  was not  only to quit  his home,  but  to see it in  the  hands 
of others; a trial  of fortitude,  which stronger heads than  Sir Walter's have 
found  too  much―Kellynch-hall was  to  be  let.4  This,  however,  was  a 
profound  secret; not to be breathed  beyond  their  own  circle. 
Sir  Walter  could  not  have  borne  the  degradation  of being  known  to 
design letting his house.―Mr.  Shepherd had  once mentioned  the  word, 
"advertise;"―but  never dared  approach  it again; Sir Walter spurned  the 
idea  of its  being  offered  in  any  manner;  forbad  the  slightest  hint  being 
dropped of his having such an  intention; and  it was only on  the  supposi02
tion  of his being spontaneously  solicited by some most unexceptionable 
applicant,  on  his  own  terms,  and  as  a  great  favor,  that  he  would  let  it 
at all. 
How quick come the  reasons for approving  what  we like!―Lady Rus02
sell had  another  excellent one at hand,  for being extremely glad that Sir 
Walter  and  his  family were  to  remove from  the  country.  Elizabeth  had 
been  lately forming  an  intimacy,  which  she  wished  to  see  interrupted. 
It  was  with  a  daughter  of  Mr.  Shepherd,  who  had  returned,  after  an 
unprosperous  marriage,  to  her  father's  house,  with  the  additional  bur02
then  of two  children.  She was a  clever young  woman,  who  understood 
the art of pleasing; the art of pleasing, at least, at Kellynch-hall; and  who 
had  made  herself  so  acceptable to  Miss  Elliot,  as  to  have  been  already 
3.  Away from. 
4.  Rented. 
12 
CHAPTER 
III 
staying  there  more  than  once,  in  spite  of  all  that  Lady  Russell,  who 
thought  it  a  friendship  quite  out  of  place,  could  hint  of  caution  and 
reserve. 
Lady Russell, indeed,  had  scarcely any influence with  Elizabeth, and 
seemed  to  love  her,  rather  because  she  would  love  her,  than  because 
Elizabeth  deserved  it.  She had  never  received from  her  more  than  out02
ward  attention,  nothing  beyond  the  observances  of complaisance; had 
never  succeeded  in  any  point  which  she wanted  to carry,  against  previ02
ous  inclination.  She  had  been  repeatedly  very  earnest  in  trying  to  get 
Anne  included  in  the  visit to  London,  sensibly open  to all the  injustice 
and  all  the  discredit  of  the  selfish  arrangements  which  shut  her  out, 
and  on  many  lesser  occasions had  endeavoured  to  give  Elizabeth  the 
advantage  of her  own  better  judgment  and  experience―but  always  in 
vain;  Elizabeth  would  go  her  own  way―and  never  had  she  pursued  it 
in  more  decided  opposition  to  Lady  Russell,  than  in  this  selection of 
Mrs.  Clay; turning  from  the  society of so deserving a sister to bestow her 
affection  and  confidence on  one who ought  to have been nothing  to her 
but  the  object  of distant civility. 
From  situation,  Mrs.  Clay  was,  in  Lady  Russell's  estimate,  a  very 
unequal,  and  in  her  character  she  believed  a  very  dangerous  compan02
ion―and  a  removal  that  would  leave  Mrs.  Clay  behind,  and  bring  a 
choice  of more  suitable  intimates within  Miss Elliot's reach,  was there02
fore  an  object  of first-rate importance. 
Chapter III 
"I  must  take  leave  to  observe,  Sir  Walter,"  said  Mr.  Shepherd  one 
morning  at  Kellynch  Hall,  as  he  laid  down  the  newspaper,  "that  the 
present  juncture  is  much  in  our  favour.  This peace will be  turning  all 
our  rich  Navy Officers ashore.5 They will be all wanting  a home.  Could 
not  be  a  better  time,  Sir Walter,  for  having  a  choice of tenants,  very 
responsible  tenants.  Many  a  noble  fortune  has  been  made  during  the 
war.  If a rich  Admiral  were to come in  our  way,  Sir Walter―" 
"He  would  be  a  very  lucky  man,  Shepherd,"  replied  Sir  Walter, 
"that's  all  I  have  to  remark.  A  prize  indeed  would  Kellynch Hall  be  to 
him;  rather  the  greatest  prize  of all,  let  him  have  taken  ever  so  many 
before―hey,  Shepherd?"6 
Mr.  Shepherd  laughed,  as  he  knew  he  must,  at  this  wit,  and  then 
added, 
"I presume  to observe, Sir Walter, that,  in the way of business, gentle02
men  of the  navy  are  well  to  deal  with.  I have  had  a  little knowledge of 
5.  The apparent end of the Napoleonic Wars,  signaled by the Treaty of Paris in  1814. 
6.  Throughout the Napoleonic Wars,  the powerful British Navy captured many enemy merchant 
ships; these "prizes" provided financial  rewards for the captain of the conquering vessel. 
CHAPTER 
III 
13 
their methods  of doing  business,  and  I am  free  to confess that  they  have 
very  liberal  notions,  and  are  as  likely to  make  desirable  tenants  as  any 
set of people one should  meet with.  Therefore, Sir Walter, what I would 
take  leave  to  suggest  is,  that  if in  consequence of any  rumours  getting 
abroad  of your  intention―which  must  be  contemplated  as  a  possible 
thing,  because we know how difficult it is to keep the actions and  designs 
of  one  part  of the  world  from  the  notice  and  curiosity  of the  other,― 
consequence  has  its tax―I,  John  Shepherd,  might  conceal any  family-
matters  that  I  chose,  for  nobody  would  think  it  worth  their  while  to 
observe  me,  but  Sir Walter  Elliot  has  eyes upon  him  which  it  may  be 
very difficult  to  elude―and  therefore,  thus  much  I venture  upon,  that 
it will  not  greatly  surprise  me  if,  with  all  our  caution,  some  rumour of 
the truth should  get abroad―in  the supposition  of which,  as I was going 
to observe, since applications will unquestionably  follow,  I should  think 
any  from  our  wealthy  naval  commanders  particularly  worth  attending 
to―and  beg leave to add,  that  two hours  will bring me over at any time, 
to save you the trouble  of replying. " 
Sir  Walter  only  nodded.  But  soon  afterwards,  rising  and  pacing  the 
room,  he observed sarcastically, 
"There  are  few  among  the  gentlemen  of the  navy,  I  imagine,  who 
would  not be surprised  to find themselves in a house  of this description." 
"They  would  look around  them,  no  doubt,  and  bless their  good  for02
tune,"  said  Mrs.  Clay, for  Mrs.  Clay was present;  her  father  had  driven 
her  over,  nothing  being of so much  use to Mrs.  Clay's health  as a  drive 
to Kellynch: "but  I quite agree with  my father  in  thinking  a sailor  might 
be  a  very  desirable  tenant.  I have  known  a  good  deal  of the  profession; 
and  besides their liberality, they are so neat and  careful  in all their ways! 
These valuable pictures of yours,  Sir Walter, if you chose to leave them, 
would  be  perfectly  safe.  Every thing  in  and  about  the  house  would  be 
taken  such  excellent care of! the  gardens  and  shrubberies would  be  kept 
in  almost as  high  order  as  they  are  now.  You need  not  be  afraid,  Miss 
Elliot,  of your own  sweet  flower-garden's  being neglected." 
"As to all that," rejoined Sir Walter coolly,  "supposing  I were  induced 
to let my house,  I have  by no  means  made  up  my  mind  as to  the  privi02
leges  to  be  annexed  to  it.  I  am  not  particularly  disposed  to  favour  a 
tenant.  The park would  be open  to him  of course,  and  few navy  officers, 
or  men  of any  other  description,  can  have  had  such  a  range;  but  what 
restrictions  I  might  impose  on  the  use  of  the  pleasure-grounds, 
is 
another  thing.  I am  not fond  of the  idea of my shrubberies being always 
approachable; and  I should  recommend  Miss Elliot  to be  on  her  guard 
with  respect  to  her  flower-garden.  I  am  very  little  disposed  to  grant  a 
tenant  of Kellynch  Hall  any  extraordinary  favour,  I  assure  you,  be  he 
sailor or soldier. " 
After  a short pause,  Mr.  Shepherd  presumed  to say, 
"In  all  these  cases,  there  are  established  usages  which  make  every 
14 
CHAPTER 
III 
thing  plain  and  easy  between  landlord  and  tenant.  Your  interest,  Sir 
Walter,  is in  pretty  safe hands.  Depend  upon  me for taking care that  no 
tenant  has  more  than  his  just  rights.  I venture  to  hint,  that  Sir Walter 
Elliot  cannot  be  half  so  jealous for  his  own,  as John  Shepherd  will  be 
for  him." 
Here  Anne  spoke,― 
"The  navy,  I think,  who  have  done  so much  for  us,  have  at  least an 
equal  claim  with  any  other  set of men,  for  all the  comforts and  all  the 
privileges which  any home  can  give.  Sailors work hard enough  for their 
comforts,  we must  all allow." 
"Very  true,  very  true.  What  Miss Anne  says,  is very  true,"  was  Mr. 
Shepherd's  rejoinder,  and  "Oh!  certainly," was  his  daughter's;  but  Sir 
Walter's  remark  was,  soon  afterwards― 
"The  profession  has  its utility,  but  I should  be sorry to see any  friend 
of  mine  belonging to  it. " 
"Indeed!" was the  reply,  and  with  a look of surprise. 
"Yes;  it is in  two points  offensive to  me; I have  two strong grounds of 
objection  to  it.  First,  as being the  means  of bringing persons of obscure 
birth  into  undue  distinction,  and  raising  men  to  honours  which  their 
fathers  and  grandfathers  never  dreamt  of; and  secondly,  as  it cuts  up  a 
man's  youth  and  vigour  most  horribly;  a  sailor  grows  old  sooner  than 
any other man;  I have observed it all my life.  A man  is in greater  danger 
in  the  navy  of being  insulted  by the  rise of one  whose father,  his  father 
might  have  disdained  to  speak  to,  and  of  becoming  prematurely  an 
object  of disgust  himself,  than  in any  other line.  One day last spring,  in 
town,  I was  in  company  with  two  men,  striking  instances of what  I am 
talking of,  Lord  St.  Ives, whose father we all know to have been a coun02
try  curate,  without  bread  to  eat;  I  was  to  give  place7  to  Lord  St.  Ives, 
and  a  certain  Admiral  Baldwin,  the  most deplorable  looking personage 
you can  imagine,  his face the  colour of mahogany,  rough  and  rugged  to 
the  last  degree,  all  lines  and  wrinkles,  nine  grey  hairs  of a  side,  and 
nothing  but  a  dab  of powder  at  top.―'In  the  name  of heaven,  who  is 
that  old  fellow?'  said  I,  to  a  friend  of mine  who  was standing  near, (Sir 
Basil Morley.) 'Old fellow!' cried Sir Basil,  'it is Admiral Baldwin. What 
do  you  take his age to be?' 'Sixty,'  said  I,  'or perhaps sixty-two.' 'Forty,' 
replied  Sir Basil,  'forty,  and  no  more.'  Picture to yourselves my amaze02
ment;  I  shall  not  easily  forget  Admiral  Baldwin.  I  never  saw  quite  so 
wretched  an  example of what  a  sea-faring  life  can  do; but  to a degree,  I 
know  it  is  the  same  with  them  all:  they  are  all  knocked  about,  and 
exposed  to  every  climate,  and  every  weather,  till  they  are  not  fit  to  be 
seen.  It  is a  pity  they  are  not  knocked  on  the  head  at  once,  before they 
reach  Admiral  Baldwin's age. " 
7.  Yield precedence. 
CHAPTER 
III 
15 
"Nay,  Sir Walter," cried Mrs. Clay, "this is being severe indeed.  Have 
a  little  mercy  on  the  poor  men.  We  are  not  all  born  to  be  handsome. 
The  sea  is  no  beautifier,  certainly; sailors  do  grow  old  betimes; I  have 
often  observed  it; they  soon  lose the  look  of youth.  But then,  is  not  it 
the same with  many  other  professions,  perhaps most other?  Soldiers, in 
active  service,  are  not  at  all  better  off: and  even  in  the  quieter  profes02
sions,  there  is a toil and  a labour  of the  mind,  if not  of the  body,  which 
seldom  leaves  a  man's  looks  to  the  natural  effect  of time.  The  lawyer 
plods,  quite care-worn; the physician  is up  at all hours,  and  travelling  in 
all weather; and  even  the  clergyman―" she stopt  a moment  to consider 
what might do for the clergyman;―"and  even the clergyman, you  know, 
is obliged to go into  infected  rooms,  and  expose his health  and  looks to 
all  the  injury  of a  poisonous  atmosphere.  In  fact,  as  I  have  long  been 
convinced,  though  every  profession  is  necessary  and  honourable  in  its 
turn,  it is only the  lot  of those  who  are  not  obliged to  follow  any,  who 
can  live  in  a  regular  way,  in  the  country,  choosing  their  own  hours, 
following  their own  pursuits,  and  living on  their  own  property,  without 
the  torment  of trying  for  more;  it  is  only  their  lot,  I  say,  to  hold  the 
blessings of health and  a good appearance  to the utmost: I know no  other 
set  of men  but  what  lose  something  of their  personableness  when  they 
cease to be quite  young. " 
It seemed  as if Mr.  Shepherd,  in  this  anxiety to  bespeak  Sir Walter's 
goodwill towards a naval  officer  as tenant,  had  been gifted with  foresight; 
for  the  very first application  for  the  house  was  from  an  Admiral  Croft, 
with  whom  he  shortly  afterwards  fell  into  company  in  attending  the 
quarter  sessions at Taunton;8  and  indeed,  he  had  received a  hint  of the 
admiral  from  a London  correspondent.  By the  report which he  hastened 
over to Kellynch to make,  Admiral  Croft  was a native  of Somersetshire, 
who  having  acquired  a very handsome  fortune,  was wishing  to  settle in 
his  own  country,  and  had  come  down  to  Taunton  in  order  to  look  at 
some advertised  places in  that  immediate  neighbourhood,  which,  how02
ever,  had  not  suited  him;  that  accidentally  hearing―(it  was  just  as  he 
had  foretold,  Mr.  Shepherd  observed,  Sir Walter's  concerns could  not 
be  kept  a  secret,)―accidentally hearing  of the  possibility  of Kellynch 
Hall  being  to  let,  and  understanding  his  (Mr.  Shepherd's)  connection 
with  the  owner,  he  had  introduced  himself  to  him  in  order  to  make 
particular  inquiries,  and  had,  in  the  course of a pretty  long conference, 
expressed  as  strong  an  inclination  for  the  place  as  a  man  who  knew  it 
only by description,  could  feel;  and  given  Mr.  Shepherd,  in  his explicit 
account of himself,  every proof of his being a most  responsible, eligible 
tenant. 
"And who is Admiral Croft?" was Sir Walter's cold suspicious  inquiry. 
8.  Court sessions held four times a year by justices of the peace. 
16 
CHAPTER 
III 
Mr.  Shepherd  answered  for  his  being  of a  gentleman's  family,  and 
mentioned  a  place;  and  Anne,  after  the  little  pause  which  followed, 
added― 
"He  is  rear  admiral  of the  white.9  He  was  in  the  Trafalgar1  action, 
and  has  been  in  the  East  Indies  since; he  has  been  stationed  there,  I 
believe,  several years." 
"Then  I  take  it  for  granted,"  observed  Sir  Walter,  "that  his  face  is 
about  as orange  as the  cuffs and  capes of my  livery. " 
Mr.  Shepherd  hastened  to  assure  him,  that  Admiral  Croft was a very 
hale,  hearty,  well-looking man,  a  little weather-beaten,  to  be  sure,  but 
not  much;  and  quite  the  gentleman  in  all  his  notions and  behaviour;― 
not  likely to  make  the  smallest difficulty  about  terms;―only  wanted  a 
comfortable  home,  and  to get into it as soon as possible;―knew he  must 
pay  for  his  convenience;―knew  what  rent  a  ready-furnished  house  of 
that  consequence  might  fetch;―should  not  have  been  surprised  if Sir 
Walter  had  asked  more;―had  inquired  about  the  manor;―would  be 
glad  of the  deputation,2  certainly,  but  made  no  great  point  of it;―said 
he  sometimes took out  a gun,  but  never killed;―quite the  gentleman. 
Mr.  Shepherd  was  eloquent  on  the  subject; pointing  out  all  the  cir02
cumstances  of the  admiral's  family,  which  made  him  peculiarly  desir02
able as a tenant.  He  was a married  man,  and  without  children; the very 
state to be wished  for.  A house was never taken  good care of,  Mr.  Shep02
herd  observed, without  a lady: he did  not know,  whether furniture  might 
not be in danger  of suffering  as much  where there was no lady,  as where 
there  were  many  children.  A lady,  without  a  family,  was the  very best 
preserver of furniture  in the world.  He had  seen Mrs. Croft,  too; she was 
at Taunton  with  the  admiral,  and  had  been  present  almost all the  time 
they were talking the  matter  over. 
"And  a  very  well-spoken,  genteel,  shrewd  lady,  she  seemed  to  be," 
continued  he;  "asked  more  questions  about  the  house,  and  terms,  and 
taxes,  than  the admiral  himself, and  seemed more conversant with  busi02
ness.  And  moreover,  Sir Walter,  I found  she was not quite  unconnected 
in  this  country,  any  more  than  her  husband;  that  is to  say,  she  is sister 
to  a  gentleman  who  did  live  amongst  us  once; she  told  me  so herself: 
sister  to  the  gentleman  who  lived  a  few  years  back,  at  Monkford.  Bless 
me!  what  was  his  name?  At this  moment  I cannot  recollect his  name, 
though  I  have  heard  it so  lately.  Penelope,  my  dear,  can  you  help  me 
to  the  name  of  the  gentleman  who  lived  at  Monkford―Mrs.  Croft's 
brother?" 
But  Mrs.  Clay  was  talking  so  eagerly  with  Miss  Elliot,  that  she  did 
not  hear  the  appeal. 
9.  The navy  consisted of three  squadrons,  Red, White,  and Blue.  Anne's display of knowledge 
here  reveals her special interest in naval affairs,  soon to be accounted for. 
1.  In the  Battle  of Trafalgar  (October  21,  1805),  the  British  Navy triumphed  over Napoleon's 
fleet and definitively established British naval supremacy. 
2.  The right to shoot game on the property. 
CHAPTER 
III 
17 
"I  have  no  conception  whom  you  can  mean,  Shepherd;  I  remember 
no  gentleman  resident  at  Monkford  since  the  time  of  old  Governor 
Trent. " 
"Bless me! how very odd! I shall forget my own  name  soon,  I suppose. 
A name  that  I am  so very well acquainted  with; knew  the  gentleman  so 
well  by  sight;  seen  him  a  hundred  times;  came  to  consult  me  once,  I 
remember,  about  a  trespass  of  one  of  his  neighbours;  farmer's  man 
breaking  into  his  orchard―wall  torn  down―apples  stolen―caught  in 
the  fact; and  afterwards,  contrary  to my  judgment,  submitted  to an  ami02
cable compromise.  Very odd  indeed!" 
After  waiting another  moment― 
"You  mean  Mr.  Wentworth,  I suppose,"  said  Anne. 
Mr.  Shepherd  was all  gratitude. 
"Wentworth  was  the  very  name!  Mr.  Wentworth  was  the  very  man. 
He  had  the  curacy  of  Monkford,  you  know,  Sir.  Walter,  some  time 
back,  for  two  or  three  years.  Came  there  about  the  year―5,  I  take  it. 
You  remember  him,  I am  sure." 
"Wentworth?  Oh!  ay,―Mr.  Wentworth,  the  curate  of  Monkford. 
You  misled  me  by the  term  gentleman. 
I thought  you  were  speaking of 
some  man  of property:  Mr.  Wentworth  was  nobody,  I remember;  quite 
unconnected;  nothing  to  do  with  the  Strafford  family.3  One  wonders 
how the  names  of many  of our  nobility become so common." 
As Mr.  Shepherd perceived that this connexion of the Crofts did  them 
no service with  Sir Walter, he  mentioned  it no more; returning,  with  all 
his  zeal,  to  dwell  on  the  circumstances  more  indisputably  in  their 
favour;  their  age,  and  number,  and  fortune;  the  high  idea  they  had 
formed  of  Kellynch  Hall,  and  extreme  solicitude  for  the  advantage  of 
renting  it; making  it appear  as if they  ranked  nothing  beyond  the  happi02
ness  of  being  the  tenants  of  Sir  Walter  Elliot:  an  extraordinary  taste, 
certainly,  could  they  have  been  supposed  in  the  secret  of  Sir Walter's 
estimate of the dues  of a  tenant. 
It succeeded,  however; and  though  Sir Walter must  ever look with  an 
evil  eye  on  any  one  intending  to  inhabit  that  house,  and  think  them 
infinitely  too well off in  being permitted  to rent  it on  the  highest  terms, 
he  was talked  into  allowing  Mr.  Shepherd  to proceed  in  the  treaty,  and 
authorising  him  to wait  on  Admiral  Croft,  who  still remained  at  Taun02
ton,  and fix a day for the  house  being seen. 
Sir  Walter  was  not  very  wise; but  still  he  had  experience enough  of 
the  world  to  feel,  that  a  more  unobjectionable tenant,  in  all essentials, 
than  Admiral  Croft  bid  fair  to  be,  could  hardly  offer.  So  far  went  his 
understanding;  and  his  vanity  supplied  a  little  additional  soothing,  in 
the admiral's  situation  in  life,  which  was  just high  enough,  and  not  too 
high.  "I  have  let  my  house  to  Admiral  Croft,"  would  sound  extremely 
3.  "Wentworth" was the family name of the Earls of Strafford. 
18 
CHAPTER 
IV 
well; very much  better than to any  mere Mr. 
; a Mr.  (save,  perhaps, 
some  half  dozen  in  the  nation,) always  needs  a note  of explanation.  An 
admiral  speaks  his  own  consequence,  and,  at the  same time,  can  never 
make  a  baronet  look  small.  In  all  their  dealings  and  intercourse,  Sir 
Walter  Elliot  must  ever have  the  precedence. 
Nothing  could  be  done  without  a  reference  to  Elizabeth;  but  her 
inclination  was  growing  so strong  for  a  removal,  that  she  was happy  to 
have  it  fixed  and  expedited  by  a  tenant  at  hand; and  not  a word  to  sus02
pend  decision  was uttered  by  her. 
Mr.  Shepherd  was  completely empowered  to  act; and  no  sooner  had 
such  an  end  been  reached,  than  Anne,  who  had  been  a  most  attentive 
listener  to  the  whole,  left  the  room,  to  seek the  comfort  of cool  air  for 
her  flushed  cheeks; and  as she walked along a favourite  grove, said,  with 
a  gentle  sigh,  "a  few  months  more,  and  he,  perhaps,  may  be  walking 
here." 
Chapter  IV 
He  was not Mr.  Wentworth,  the former  curate of Monkford,  however 
suspicious appearances  may be,  but  a captain  Frederick Wentworth,  his 
brother,  who  being  made  commander  in  consequence of the  action off 
St.  Domingo,4  and  not  immediately  employed,  had  come  into  Somer02
setshire,  in  the  summer  of  1806;  and  having  no  parent  living,  found  a 
home  for  half  a  year,  at  Monkford.  He  was,  at  that  time,  a  remarkably 
fine  young  man,  with  a  great  deal  of intelligence, spirit  and  brilliancy; 
and  Anne  an  extremely pretty  girl,  with  gentleness,  modesty,  taste,  and 
feeling.―Half  the  sum  of attraction,  on  either  side,  might  have  been 
enough,  for he  had  nothing  to do,  and  she had  hardly  any  body to love; 
but  the  encounter  of such  lavish  recommendations  could  not fail.  They 
were gradually  acquainted,  and  when  acquainted,  rapidly  and  deeply  in 
love.  It  would  be  difficult  to  say  which  had  seen  highest  perfection  in 
the  other,  or which  had  been  the  happiest;  she,  in  receiving his declara02
tions and  proposals,  or he  in  having  them  accepted. 
A  short  period  of exquisite  felicity  followed,  and  but  a  short  one.― 
Troubles  soon  arose.  Sir Walter,  on  being  applied  to,  without  actually 
withholding  his  consent,  or  saying  it  should  never  be,  gave  it  all  the 
negative  of great  astonishment,  great  coldness, great  silence,  and  a  pro02
fessed  resolution  of doing  nothing  for his daughter.5  He thought  it a very 
degrading  alliance; and  Lady  Russell, though  with  more  tempered  and 
pardonable  pride,  received it as a most unfortunate  one. 
Anne  Elliot,  with  all  her  claims of birth,  beauty,  and  mind,  to  throw 
4.  A British naval  victory in  February  1806. 
5.  Giving her no dowry. 
CHAPTER 
IV 
19 
herself  away  at  nineteen;  involve  herself  at  nineteen  in  an  engagement 
with  a  young  man,  who  had  nothing  but  himself  to  recommend  him, 
and  no hopes of attaining affluence,  but  in the chances of a most  uncer02
tain  profession,  and  no connexions to secure even  his farther  rise in  that 
profession;  would  be,  indeed,  a  throwing  away,  which  she  grieved  to 
think  of! Anne  Elliot,  so young;  known  to so few,  to  be snatched  off by 
a stranger without  alliance or fortune;  or rather  sunk  by him  into a  state 
of  most  wearing,  anxious,  youth-killing  dépendance!  It must  not  be, if 
by any fair interference of friendship,  any  representations  from  one  who 
had  almost a mother's  love, and  mother's  rights,  it would  be  prevented. 
Captain  Wentworth  had  no fortune.  He had  been lucky in  his profes02
sion,  but  spending  freely,  what  had  come freely,  had  realized  nothing. 
But,  he  was  confident  that  he  should  soon  be  rich;―full  of  life  and 
ardour,  he  knew  that  he  should  soon  have  a  ship,  and  soon  be  on  a 
station  that  would  lead  to  every thing  he  wanted.6  He  had  always  been 
lucky; he  knew he  should  be so still.―Such confidence, powerful  in  its 
own  warmth,  and  bewitching  in  the  wit which  often  expressed  it,  must 
have  been  enough  for Anne; but  Lady  Russell saw it very  differently.― 
His sanguine  temper,  and  fearlessness of mind,  operated  very  differently 
on  her.  She  saw  in  it  but  an  aggravation  of the  evil.  It  only  added  a 
dangerous  character to  himself.  He  was brilliant,  he  was  headstrong.― 
Lady  Russell  had  little  taste  for  wit;  and  of  any  thing  approaching  to 
imprudence  a horror.  She deprecated  the  connexion in  every light. 
Such  opposition,  as  these  feelings  produced,  was  more  than  Anne 
could  combat.  Young  and  gentle  as  she  was,  it  might  yet  have  been 
possible to withstand  her father's  ill-will, though  unsoftened  by one kind 
word  or look on the part of her sister;―but  Lady Russell, whom  she  had 
always loved  and  relied  on,  could  not,  with  such  steadiness of opinion, 
and such tenderness of manner,  be continually advising her in vain.  She 
was  persuaded  to  believe  the  engagement  a  wrong  thing―indiscreet, 
improper,  hardly  capable of success,  and  not deserving  it.  But it was  not 
a merely selfish caution,  under which  she acted,  in putting an  end  to it. 
Had  she  not  imagined  herself  consulting  his good,  even  more  than  her 
own,  she  could  hardly  have  given  him  up.―The  belief  of being  pru02
dent,  and  self-denying  principally  for  his advantage,  was her  chief  con02
solation,  under  the  misery  of  a  parting―a  final  parting;  and  every 
consolation  was  required,  for  she  had  to  encounter  all  the  additional 
pain  of opinions,  on  his side,  totally unconvinced  and  unbending,  and 
of  his  feeling  himself  ill-used  by  so  forced  a  relinquishment.―He  had 
left  the  country  in consequence. 
A  few  months  had  seen  the  beginning  and  the  end  of their  acquain02
tance; but,  not with  a few months  ended  Anne's share  of suffering  from 
it.  Her attachment and  regrets had,  for a long time, clouded every enjoy-
6.  He expected  to be given  command  of a ship and assigned to a  part  of the world that would 
allow him to capture many enemy vessels. 
20 
CHAPTER 
IV 
ment  of  youth;  and  an  early  loss  of bloom  and  spirits  had  been  their 
lasting  effect. 
More  than  seven  years were  gone  since this  little history  of  sorrowful 
interest  had  reached  its  close;  and  time  had  softened  down  much,  per02
haps  nearly  all  of peculiar  attachment  to  him,―but  she  had  been  too 
dependant  on  time  alone;  no  aid  had  been  given  in  change  of place, 
(except  in  one  visit to  Bath soon  after  the  rupture,)  or  in  any  novelty  or 
enlargement  of  society.―No  one  had  ever  come  within  the  Kellynch 
circle,  who  could  bear  a  comparison  with  Frederick Wentworth,  as  he 
stood  in her  memory.  No  second attachment,  the only thoroughly  natu02
ral,  happy,  and  sufficient  cure,  at  her  time  of life,  had  been  possible to 
the  n i c e7  tone  of her  mind,  the  fastidiousness  of her  taste,  in  the  small 
limits  of the  society around  them.  She had  been  solicited, when  about 
two-and-twenty,  to change  her  name,  by the  young  man,  who  not  long 
afterwards  found  a  more  willing  mind  in  her  younger  sister; and  Lady 
Russell  had  lamented  her  refusal;  for  Charles  Musgrove  was  the  eldest 
son  of  a  man,  whose  landed  property  and  general  importance,  were 
second,  in  that  country,  only to  Sir Walter's,  and  of good  character  and 
appearance;  and  however  Lady  Russell  might  have  asked  yet for  some02
thing  more,  while  Anne  was  nineteen,  she  would  have  rejoiced  to  see 
her  at  twenty-two,  so  respectably  removed  from  the  partialities  and 
injustice  of her  father's  house,  and  settled  so permanently  near  herself. 
But  in  this  case,  Anne  had  left  nothing  for  advice  to  do;  and  though 
Lady  Russell, as satisfied  as ever  with  her  own  discretion,  never  wished 
the  past  undone,  she  began  now  to  have  the  anxiety  which  borders  on 
hopelessness  for  Anne's  being  tempted,  by  some  man  of  talents  and 
independence,  to  enter  a  state  for  which  she  held  her  to  be  peculiarly 
fitted  by her  warm  affections and  domestic  habits. 
They  knew  not  each  other's  opinion,  either  its  constancy  or  its 
change,  on  the  one  leading  point  of  Anne's  conduct,  for  the  subject 
was  never  alluded  to,―but  Anne,  at  seven  and  twenty,  thought  very 
differently  from  what  she had  been  made  to think at nineteen.―She did 
not  blame  Lady  Russell,  she  did  not  blame  herself  for  having  been 
guided  by  her;  but  she  felt  that  were  any  young  person,  in  similar  cir02
cumstances,  to  apply  to  her  for  counsel,  they  would  never  receive  any 
of such  certain  immediate  wretchedness,  such  uncertain  future  good.― 
She  was  persuaded  that  under  every  disadvantage  of disapprobation  at 
home,  and  every  anxiety  attending  his  profession,  all  their  probable 
fears,  delays  and  disappointments,  she  should  yet  have  been  a  happier 
woman  in  maintaining  the  engagement,  than  she had  been  in  the sacri02
fice  of  it;  and  this,  she  fully  believed,  had  the  usual  share,  had  even 
more than  a usual  share  of all such  solicitudes and  suspense  been  theirs, 
without  reference  to  the  actual  results  of their  case,  which,  as  it  hap-
7.  Here and throughout the novel meaning discriminating. 
CHAPTER 
IV 
21 
pened,  would  have bestowed  earlier prosperity  than could  be  reasonably 
calculated  on.  All  his  sanguine  expectations,  all  his  confidence  had 
been  justified.  His genius and  ardour had  seemed to foresee and  to com02
mand  his  prosperous  path.  He  had,  very  soon  after  their  engagement 
ceased, got employ; and  all that  he had  told her would  follow,  had  taken 
place.  He  had  distinguished  himself,  and  early gained  the  other  step  in 
rank―and  must  now,  by  successive captures,  have  made  a  handsome 
fortune.  She had  only  navy  lists8 and  newspapers  for  her  authority,  but 
she  could  not  doubt  his  being  rich;―and,  in  favour  of his  constancy, 
she had  no  reason  to believe him  married. 
How eloquent could Anne  Elliot have been,―how  eloquent,  at least, 
were  her  wishes  on  the  side  of early  warm  attachment,  and  a  cheerful 
confidence  in  futurity,  against  that  over-anxious  caution  which  seems 
to  insult  exertion  and  distrust  Providence!―She  had  been  forced  into 
prudence  in  her  youth,  she  learned  romance  as  she  grew  older―the 
natural  sequel  of an  unnatural  beginning. 
With  all  these  circumstances,  recollections  and  feelings,  she  could 
not  hear  that  Captain  Wentworth's  sister was  likely to  live at Kellynch, 
without  a revival of former  pain; and  many  a stroll and  many  a sigh  were 
necessary to dispel  the  agitation  of the  idea.  She often  told  herself  it was 
folly,  before  she could  harden  her  nerves  sufficiently  to feel  the  contin02
ual discussion  of the  Crofts  and  their business  no  evil.  She was  assisted, 
however,  by  that  perfect  indifference  and  apparent  unconsciousness, 
among  the  only three  of her  own  friends  in  the  secret of the  past,  which 
seemed almost to deny  any recollection of it.  She could do  justice to  the 
superiority  of Lady Russell's motives in this,  over those of her father  and 
Elizabeth;  she  could  honour  all  the  better  feelings  of her  calmness― 
but  the  general  air of oblivion  among  them  was highly  important,  from 
whatever  it  sprung;  and  in  the  event  of  Admiral  Croft's  really  taking 
Kellynch-hall,  she  rejoiced anew  over the  conviction which  had  always 
been  most  grateful  to  her,  of the  past  being  known  to  those  three  only 
among  her  connexions,  by whom  no  syllable, she  believed,  would  ever 
be  whispered,  and  in  the  trust  that  among  his,  the  brother  only  with 
whom  he  had  been  residing,  had  received  any  information  of  their 
short-lived  engagement.―That  brother  had  been  long  removed  from 
the country―and  being a sensible man,  and,  moreover,  a single man  at 
the  time,  she  had  a  fond  dépendance  on  no  human  creature's  having 
heard  of it  from  him. 
The  sister,  Mrs. Croft,  had  then  been  out  of England,  accompanying 
her husband  on  a foreign  station,  and  her  own  sister,  Mary,  had  been  at 
school  while  it all  occurred―and  never  admitted  by the  pride of some, 
and  the  delicacy of others,  to the  smallest knowledge  of it  afterwards. 
With these supports,  she hoped  that the acquaintance between  herself 
8.  Official publications of the navy containing lists of officers  and other nautical  information. 
22 
CHAPTER  V 
and  the Crofts,  which,  with  Lady Russell, still resident in Kellynch, and 
Mary  fixed  only  three  miles off,  must  be  anticipated,  need  not  involve 
any particular  awkwardness. 
Chapter  V 
On  the  morning  appointed  for  Admiral  and  Mrs.  Croft's  seeing  Kel02
lynch-hall,  Anne  found  it most  natural  to take her  almost daily walk to 
Lady Russell's,  and  keep out of the way till all was over; when  she  found 
it most natural  to be sorry that  she had  missed the  opportunity  of seeing 
them. 
This  meeting  of  the  two  parties  proved  highly  satisfactory,  and 
decided  the  whole  business at  once.  Each  lady was previously  well dis02
posed  for an  agreement,  and  saw nothing,  therefore,  but  good  manners 
in the other; and,  with  regard to the gentlemen, there was such an  hearty 
good  humour,  such  an  open,  trusting  liberality  on  the  Admiral's  side, 
as  could  not  but  influence  Sir Walter,  who  had  besides been  flattered 
into his very best and  most polished behaviour by Mr.  Shepherd's assur02
ances  of  his  being  known,  by  report,  to  the  Admiral,  as  a  model  of 
good  breeding. 
The  house  and  grounds,  and  furniture,  were  approved,  the  Crofts 
were approved,  terms,  time,  every thing,  and  every body,  was right; and 
Mr.  Shepherd's  clerks  were  set  to  work,  without  there  having  been  a 
single  preliminary  difference  to  modify  of  all  that  "This  indenture 
sheweth." 
Sir  Walter,  without  hesitation,  declared  the  Admiral  to  be  the  best-
looking  sailor  he  had  ever  met  with,  and  went  so far  as to  say,  that,  if 
his  own  man  might  have  had  the  arranging  of his  hair,  he  should  not 
be  ashamed  of being  seen  with  him  any  where;  and  the  Admiral,  with 
sympathetic  cordiality,  observed  to  his  wife  as they  drove  back through 
the  Park,  "I thought  we  should  soon  come  to  a  deal,  my  dear,  in  spite 
of what  they told  us at Taunton.  The baronet will never set the Thames 
on  fire,  but  there  seems  no  harm  in  him:"―reciprocal  compliments, 
which  would  have been  esteemed about  equal. 
The Crofts were to have possession at Michaelmas,9 and as Sir Walter 
proposed  removing to Bath  in  the  course of the preceding  month,  there 
was no time to be lost in  making  every dependant  arrangement. 
Lady Russell, convinced that Anne would  not be allowed to be of any 
use,  or  any  importance,  in  the  choice  of the  house  which  they  were 
going  to  secure,  was  very  unwilling  to  have  her  hurried  away  so  soon, 
and  wanted  to  make  it  possible  for  her  to  stay  behind,  till  she  might 
convey  her  to  Bath  herself  after  Christmas; but  having  engagements of 
9.  September 29. 
CHAPTER  V 
23 
her own,  which  must  take her from  Kellynch for several weeks, she was 
unable to give the full  invitation she wished; and Anne, though  dreading 
the possible heats of September in all the  white glare of Bath,  and  griev02
ing  to  forego  all  the  influence  so  sweet  and  so  sad  of  the  autumnal 
months  in  the  country,  did  not  think  that,  every thing  considered,  she 
wished to remain.  It would  be most right,  and  most wise, and,  therefore, 
must  involve least suffering,  to go with  the  others. 
Something  occurred,  however,  to  give  her  a  different  duty.  Mary, 
often  a  little  unwell,  and  always thinking  a  great deal  of her  own  com02
plaints,  and  always  in  the  habit  of claiming Anne  when  any  thing  was 
the  matter,  was  indisposed;  and  foreseeing  that  she  should  not  have  a 
day's  health  all the  autumn,  entreated,  or rather  required  her,  for it was 
hardly  entreaty,  to come to  Uppercross Cottage,  and  bear her  company 
as long as she should  want  her,  instead  of going to  Bath. 
"I cannot possibly do without  Anne," was Mary's reasoning; and  Eliz02
abeth's reply was, "Then  I am sure Anne had better stay, for nobody will 
want  her  in  Bath." 
To  be claimed as a good,  though  in an  improper  style, is at least better 
than  being  rejected  as  no  good  at  all; and  Anne,  glad  to  be  thought  of 
some  use,  glad  to  have  any  thing  marked  out  as  a duty,  and  certainly 
not sorry to have the  scene of it in  the  country,  and  her own  dear  coun02
try,  readily agreed to stay. 
This  invitation  of Mary's removed  all  Lady  Russell's difficulties,  and 
it  was  consequently  soon  settled  that  Anne  should  not  go  to  Bath  till 
Lady  Russell  took  her,  and  that  all  the  intervening  time  should  be 
divided  between  Uppercross Cottage and Kellynch-lodge. 
So  far  all  was  perfectly  right; but  Lady  Russell was  almost  startled  by 
the  wrong  of one  part  of the  Kellynch-hall plan,  when  it burst  on  her, 
which was,  Mrs. Clay's being engaged to go to Bath with  Sir Walter and 
Elizabeth,  as a most  important  and  valuable  assistant to the  latter  in  all 
the  business  before  her.  Lady  Russell  was  extremely  sorry  that  such  a 
measure  should  have  been  resorted  to  at  all―wondered,  grieved,  and 
feared―and  the  affront  it contained to Anne,  in  Mrs. Clay's being of so 
much  use,  while Anne  could be of none,  was a very sore aggravation. 
Anne  herself  was  become hardened  to  such  affronts;  but  she  felt  the 
imprudence  of the  arrangement  quite as keenly as Lady Russell. With a 
great  deal  of  quiet  observation,  and  a  knowledge,  which  she  often 
wished  less,  of her  father's  character,  she  was  sensible  that  results  the 
most serious to  his family from  the  intimacy,  were  more  than possible. 
She  did  not  imagine  that  her  father  had  at  present  an  idea  of the  kind. 
Mrs.  Clay  had  freckles,  and  a  projecting  tooth,  and  a  clumsy  wrist, 
which  he  was continually  making  severe remarks  upon,  in  her absence; 
but she was young,  and  certainly altogether well-looking, and possessed, 
in  an  acute  mind  and  assiduous  pleasing  manners,  infinitely more  dan02
gerous attractions than any merely personal  might have been.  Anne was 
24 
CHAPTER  V 
so  impressed  by  the  degree  of their  danger,  that  she  could  not  excuse 
herself  from  trying  to  make  it  perceptible  to  her  sister.  She  had  little 
hope of success; but  Elizabeth, who in the event of such a reverse would 
be  so  much  more  to  be  pitied  than  herself,  should  never,  she  thought, 
have  reason  to reproach  her for giving no  warning. 
She  spoke,  and  seemed  only to offend.  Elizabeth could  not conceive 
how  such  an  absurd  suspicion  should  occur  to  her;  and  indignantly 
answered  for each party's  perfectly knowing their  situation. 
"Mrs.  Clay," said  she  warmly,  "never forgets who  she  is; and  as I am 
rather  better  acquainted  with  her  sentiments  than  you  can  be,  I  can 
assure  you,  that  upon  the  subject of marriage  they are particularly  nice; 
and  that  she  reprobates  all  inequality  of  condition  and  rank  more 
strongly than  most people.  And as to my father,  I really should  not  have 
thought  that  he,  who  has kept himself  single so long for our sakes, need 
be  suspected  now.  If Mrs.  Clay  were  a  very  beautiful  woman,  I  grant 
you,  it might be wrong to have her so much  with  me; not that any  thing 
in  the  world,  I  am  sure,  would  induce  my  father  to  make  a  degrading 
match;  but  he  might  be  rendered  unhappy.  But poor  Mrs.  Clay,  who, 
with  all  her  merits,  can  never  have  been  reckoned  tolerably  pretty!  I 
really  think  poor  Mrs.  Clay  may  be  staying  here  in  perfect  safety.  One 
would  imagine  you  had  never  heard  my  father  speak  of her  personal 
misfortunes,  though  I  know  you  must  fifty  times.  That  tooth  of her's ! 
and  those  freckles!  Freckles  do  not  disgust  me  so very  much  as they  do 
him:  I  have  known  a  face  not  materially  disfigured  by  a  few,  but  he 
abominates  them.  You  must  have  heard  him  notice  Mrs.  Clay's 
freckles. " 
"There is hardly any personal defect," replied Anne, "which an agree02
able  manner  might  not  gradually  reconcile one to." 
"I  think  very  differently,"  answered  Elizabeth,  shortly; "an  agreeable 
manner  may  set off handsome  features,  but  can  never  alter plain  ones. 
However,  at  any  rate,  as  I have  a great deal  more  at  stake on  this  point 
than  any  body  else can  have,  I think  it  rather  unnecessary  in  you  to be 
advising  me." 
Anne  had  done―glad  that  it was over,  and  not absolutely hopeless of 
doing  good.  Elizabeth,  though  resenting  the  suspicion,  might  yet  be 
made  observant by it. 
The  last  office  of  the  four  carriage-horses  was  to  draw  Sir  Walter, 
Miss  Elliot,  and  Mrs.  Clay  to  Bath.  The  party  drove  off in  very  good 
spirits; Sir Walter prepared  with  condescending bows for all the afflicted 
tenantry  and  cottagers who  might  have  had  a  hint  to  shew themselves: 
and  Anne  walked  up  at the  same time,  in  a sort of desolate  tranquillity, 
to the  Lodge, where  she was to spend  the first week. 
Her friend  was not  in  better spirits than  herself.  Lady Russell felt  this 
break-up  of the  family  exceedingly. Their  respectability was  as dear  to 
her  as  her  own;  and  a  daily  intercourse  had  become precious  by  habit. 
CHAPTER  V 
25 
It  was  painful  to  look  upon  their  deserted  grounds,  and  still  worse  to 
anticipate the new hands they were to fall  into; and  to escape the solitari02
ness and  the  melancholy  of so  altered  a  village,  and  be  out  of the  way 
when  Admiral  and  Mrs. Croft first arrived,  she had  determined  to  make 
her  own  absence  from  home  begin  when  she  must  give  up  Anne. 
Accordingly  their  removal  was  made  together,  and  Anne  was  set down 
at Uppercross Cottage,  in  the first stage of Lady Russell's journey. 
Uppercross was a moderate-sized  village, which  a few years back  had 
been  completely  in  the  old  English  style; containing  only  two  houses 
superior  in  appearance  to  those  of  the  yeomen  and  labourers,―the 
mansion  of the  'squire,  with  its  high  walls,  great  gates,  and  old  trees, 
substantial  and  unmodernized―and 
the  compact,  tight  parsonage, 
enclosed  in  its  own  neat  garden,  with  a  vine  and  a  pear-tree  trained 
round  its casements; but  upon  the  marriage  of the  young  'squire,  it  had 
received the improvement  of a farm-house  elevated into a cottage for his 
residence; and  Uppercross  Cottage,  with  its  veranda,  French  windows, 
and  other  prettinesses,  was quite  as likely to catch the  traveller's eye, as 
the  more  consistent and  considerable aspect and  premises  of the  Great 
House,  about  a quarter  of a mile farther  on. 
Here Anne  had  often  been  staying.  She knew the  ways of Uppercross 
as well as those of Kellynch.  The two families were so continually meet02
ing,  so much  in  the  habit  of running  in  and  out  of each  other's  house 
at all  hours,  that  it was  rather  a  surprise  to  her  to  find  Mary alone;  but 
being alone,  her being unwell  and  out  of spirits,  was almost a  matter of 
course.  Though  better  endowed  than  the  elder  sister,  Mary  had  not 
Anne's  understanding  or  temper.  While well,  and  happy,  and  properly 
attended  to,  she  had  great  good  humour  and  excellent spirits; but  any 
indisposition  sunk her completely; she had  no resources for solitude; and 
inheriting  a  considerable  share  of the  Elliot  self-importance,  was  very 
prone to add to every other distress that of fancying herself neglected and 
ill-used.  In person,  she was inferior to both  sisters, and  had,  even  in  her 
bloom,  only  reached  the  dignity  of being  "a  fine  girl."  She  was  now 
lying  on  the  faded  sofa  of the  pretty  little drawing-room,  the  once  ele02
gant  furniture  of which  had  been  gradually  growing  shabby,  under  the 
influence  of four summers  and  two children; and,  on  Anne's  appearing, 
greeted her  with, 
"So,  you  are  come at  last! I began  to  think  I should  never  see you.  I 
am  so  ill  I  can  hardly  speak.  I  have  not  seen  a  creature  the  whole 
morning!" 
"I  am  sorry to  find  you  unwell,"  replied  Anne.  "You sent  me  such  a 
good account of yourself on  Thursday!" 
"Yes,  I made  the  best of it; I always do; but  I was very far  from  well at 
the time; and  I do  not think  I ever was so ill in  my life as I have been all 
this  morning―very  unfit  to be  left  alone,  I am  sure.  Suppose  I were  to 
be  seized  of a  sudden  in  some  dreadful  way,  and  not  able  to  ring  the 
26 
CHAPTER  V 
bell!  So, Lady Russell would  not get out.  I do  not think  she has been  in 
this house  three  times this  summer." 
Anne  said  what  was  proper,  and  enquired  after  her  husband.  "Oh! 
Charles  is  out  shooting.  I  have  not  seen  him  since  seven  o'clock.  He 
would  go,  though  I told  him  how  ill  I was.  He  said  he  should  not stay 
out  long; but  he has never come back, and  now it is almost one.  I assure 
you,  I have  not  seen a soul this whole long  morning." 
"You  have had  your  little boys with you?" 
"Yes,  as long as I could bear their noise; but they are so unmanageable 
that  they  do  me  more  harm  than  good.  Little Charles does  not  mind  a 
word  I say, and  Walter is growing quite as bad." 
"Well,  you  will soon  be better  now,"  replied  Anne,  cheerfully. "You 
know  I always cure  you  when  I come.  How  are  your  neighbours  at  the 
Great House?" 
"I  can  give you  no  account of them.  I have  not  seen one  of them  to02
day,  except  Mr.  Musgrove,  who  just  stopped  and  spoke  through  the 
window,  but  without  getting  off his  horse; and  though  I told  him  how 
ill  I was,  not  one  of them  have  been  near  me.  It did  not  happen  to suit 
the  Miss  Musgroves,  I  suppose,  and  they  never  put  themselves  out of 
their way. " 
"You  will  see  them  yet,  perhaps,  before  the  morning  is  gone.  It  is 
early. " 
"I  never  want  them,  I  assure  you.  They  talk  and  laugh  a  great  deal 
too  much  for  me.  Oh!  Anne,  I am  so very  unwell!  It was quite  unkind 
of  you  not to come on  Thursday." 
"My dear  Mary,  recollect what  a comfortable account you sent me of 
yourself! You wrote  in  the  cheerfullest  manner,  and  said you  were  per02
fectly  well,  and  in  no  hurry  for  me; and  that  being the  case,  you  must 
be aware that  my wish would  be to remain  with  Lady Russell to the last: 
and  besides what  I felt  on  her  account,  I have  really been so busy,  have 
had  so  much  to  do,  that  I  could  not  very  conveniently  have  left  Kel02
lynch  sooner." 
"Dear  me! what  can  you possibly have to do?" 
"A  great  many  things,  I  assure  you.  More  than  I  can  recollect  in  a 
moment: but  I can tell you some.  I have been  making a duplicate of the 
catalogue  of my  father's  books  and  pictures.  I  have  been  several  times 
in  the  garden  with  Mackenzie,  trying  to  understand,  and  make  him 
understand,  which  of Elizabeth's plants are for Lady Russell. I have  had 
all  my  own  little concerns to  arrange―books  and  music  to divide,  and 
all  my  trunks  to  repack,  from  not  having  understood  in  time  what  was 
intended  as to the  waggons.  And  one thing  I have had  to do,  Mary, of a 
more  trying  nature;  going to  almost  every house  in  the  parish,  as a  sort 
of  take-leave.  I was told  that  they  wished  it.  But all these things took  up 
a great deal  of time." 
"Oh! well;"―and  after  a moment's  pause,  "But you  have never asked 
CHAPTER  V 
27 
me one word  about  our  dinner  at the  Pooles yesterday. " 
"Did  you  go  then?  I  have  made  no  enquiries,  because  I  concluded 
you  must  have been  obliged to give up  the  party." 
"Oh!  yes,  I went.  I was  very  well  yesterday;  nothing  at  all  the  matter 
with  me till this morning.  It would  have been strange  if I had  not  gone." 
"I  am  very  glad  you  were  well  enough,  and  I  hope  you  had  a  pleas02
ant party. " 
"Nothing  remarkable.  One  always knows beforehand  what  the  dinner 
will  be,  and  who  will  be  there.  And  it  is  so  very  uncomfortable,  not 
having  a  carriage  of one's  own.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Musgrove  took  me,  and 
we were  so crowded!  They  are  both  so very  large,  and  take  up  so  much 
room! And  Mr.  Musgrove  always sits forward.  So, there  was  I,  crowded 
into  the  back seat with  Henrietta  and  Louisa.  And  I think  it very likely 
that  my  illness to-day  may  be owing  to it. " 
A  little  farther  perseverance  in  patience,  and  forced  cheerfulness  on 
Anne's  side,  produced  nearly  a  cure  on  Mary's.  She  could  soon  sit 
upright  on  the  sofa,  and  began  to  hope  she  might  be  able to  leave  it by 
dinner-time.  Then,  forgetting  to  think  of it,  she was at  the  other  end  of 
the  room,  beautifying  a  nosegay; then,  she  ate  her  cold  meat;  and  then 
she was well enough  to propose  a little walk. 
"Where  shall  we  go?" said  she,  when  they  were  ready.  "I  suppose 
you  will  not  like  to  call  at  the  Great  House  before  they  have  been  to 
see you?" 
"I  have  not  the  smallest objection on  that  account," replied  Anne.  "I 
should  never think  of standing  on  such  ceremony with  people  I know so 
well as Mrs. and  the  Miss Musgroves." 
"Oh! but they  ought  to call  upon  you  as soon as possible. They  ought 
to feel  what  is due  to you  as my  sister.  However,  we  may  as well go  and 
sit  with  them  a  little  while,  and  when  we  have  got  that  over,  we  can 
enjoy  our  walk." 
Anne  had  always  thought  such  a  style  of intercourse  highly  impru02
dent; but  she  had  ceased  to  endeavour  to  check  it,  from  believing  that, 
though  there  were  on  each  side  continual  subjects  of offence,  neither 
family  could  now  do  without  it.  To  the  Great  House  accordingly  they 
went,  to  sit  the  full  half  hour  in  the  old-fashioned  square  parlour, 
with  a small carpet  and  shining  floor,  to which  the  present  daughters  of 
the  house  were  gradually  giving  the  proper  air  of confusion  by  a  grand 
piano  forte  and  a  harp,  flower-stands  and  little  tables  placed  in  every 
direction.  Oh!  could  the  originals  of the  portraits  against  the  wainscot, 
could  the  gentlemen  in  brown  velvet  and  the  ladies  in  blue  satin  have 
seen  what  was  going  on,  have  been  conscious  of such  an  overthrow  of 
all  order  and  neatness!  The  portraits  themselves  seemed  to  be  staring 
in  astonishment. 
The  Musgroves,  like  their  houses,  were  in  a  state  of alteration,  per02
haps  of improvement.  The  father  and  mother  were  in  the  old  English 
28 
CHAPTER  VI 
style,  and  the  young  people  in the  new.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Musgrove were a 
very  good  sort  of people;  friendly  and  hospitable,  not  much  educated, 
and  not  at  all  elegant.  Their  children  had  more  modern  minds  and 
manners.  There  was  a  numerous  family;  but  the  only  two  grown  up, 
excepting Charles, were Henrietta  and  Louisa, young  ladies of nineteen 
and  twenty,  who  had  brought  from  a school at Exeter all the  usual stock 
of  accomplishments,  and  were  now,  like  thousands  of  other  young 
ladies, living to be fashionable, happy,  and  merry.  Their dress had every 
advantage,  their  faces  were  rather  pretty,  their  spirits  extremely  good, 
their manners  unembarrassed  and  pleasant; they were of consequence at 
home,  and  favourites  abroad.  Anne  always contemplated  them  as some 
of  the  happiest  creatures  of her  acquaintance; but  still,  saved  as  we all 
are by some comfortable feeling of superiority  from  wishing for the pos02
sibility of exchange,  she would  not have given  up  her own  more elegant 
and  cultivated  mind  for  all  their  enjoyments; and  envied  them  nothing 
but  that  seemingly perfect good  understanding and  agreement  together, 
that  good-humoured  mutual affection,  of which  she had  known  so little 
herself with  either of her sisters. 
They  were  received  with  great  cordiality.  Nothing  seemed  amiss  on 
the  side  of the  Great  House  family,  which  was generally,  as Anne  very 
well knew,  the least to blame. The half hour was chatted away pleasantly 
enough;  and  she  was  not  at  all  surprised,  at the  end  of it,  to  have  their 
walking  party  joined  by  both  the  Miss Musgroves,  at  Mary's  particular 
invitation. 
Chapter  VI 
Anne had  not wanted1  this visit to Uppercross, to learn that a removal 
from  one  set  of people  to  another,  though  at  a  distance  of only  three 
miles,  will  often  include  a  total  change  of conversation,  opinion,  and 
idea.  She had  never  been  staying  there  before,  without  being  struck by 
it,  or  without  wishing  that  other  Elliots  could  have  her  advantage  in 
seeing  how  unknown,  or  unconsidered  there,  were  the  affairs  which  at 
Kellynch-hall  were  treated  as  of such  general  publicity  and  pervading 
interest; yet,  with  all this experience, she believed she must  now  submit 
to  feel  that  another  lesson,  in  the  art  of knowing  our  own  nothingness 
beyond  our  own  circle,  was  become  necessary  for  her;―for  certainly, 
coming  as  she  did,  with  a  heart  full  of  the  subject  which  had  been 
completely  occupying  both  houses  in  Kellynch  for  many  weeks,  she 
had  expected rather  more  curiosity and  sympathy  than  she found  in  the 
separate,  but very similar remark of Mr.  and  Mrs. Musgrove―"So,  Miss 
Anne,  Sir Walter and  your sister are gone; and  what part of Bath do you 
1.  Needed. 
CHAPTER  VI 
29 
think  they  will  settle  in?"  and  this,  without  much  waiting  for  an 
answer;―or in the young ladies' addition  of, "I hope  we shall be in  Bath 
in  the  winter;  but  remember,  papa,  if we  do  go,  we  must  be  in  a  good 
situation―none  of your  Queen-squares  for  us!" or  in  the  anxious  sup02
plement from  Mary, of "Upon  my word,  I shall be pretty well off,  when 
you are all gone away to be happy at  Bath!" 
She could only resolve to avoid such self-delusion in future,  and  think 
with  heightened  gratitude  of the  extraordinary  blessing  of having  one 
such truly  sympathising friend  as Lady Russell. 
The  Mr.  Musgroves  had  their  own  game  to  guard,  and  to  destroy; 
their own  horses, dogs, and  newspapers  to engage them; and the females 
were fully  occupied in all the  other common  subjects of house-keeping, 
neighbours,  dress,  dancing,  and  music.  She acknowledged  it to be very 
fitting,  that every little social commonwealth should dictate its own  mat02
ters of discourse; and  hoped,  ere long,  to become a not unworthy  mem02
ber  of the  one  she  was  now  transplanted  into.―With  the  prospect  of 
spending  at least two months  at Uppercross, it was highly incumbent  on 
her to clothe her imagination,  her memory, and  all her ideas in as  much 
of  Uppercross as possible. 
She  had  no  dread  of these  two  months.  Mary  was  not  so  repulsive2 
and  unsisterly  as Elizabeth,  nor  so inaccessible to all  influence  of hers; 
neither  was  there  any  thing  among  the  other  component  parts  of  the 
cottage inimical to comfort.―She was always on friendly  terms with  her 
brother-in-law;  and  in  the  children,  who  loved  her  nearly  as well,  and 
respected her  a great deal  more than  their  mother,  she had  an  object of 
interest,  amusement,  and  wholesome exertion. 
Charles  Musgrove  was  civil  and  agreeable;  in  sense  and  temper  he 
was undoubtedly  superior to his wife; but not of powers,  or conversation, 
or  grace,  to  make  the  past,  as  they  were  connected  together,  at  all  a 
dangerous  contemplation;  though,  at  the  same  time,  Anne  could 
believe,  with  Lady Russell, that  a more equal  match  might  have greatly 
improved  him;  and  that  a  woman  of  real  understanding  might  have 
given more consequence to his character, and  more usefulness,  rational02
ity,  and  elegance to  his  habits  and  pursuits.  As it was,  he  did  nothing 
with  much  zeal, but sport; and  his time was otherwise trifled away,  with02
out  benefit  from  books,  or  any  thing  else.  He  had  very  good  spirits, 
which  never  seemed  much  affected  by  his  wife's  occasional  lowness; 
bore  with  her  unreasonableness  sometimes to  Anne's  admiration;  and, 
upon  the  whole,  though  there  was  very  often  a  little disagreement,  (in 
which  she  had  sometimes more  share  than  she  wished,  being  appealed 
to by both parties) they might pass for a happy couple. They were always 
perfectly  agreed in the want of more money,  and  a strong inclination for 
a handsome  present from  his father; but  here,  as on  most topics, he  had 
2.  Cold in manner. 
30 
CHAPTER  VI 
the  superiority,  for  while  Mary  thought  it  a  great  shame  that  such  a 
present was not made,  he always contended  for his father's having  many 
other  uses for his money,  and  a right to spend  it as he liked. 
As to  the  management  of their  children,  his theory  was much  better 
than  his  wife's,  and  his  practice  not  so  bad.―"I  could  manage  them 
very well,  if it were not  for Mary's interference,"―was what Anne  often 
heard  him  say,  and  had  a  good  deal  of faith  in;  but  when  listening  in 
turn  to  Mary's reproach  of "Charles spoils the  children  so that  I cannot 
get them  into any order,"―she  never had the smallest temptation  to say, 
"Very  true." 
One  of the  least agreeable circumstances of her  residence there,  was 
her being treated  with  too much  confidence by all parties,  and being too 
much  in  the  secret  of the  complaints  of each  house.  Known  to  have 
some influence with  her sister, she was continually requested,  or at least 
receiving  hints  to  exert  it,  beyond  what  was  practicable.  "I  wish  you 
could persuade  Mary not to be always fancying herself ill," was Charles's 
language; and,  in an  unhappy mood,  thus spoke Mary;―"I do believe if 
Charles  were  to  see me  dying,  he  would  not  think  there  was any  thing 
the matter with  me.  I am  sure,  Anne,  if you would,  you might  persuade 
him  that  I really am  very ill―a  great deal worse than  I ever  own." 
Mary's  declaration  was,  "I  hate  sending  the  children  to  the  Great 
House,  though  their  grandmamma  is  always  wanting  to  see  them,  for 
she  humours  and  indulges  them  to  such  a  degree,  and  gives them  so 
much  trash  and  sweet things,  that  they  are  sure  to  come back sick  and 
cross for the  rest of the  day."―And  Mrs.  Musgrove took the first oppor02
tunity  of being alone with  Anne,  to say,  "Oh! Miss Anne,  I cannot  help 
wishing  Mrs.  Charles  had  a  little  of your  method  with  those  children. 
They  are  quite  different  creatures  with  you!  But to  be  sure,  in  general 
they  are  so  spoilt!  It  is a  pity  you  cannot  put  your  sister  in  the  way of 
managing  them.  They  are  as  fine  healthy  children  as  ever  were  seen, 
poor  little  dears,  without  partiality;  but  Mrs.  Charles  knows  no  more 
how  they  should  be  treated!―Bless  me,  how  troublesome  they  are 
sometimes!―I  assure  you,  Miss  Anne,  it  prevents  my  wishing  to  see 
them  at our  house  so often  as I otherwise should.  I believe Mrs. Charles 
is not  quite  pleased  with  my  not  inviting  them  oftener; but  you  know  it 
is very bad  to have children  with  one,  that  one is obliged to be checking 
every  moment;  'don't  do  this,  and  don't  do  that;'―or  that  one can  only 
keep in  tolerable order  by more cake than  is good for  them." 
She  had  this  communication,  moreover,  from  Mary.  "Mrs.  Mus02
grove  thinks  all  her  servants  so steady,  that  it would  be  high  treason  to 
call  it  in  question; but  I am  sure,  without  exaggeration,  that  her  upper 
house-maid  and  laundry-maid,  instead  of being  in  their  business,  are 
gadding about  the  village, all day  long.  I meet them  wherever  I go; and 
I  declare,  I never go twice into  my  nursery  without  seeing something of 
them.  If Jemima were  not  the  trustiest,  steadiest  creature  in  the  world, 
CHAPTER  VI 
31 
it would  be enough  to spoil her; for she tells me,  they  are always  tempt02
ing  her  to  take  a  walk  with  them."  And  on  Mrs.  Musgrove's  side,  it 
was,―"I make a rule of never interfering  in any of my  daughter-in-law's 
concerns,  for  I  know  it would  not  do; but  I  shall  tell  you,  Miss Anne, 
because you  may be able to set things to rights,  that  I have  no very good 
opinion  of Mrs.  Charles's nursery-maid:  I hear strange stories of her; she 
is always upon the gad: and  from  my own  knowledge,  I can declare,  she 
is such  a  fine-dressing  lady,  that  she  is enough  to  ruin  any  servants  she 
comes  near.  Mrs.  Charles  quite  swears  by  her,  I  know;  but  I  just  give 
you  this  hint,  that  you  may be  upon  the  watch; because,  if you  see any 
thing  amiss, you  need  not be afraid  of mentioning  it." 
Again; it was  Mary's complaint that  Mrs.  Musgrove was very  apt  not 
to  give  her  the  precedence  that  was  her  due,  when  they  dined  at  the 
Great  House  with  other  families; and  she  did  not  see  any  reason  why 
she was to be considered so much  at home as to lose her place. And  one 
day,  when  Anne  was  walking  with  only  the  Miss  Musgroves,  one  of 
them,  after talking of rank,  people of rank,  and  jealousy of rank,  said, "I 
have  no  scruple  of observing to  you,  how  nonsensical some persons  are 
about their place, because, all the world  knows how easy and  indifferent 
you  are  about  it:  but  I  wish  any  body  could  give  Mary  a  hint  that  it 
would  be a great deal better if she were not so very tenacious; especially, 
if  she  would  not  be  always  putting  herself  forward  to  take  place  of 
mamma.  Nobody  doubts  her  right  to  have  precedence  of mamma,  but 
it would  be  more  becoming in  her  not  to be  always  insisting on  it.  It is 
not  that  mamma  cares  about  it  the  least  in  the  world,  but  I know  it  is 
taken  notice of by many  persons." 
How  was  Anne  to  set all  these  matters  to  rights?  She  could  do  little 
more  than  listen  patiently,  soften  every  grievance,  and  excuse each  to 
the other; give them  all hints  of the forbearance necessary between  such 
near  neighbours,  and  make  those  hints  broadest  which  were  meant  for 
her sister's benefit. 
In  all  other  respects,  her  visit  began  and  proceeded  very  well.  Her 
own  spirits  improved  by change of place and  subject, by being  removed 
three  miles  from  Kellynch: Mary's  ailments  lessened  by  having  a  con02
stant companion; and their daily intercourse with the other family, since 
there was neither superior affection, confidence, nor employment in  the 
cottage,  to be interrupted  by it, was rather  an  advantage.  It was certainly 
carried  nearly as far as possible, for they  met every morning,  and  hardly 
ever  spent  an  evening  asunder;  but  she  believed  they  should  not  have 
done  so well without  the  sight of Mr.  and  Mrs.  Musgrove's respectable 
forms  in  the  usual  places, or without  the  talking,  laughing,  and  singing 
of their  daughters. 
She  played  a great deal  better than  either of the  Miss Musgroves; but 
having  no  voice,  no  knowledge  of the  harp,  and  no  fond  parents  to  sit 
by  and  fancy  themselves  delighted,  her  performance  was  little  thought 
32 
CHAPTER  VI 
of,  only  out  of civility,  or  to  refresh  the  others,  as  she  was  well  aware. 
She  knew  that  when  she  played  she  was giving  pleasure  only to  herself; 
but  this was no new sensation: excepting one short period  of her life,  she 
had  never,  since  the  age  of fourteen,  never  since  the  loss  of her  dear 
mother,  known  the  happiness  of being listened to, or encouraged  by any 
just appreciation  or real taste.  In  music she had  been  always used to  feel 
alone  in  the  world;  and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Musgrove's  fond  partiality  for 
their  own  daughters'  performance,  and  total  indifference  to  any  other 
person's,  gave  her  much  more  pleasure  for  their  sakes,  than  mortifica02
tion  for her  own. 
The  party  at the  Great House  was sometimes  increased by other  com02
pany.  The neighbourhood  was not large, but  the Musgroves were visited 
by  every  body,  and  had  more  dinner  parties,  and  more  callers,  more 
visitors  by  invitation  and  by chance,  than  any  other  family.  They  were 
more  completely  popular. 
The  girls  were  wild  for  dancing;  and  the  evenings  ended,  occasion02
ally,  in  an  unpremeditated  little  ball.  There  was  a  family  of  cousins 
within  a  walk  of  Uppercross,  in  less  affluent  circumstances,  who 
depended  on  the  Musgroves  for  all  their  pleasures: they  would  come  at 
any  time,  and  help  play  at  any  thing,  or  dance  any  where;  and  Anne, 
very much  preferring  the  office  of musician to a more active post,  played 
country  dances  to  them  by the  hour  together;  a  kindness  which  always 
recommended  her  musical  powers  to  the  notice of Mr.  and  Mrs.  Mus02
grove  more  than  any  thing  else,  and  often  drew  this  compliment;― 
"Well  done,  Miss  Anne!  very  well  done  indeed!  Lord  bless  me!  how 
those  little fingers of yours  fly  about!" 
So  passed  the  first  three  weeks.  Michaelmas  came; and  now  Anne's 
heart  must  be  in  Kellynch again.  A beloved  home  made  over to  others; 
all  the  precious  rooms  and  furniture,  groves,  and  prospects,  beginning 
to own  other  eyes and  other  limbs! She could  not think  of much  else on 
the  29th  of September; and  she  had  this  sympathetic  touch  in  the  eve02
ning,  from  Mary,  who,  on  having  occasion to  note down the  day  of the 
month,  exclaimed,  "Dear  me!  is  not  this  the  day  the  Crofts  were  to 
come  to  Kellynch? I  am  glad  I  did  not  think  of it  before.  How  low  it 
makes  me!" 
The  Crofts  took  possession  with  true  naval  alertness,  and  were  to  be 
visited.  Mary  deplored  the  necessity  for  herself.  "Nobody  knew  how 
much  she should  suffer.  She should  put  it off as long as she could." But 
was not easy till she had  talked Charles into driving  her  over on  an  early 
day;  and  was  in  a  very  animated,  comfortable  state  of imaginary  agita02
tion,  when  she  came  back.  Anne  had  very  sincerely  rejoiced  in  there 
being  no  means  of her  going.3  She wished,  however,  to  see the  Crofts, 
and  was glad  to  be  within  when  the  visit was  returned.  They came; the 
3.  Because Charles,  as we learn later,  drives a curricle,  which holds only two people. 
CHAPTER  VI 
33 
master  of the  house  was  not  at  home,  but  the  two  sisters were  together; 
and  as  it  chanced  that  Mrs.  Croft  fell  to  the  share  of Anne,  while  the 
admiral  sat  by  Mary,  and  made  himself  very  agreeable  by  his  good-
humoured  notice  of  her  little  boys,  she  was  well  able  to  watch  for  a 
likeness,  and  if it failed  her  in  the  features,  to  catch  it  in  the  voice,  or 
the turn of sentiment  and  expression. 
Mrs.  Croft,  though  neither tall nor fat,  had  a squareness,  uprightness, 
and  vigour  of  form,  which  gave  importance  to  her  person.  She  had 
bright  dark  eyes,  good  teeth,  and  altogether  an  agreeable  face;  though 
her  reddened  and  weather-beaten  complexion,  the  consequence of her 
having  been  almost  as  much  at  sea  as  her  husband,  made  her  seem  to 
have lived some years longer in  the world than  her real eight and  thirty. 
Her manners were open,  easy, and decided,  like one who had no  distrust 
of herself,  and  no doubts  of what to do; without  any approach  to coarse02
ness,  however,  or  any  want  of  good  humour.  Anne  gave  her  credit, 
indeed,  for  feelings  of  great  consideration  towards  herself,  in  all  that 
related  to  Kellynch; and  it  pleased  her:  especially,  as  she  had  satisfied 
herself  in  the  very first half  minute,  in  the  instant  even of  introduction, 
that  there  was not  the  smallest symptom  of any  knowledge  or  suspicion 
on Mrs. Croft's side, to give a bias of any sort.  She was quite easy on  that 
head,  and  consequently full  of strength  and  courage,  till for  a  moment 
electrified  by Mrs. Croft's  suddenly  saying,― 
"It was you,  and  not  your sister,  I  find,  that  my brother  had  the  plea02
sure of being acquainted  with,  when  he was in  this  country." 
Anne hoped  she had  outlived the age of blushing; but the age of emo02
tion  she certainly had  not. 
"Perhaps  you  may  not  have  heard  that  he  is  married,"  added  Mrs. 
Croft. 
She  could  now  answer  as  she  ought;  and  was  happy  to  feel,  when 
Mrs.  Croft's  next words  explained  it to be Mr.  Wentworth  of whom  she 
spoke,  that  she had  said  nothing  which  might  not do for either  brother. 
She  immediately  felt  how  reasonable  it was,  that  Mrs.  Croft  should  be 
thinking  and  speaking of Edward,  and  not of Frederick; and  with  shame 
at her own forgetfulness,  applied  herself to the knowledge of their former 
neighbour's  present  state,  with  proper  interest. 
The  rest was  all  tranquillity; till  just as  they  were  moving,  she  heard 
the admiral  say to Mary, 
"We  are expecting a brother  of Mrs.  Croft's  here  soon; I dare say you 
know him  by name. " 
He  was  cut  short  by  the  eager  attacks  of the  little  boys,  clinging  to 
him  like an  old  friend,  and  declaring  he  should  not  go; and  being  too 
much  engrossed  by proposals  of carrying them  away  in  his  coat pocket, 
etc.  to  have  another  moment  for  finishing  or  recollecting what  he  had 
begun,  Anne  was left  to persuade  herself,  as well as she  could,  that  the 
same  brother  must  still be  in  question.  She could  not,  however,  reach 
34 
CHAPTER  VI 
such  a  degree  of certainty,  as  not  to  be  anxious  to  hear  whether  any 
thing  had  been  said  on  the  subject at the  other  house,  where the  Crofts 
had  previously been calling. 
The  folks of Great House were to spend  the  evening of this day at the 
Cottage; and  it being  now  too late in  the year for such  visits to be  made 
on  foot,  the  coach was beginning  to be listened for,  when  the  youngest 
Miss  Musgrove walked  in.  That  she was coming to apologize,  and  that 
they should  have to spend  the  evening by themselves, was the first black 
idea; and  Mary  was  quite  ready  to  be  affronted,  when  Louisa  made  all 
right by saying,  that  she  only came on  foot,  to leave more  room  for  the 
harp,  which  was bringing4  in  the carriage. 
"And  I  will  tell  you  our  reason,"  she  added,  "and  all  about  it.  I  am 
come on  to give you  notice, that papa and  mamma  are out of spirits this 
evening,  especially mamma;  she  is thinking  so  much  of poor  Richard! 
And  we agreed  it would  be best to have the  harp,  for  it seems to  amuse 
her  more  than  the  piano-forte.  I will  tell  you  why  she  is out  of spirits. 
When  the  Crofts  called this  morning,  (they called here  afterwards,  did 
not  they?) they  happened  to  say, that  her brother,  Captain  Wentworth, 
is just returned  to  England,  or paid  off,  or something,  and  is coming to 
see  them  almost  directly;  and  most  unluckily  it  came  into  mamma's 
head,  when  they were gone,  that Wentworth,  or something very like it, 
was  the  name  of poor  Richard's  captain,  at  one  time,  I  do  not  know 
when  or where,  but a great while before he died,  poor fellow! And  upon 
looking  over  his  letters and  things,  she  found  it was so; and  is perfectly 
sure that  this must  be the  very man,  and  her head  is quite full  of it,  and 
of poor Richard! So we must  all be as merry as we can, that she may not 
be dwelling upon such  gloomy things." 
The  real  circumstances of this  pathetic  piece of family  history  were, 
that  the  Musgroves had  had  the  ill fortune  of a very troublesome,  hope02
less son; and  the  good fortune  to lose him  before he  reached  his  twenti02
eth  year;  that  he  had  been  sent  to  sea,  because  he  was  stupid  and 
unmanageable  on  shore;  that  he  had  been  very  little  cared  for  at  any 
time by his family,  though  quite  as much  as he deserved; seldom  heard 
of,  and  scarcely  at  all  regretted,  when  the  intelligence  of  his  death 
abroad  had  worked  its way to  Uppercross, two years before. 
He  had,  in  fact,  though  his sisters were  now  doing  all they could  for 
him,  by calling him  "poor  Richard," been  nothing  better than  a thick02
headed,  unfeeling,  unprofitable  Dick  Musgrove,  who  had  never  done 
any  thing  to  entitle  himself  to  more  than  the  abbreviation  of his  name, 
living or  dead. 
He  had  been  several  years  at  sea,  and  had,  in  the  course  of  those 
removals to  which  all  midshipmen  are  liable,  and  especially such  mid02
shipmen  as every captain  wishes to get rid  of,  been six months  on  board 
4.  Being brought. 
CHAPTER  VII 
35 
Captain  Frederick Wentworth's  frigate,  the  Laconia; and  from  the  Laco-
nia  he  had,  under  the  influence  of his  captain,  written  the  only  two 
letters which  his father  and  mother  had  ever  received from  him  during 
the whole of his absence; that  is to say, the  only two disinterested  letters; 
all the  rest had  been  mere applications for  money. 
In  each  letter  he  had  spoken  well  of  his  captain;  but  yet,  so  little 
were they  in  the  habit  of attending  to such  matters,  so unobservant  and 
incurious  were  they  as to  the  names  of men  or  ships,  that  it had  made 
scarcely  any  impression  at  the  time;  and  that  Mrs.  Musgrove  should 
have been suddenly  struck,  this very day,  with a recollection of the  name 
of Wentworth,  as connected with  her  son,  seemed  one  of those extraor02
dinary  bursts  of mind  which  do sometimes occur. 
She had  gone to her  letters, and  found  it all as she supposed;  and  the 
reperusal  of these letters, after  so long an  interval,  her poor son gone for 
ever,  and  all the  strength  of his  faults  forgotten,  had  affected  her  spirits 
exceedingly,  and  thrown  her  into  greater  grief  for  him  than  she  had 
known  on  first  hearing  of  his  death.  Mr.  Musgrove  was,  in  a  lesser 
degree,  affected  likewise; and  when  they  reached  the  cottage, they  were 
evidently  in  want,  first,  of being  listened  to  anew  on  this  subject,  and 
afterwards,  of all the  relief which  cheerful  companions  could give. 
that  it  probably  would, 
To  hear  them  talking  so much  of Captain  Wentworth,  repeating  his 
name  so  often,  puzzling  over  past  years,  and  at  last ascertaining  that  it 
might, 
turn  out  to  be  the  very  same  Captain 
Wentworth  whom  they  recollected  meeting,  once  or  twice,  after  their 
coming back from Clifton;―a  very  fine  young  man;  but  they  could  not 
say whether  it was  seven  or  eight  years  ago,―was  a  new  sort  of trial  to 
Anne's  nerves.  She found,  however,  that  it was  one  to which  she  must 
enure  herself.  Since  he  actually was  expected  in  the  country,  she  must 
teach  herself to be insensible on  such  points.  And  not only did  it  appear 
that  he  was  expected,  and  speedily,  but  the  Musgroves,  in  their  warm 
gratitude for the kindness he had  shewn  poor Dick,  and  very high  respect 
for  his  character,  stamped  as  it  was  by  poor  Dick's  having  been  six 
months  under his care, and  mentioning  him  in  strong,  though  not  per02
fectly  well  spelt  praise,  as  "a  fine  dashing  felow,  only  two  perticular 
about  the  school-master,"5  were  bent  on  introducing  themselves,  and 
seeking his acquaintance,  as soon as they  could  hear  of his  arrival. 
The  resolution  of  doing  so  helped  to  form  the  comfort  of  their 
evening. 
Chapter  VII 
A  very  few  days  more,  and  Captain  Wentworth  was  known  to  be  at 
Kellynch,  and  Mr.  Musgrove had  called on  him,  and  come back  warm 
5.  Royal Navy ships all carried schoolmasters. 
36 
CHAPTER  VII 
in  his praise,  and  he  was engaged  with  the Crofts  to dine  at  Uppercross, 
by  the  end  of another  week.  It had  been  a great disappointment  to  Mr. 
Musgrove,  to  find  that  no  earlier  day  could  be  fixed,  so  impatient  was 
he  to  shew  his  gratitude,  by  seeing  Captain  Wentworth  under  his  own 
roof,  and  welcoming him to all that was strongest and  best in his cellars.6 
But  a  week  must  pass; only  a week,  in  Anne's  reckoning,  and  then,  she 
supposed,  they  must  meet;  and  soon  she  began  to  wish  that  she  could 
feel  secure even  for a week. 
Captain  Wentworth  made  a very early return to Mr.  Musgrove's  civil02
ity,  and  she  was  all  but  calling  there  in  the  same  half  hour!―She  and 
Mary  were  actually  setting  forward  for  the  great  house,  where,  as  she 
afterwards  learnt,  they  must  inevitably have found  him,  when  they were 
stopped  by the  eldest  boy's being at that  moment  brought  home  in  con02
sequence  of a  bad  fall.  The  child's  situation  put  the  visit entirely  aside, 
but  she could not hear of her escape with  indifference,  even in the  midst 
of  the  serious anxiety which  they  afterwards  felt  on  his  account. 
His  collar-bone was  found  to be dislocated,  and  such  injury  received 
in  the  back,  as  roused  the  most  alarming  ideas.  It  was  an  afternoon  of 
distress,  and  Anne  had  every  thing  to  do  at  once―the  apothecary7  to 
send  for―the  father  to have pursued and  informed―the  mother  to  sup02
port  and  keep  from  hysterics―the  servants  to  control―the  youngest 
child  to  banish,  and  the  poor  suffering  one  to  attend  and  soothe;― 
besides sending,  as soon  as she  recollected it,  proper  notice to the  other 
house,  which  brought  her  an  accession  rather  of frightened,  enquiring 
companions,  than  of very  useful  assistants. 
Her  brother's  return  was  the  first  comfort;  he  could  take  best care of 
his wife,  and  the  second  blessing was  the  arrival  of the  apothecary.  Till 
he  came  and  had  examined  the  child,  their  apprehensions  were  the 
worse  for  being  vague;―they  suspected  great  injury,  but  knew  not 
where;  but  now  the  collar-bone  was  soon  replaced,  and  though  Mr. 
Robinson  felt  and  felt,  and  rubbed,  and  looked  grave,  and  spoke  low 
words  both  to  the  father  and  the  aunt,  still  they  were  all  to  hope  the 
best,  and  to be able to part and  eat their dinner  in tolerable ease of mind; 
and  then  it was,  just before  they  parted,  that  the  two  young  aunts  were 
able so far to digress from  their nephew's  state, as to give the  information 
of  Captain  Wentworth's  visit;―staying  five  minutes  behind  their  father 
and  mother,  to  endeavour  to  express  how  perfectly  delighted  they  were 
with  him,  how  much  handsomer,  how  infinitely  more  agreeable  they 
thought  him  than  any  individual  among  their  male  acquaintance,  who 
had  been  at all a favourite  before―how  glad they  had  been  to hear papa 
invite  him  to  stay  dinner―how  sorry  when  he  said  it  was  quite  out of 
his power―and  how glad again,  when  he had  promised  in  reply to papa 
and  mamma's  farther  pressing  invitations,  to  come and  dine  with  them 
6.  Wine  cellars. 
7.  At this time a general  medical  practitioner. 
CHAPTER  VII 
37 
on the  morrow,  actually on  the  morrow!―And  he had  promised  it in so 
pleasant  a  manner,  as  if he  felt  all  the  motive  of their  attention  just as 
he ought!―And,  in  short,  he had  looked and  said every thing with  such 
exquisite  grace,  that  they  could  assure  them  all,  their  heads  were  both 
turned  by  him!―And  off they  ran,  quite  as  full  of glee as  of love,  and 
apparently  more  full  of Captain  Wentworth  than  of little Charles. 
The  same  story  and  the  same  raptures  were  repeated,  when  the  two 
girls came with  their father,  through  the  gloom of the  evening,  to  make 
enquiries; and  Mr.  Musgrove, no longer under the first uneasiness  about 
his  heir,  could  add  his  confirmation  and  praise,  and  hope  there  would 
be  now  no  occasion  for  putting  Captain  Wentworth  off,  and  only  be 
sorry  to  think  that  the  cottage  party,  probably,  would  not  like to  leave 
the little boy, to give him  the  meeting.―"Oh,  no! as to leaving the little 
boy!"―both  father  and  mother  were  in  much  too  strong  and  recent 
alarm  to bear the thought;  and  Anne,  in  the  joy of the escape, could  not 
help adding her warm  protestations  to theirs. 
Charles  Musgrove,  indeed,  afterwards  shewed  more  of  inclination; 
"the  child  was  going  on  so  well―and  he  wished  so  much  to  be  intro02
duced  to Captain  Wentworth,  that,  perhaps,  he  might  join  them  in  the 
evening; he  would  not  dine  from  home,  but  he  might  walk  in  for  half 
an  hour."  But in  this he was eagerly opposed  by his wife,  with  "Oh,  no! 
indeed,  Charles,  I cannot bear to have  you  go away.  Only think,  if any 
thing  should  happen!" 
The  child  had  a  good  night,  and  was  going  on  well  the  next day.  It 
must  be a work of time to ascertain that  no  injury  had  been  done  to  the 
spine,  but  Mr.  Robinson found  nothing  to  increase alarm,  and  Charles 
Musgrove  began  consequently  to  feel  no  necessity for  longer  confine02
ment.  The  child was to be kept  in  bed,  and  amused  as quietly as possi02
ble; but  what  was there  for a father  to do? This was quite  a female  case, 
and  it would  be highly absurd  in  him,  who could be of no  use at  home, 
to  shut  himself  up.  His  father  very  much  wished  him  to  meet  Captain 
Wentworth,  and  there  being no  sufficient reason  against  it,  he  ought  to 
go; and  it ended  in  his making a bold public declaration,  when  he  came 
in  from  shooting,  of  his  meaning  to  dress  directly,  and  dine  at  the 
other  house. 
"Nothing  can  be  going  on  better  than  the  child," said  he,  "so  I  told 
my  father  just now  that  I would  come,  and  he  thought  me  quite  right. 
Your sister being with  you,  my love, I have no scruple at all. You would 
not like to leave him  yourself,  but  you  see I can be of no  use.  Anne will 
send for me  if any thing  is the  matter. " 
Husbands  and  wives  generally  understand  when  opposition  will  be 
vain.  Mary knew,  from  Charles's manner  of speaking,  that  he was  quite 
determined  on  going,  and  that  it would  be  of no  use to teaze him.  She 
said  nothing,  therefore,  till he was out of the  room,  but  as soon as  there 
was only Anne to  hear, 
38 
CHAPTER  VII 
"So!  You and  I are  to  be  left  to shift  by ourselves, with  this poor  sick 
child―and  not  a  creature  coming  near  us  all the  evening! I knew  how 
it  would  be.  This  is  always  my  luck!  If there  is any  thing  disagreeable 
going  on,  men  are  always sure  to get out  of it,  and  Charles is as bad  as 
any  of them.  Very  unfeeling!  I  must  say  it  is very  unfeeling  of him,  to 
be  running  away  from  his  poor  little boy; talks of his being going on  so 
well! How does he  know that  he  is going on  well, or that  there  may  not 
be  a sudden  change  half  an  hour  hence? I did  not think  Charles  would 
have  been  so  unfeeling.  So,  here  he  is to  go  away  and  enjoy  himself, 
and  because I am  the  poor  mother,  I am  not to be allowed to  stir;―and 
yet,  I am  sure,  I am  more unfit than any body else to be about the child. 
My  being the  mother  is the  very  reason  why  my  feelings should  not  be 
tried.  I am  not at all equal to it. You saw how hysterical I was yesterday." 
"But  that  was only the  effect  of the  suddenness  of your alarm―of the 
shock.  You will not be hysterical again.  I dare say we shall have  nothing 
to  distress  us.  I  perfectly  understand  Mr.  Robinson's  directions,  and 
have  no  fears;  and  indeed,  Mary,  I  cannot  wonder  at  your  husband. 
Nursing  does  not belong to  a man,  it is not  his province.  A sick child is 
always the  mother's  property,  her own  feelings generally make it so." 
"I  hope  I am  as fond  of my  child  as any  mother―but  I do  not  know 
that  I am  of any  more  use  in  the  sick-room than  Charles,  for  I  cannot 
be  always scolding and  teazing  a poor  child when  it is ill; and  you  saw, 
this  morning,  that  if  I  told  him  to  keep  quiet,  he  was  sure  to  begin 
kicking about.  I have  not  nerves for the  sort of thing." 
"But,  could  you  be  comfortable  yourself,  to  be  spending  the  whole 
evening away  from  the  poor  boy?" 
"Yes;  you  see  his  papa  can,  and  why  should  not  I?―Jemima  is  so 
careful!  And  she  could  send  us  word  every  hour  how  he  was.  I  really 
think  Charles  might  as  well  have  told  his  father  we  would  all  come.  I 
am  not  more  alarmed  about  little Charles  now  than  he  is.  I was dread02
fully  alarmed  yesterday,  but  the  case is very different  to-day. " 
"Well―if  you  do  not  think  it too late to give notice for yourself,  sup02
pose you  were to go, as well as your husband.  Leave little Charles to my 
care.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Musgrove  cannot  think  it  wrong,  while  I  remain 
with  him." 
"Are you serious?" cried Mary,  her eyes brightening.  "Dear me! that's 
a  very good thought,  very good  indeed.  To be sure  I may  just as well go 
as not,  for I am  of no use at home―am  I? and  it only harasses me. You, 
who  have  not  a  mother's  feelings, are  a great deal  the  properest  person. 
You  can  make  little  Charles  do  any  thing;  he  always  minds  you  at  a 
word.  It will  be a great deal  better than  leaving him  with  only Jemima. 
Oh!  I  will  certainly  go;  I  am  sure  I  ought  if I  can,  quite  as  much  as 
Charles,  for  they  want  me  excessively  to  be  acquainted  with  Captain 
Wentworth,  and  I know you do  not mind  being left  alone. An excellent 
thought  of yours,  indeed,  Anne! I will go and  tell Charles, and  get ready 
CHAPTER  VII 
39 
directly.  You can  send  for  us,  you  know,  at  a  moment's  notice,  if any 
thing  is the  matter;  but  I dare  say there  will  be  nothing  to alarm  you.  I 
should  not  go,  you  may  be sure,  if I did  not  feel  quite  at ease about  my 
dear child." 
The  next  moment  she  was  tapping  at  her  husband's  dressing-room 
door,  and  as Anne  followed  her  up  stairs,  she was in  time for the  whole 
conversation,  which  began  with  Mary's saying,  in  a  tone  of great  exul02
tation, 
"I  mean  to  go  with  you,  Charles,  for  I am  of no  more  use  at  home 
than you are.  If I were to shut myself up for ever with the child,  I should 
not  be able to  persuade  him  to  do  any  thing  he  did  not  like.  Anne  will 
stay; Anne  undertakes  to stay at home  and  take care of him.  It is Anne's 
own  proposal,  and  so  I  shall  go  with  you,  which  will  be  a  great  deal 
better,  for  I have not dined  at the  other house  since Tuesday. " 
"This  is very kind  of Anne, " was her husband's  answer,  "and  I should 
be very glad to  have  you  go; but  it seems rather  hard  that  she should  be 
left  at home  by herself,  to nurse  our  sick child." 
Anne  was now at hand  to take up  her own  cause, and  the  sincerity of 
her  manner  being  soon  sufficient  to  convince  him,  where  conviction 
was at least very agreeable, he had  no farther  scruples as to her being  left 
to dine  alone,  though  he  still wanted  her  to  join  them  in  the  evening, 
when  the child might be at rest for the  night,  and  kindly urged  her to let 
him  come  and  fetch  her;  but  she  was  quite  unpersuadable;  and  this 
being  the  case,  she  had  ere  long  the  pleasure  of  seeing  them  set  off 
together  in  high  spirits.  They were gone,  she hoped,  to be happy,  how02
ever  oddly  constructed  such  happiness  might  seem;  as  for  herself,  she 
was left with as many sensations of comfort,  as were, perhaps,  ever likely 
to  be  hers.  She  knew  herself  to  be  of the  first  utility  to  the  child;  and 
what was it to her,  if Frederick Wentworth  were only half a mile  distant, 
making  himself agreeable to  others! 
She  would  have  liked  to  know  how  he  felt  as  to  a  meeting.  Perhaps 
indifferent,  if  indifference  could  exist  under  such  circumstances.  He 
must  be  either  indifferent  or  unwilling.  Had  he  wished  ever  to  see  her 
again,  he  need  not  have waited  till this  time; he  would  have  done  what 
she  could  not  but  believe that  in  his  place  she  should  have  done  long 
ago,  when  events  had  been  early  giving  him  the  independence  which 
alone had  been  wanting. 
Her  brother  and  sister  came  back delighted  with  their  new  acquain02
tance,  and their visit in general. There had been music, singing, talking, 
laughing,  all  that  was  most  agreeable; charming  manners  in  Captain 
Wentworth,  no  shyness  or  reserve; they  seemed  all  to  know  each  other 
perfectly,  and  he  was  coming  the  very  next  morning  to  shoot  with 
Charles.  He  was  to  come  to  breakfast,  but  not  at  the  Cottage,  though 
that  had  been proposed  at first; but then  he  had  been  pressed to come to 
the Great House instead,  and  he seemed afraid  of being in  Mrs. Charles 
40 
CHAPTER  VII 
Musgrove's way,  on  account of the  child; and  therefore,  somehow,  they 
hardly  knew  how,  it,  ended  in  Charles's  being to  meet  him  to  breakfast 
at his  father's. 
Anne  understood  it.  He  wished  to avoid  seeing her.  He had  enquired 
after  her,  she found,  slightly, as might suit a former  slight acquaintance, 
seeming  to  acknowledge  such  as she  had  acknowledged,  actuated,  per02
haps,  by  the  same  view  of  escaping  introduction  when  they  were  to 
meet. 
The  morning  hours  of the  Cottage were always later than those of the 
other  house;  and  on  the  morrow  the  difference  was so great,  that  Mary 
and  Anne  were  not  more  than  beginning  breakfast  when  Charles  came 
in  to  say  that  they  were  just  setting  off,  that  he  was  come  for  his  dogs, 
that his sisters were following with  Captain  Wentworth,  his sisters mean02
ing to  visit Mary  and  the  child,  and  Captain  Wentworth  proposing  also 
to  wait  on  her  for  a  few  minutes,  if  not  inconvenient;  and  though 
Charles  had  answered  for  the  child's  being  in  no  such  state  as  could 
make  it  inconvenient,  Captain  Wentworth  would  not  be satisfied  with02
out  his running on  to give notice. 
Mary,  very  much  gratified  by this  attention,  was delighted  to receive 
him;  while  a  thousand  feelings  rushed  on  Anne,  of which  this  was  the 
most  consoling,  that  it  would  soon  be  over.  And  it  was  soon  over.  In 
two  minutes  after  Charles's  preparation,  the  others  appeared;  they  were 
in  the  drawing-room.  Her  eye  half  met  Captain  Wentworth's;  a bow,  a 
curtsey  passed; she heard  his voice―he talked  to  Mary,  said all that  was 
right;  said  something  to  the  Miss  Musgroves,  enough  to  mark  an  easy 
footing:  the  room  seemed  full―full  of persons  and  voices―but  a  few 
minutes  ended  it. Charles shewed  himself at the  window,  all was  ready, 
their  visitor  had  bowed  and  was  gone;  the  Miss  Musgroves  were  gone 
too,  suddenly  resolving to walk to the  end  of the  village with  the  sports02
men:  the  room  was  cleared,  and  Anne  might  finish  her  breakfast  as 
she  could. 
"It  is  over!  it  is  over!"  she  repeated  to  herself  again,  and  again,  in 
nervous  gratitude.  "The worst  is over!" 
Mary  talked,  but  she  could  not  attend.  She had  seen  him.  They  had 
met.  They had  been  once more  in  the  same  room! 
Soon,  however,  she began to reason with  herself,  and  try to be feeling 
less.  Eight years, almost eight years had  passed,  since all had  been  given 
up.  How  absurd  to  be  resuming  the  agitation  which  such  an  interval 
had  banished  into  distance  and  indistinctness!  What  might  not  eight 
years do? Events of every description,  changes,  alienations,  removals,― 
all,  all  must  be  comprised  in  it; and  oblivion  of the  past―how  natural, 
how  certain  too! It included  nearly  a third  part of her  own  life. 
Alas!  with  all  her  reasonings,  she  found,  that  to  retentive  feelings 
eight years may  be little more than  nothing. 
Now,  how  were  his  sentiments  to  be  read?  Was  this  like  wishing  to 
CHAPTER  VII 
41 
avoid  her?  And  the  next  moment  she  was  hating  herself  for  the  folly 
which  asked the  question. 
On  one other  question,  which  perhaps her  utmost  wisdom  might  not 
have  prevented,  she  was  soon  spared  all  suspense;  for  after  the  Miss 
Musgroves had  returned  and  finished  their visit at the  Cottage,  she  had 
this spontaneous  information  from  Mary: 
"Captain  Wentworth  is not very gallant by you,  Anne,  though  he  was 
so attentive  to  me.  Henrietta  asked  him  what  he  thought  of you,  when 
they  went  away; and  he  said,  T ou  were  so altered  he  should  not  have 
known  you again.'  " 
Mary  had  no  feelings  to  make  her  respect  her  sister's  in  a  common 
way; but  she was perfectly  unsuspicious  of being  inflicting any  peculiar 
wound. 
"Altered beyond his knowledge!" Anne fully submitted,  in silent,  deep 
mortification.  Doubtless it was so; and  she could take no  revenge, for  he 
was not  altered,  or  not  for  the  worse.  She had  already  acknowledged  it 
to herself,  and  she could  not think differently,  let him  think  of her as he 
would.  No;  the  years  which  had  destroyed  her  youth  and  bloom  had 
only  given  him  a  more  glowing,  manly,  open  look,  in  no  respect  less02
ening  his personal  advantages.  She had  seen  the  same  Frederick Went02
worth. 
"So  altered  that  he  should  not  have  known  her  again!"  These  were 
words which could not but dwell with  her.  Yet she soon began to  rejoice 
that  she  had  heard  them.  They were  of sobering tendency; they allayed 
agitation; they composed,  and  consequently must  make her  happier. 
Frederick Wentworth  had  used  such  words,  or something  like  them, 
but  without  an  idea  that  they  would  be  carried  round  to  her.  He  had 
thought  her wretchedly  altered,  and,  in the first moment  of appeal,  had 
spoken  as he  felt.  He  had  not  forgiven  Anne  Elliot.  She had  used  him 
ill; deserted  and  disappointed  him;  and  worse,  she  had  shewn  a  feeble02
ness of character in  doing  so, which  his own  decided,  confident  temper 
could  not  endure.  She had  given  him  up  to  oblige others.  It  had  been 
the  effect  of over-persuasion.  It had  been  weakness and  timidity. 
He  had  been  most  warmly  attached  to  her,  and  had  never  seen  a 
woman  since whom  he  thought  her  equal; but,  except from  some  natu02
ral  sensation  of curiosity,  he  had  no  desire  of meeting  her  again.  Her 
power with  him  was gone for ever. 
It  was  now  his  object  to  marry.  He  was  rich,  and  being  turned  on 
shore,  fully  intended  to  settle as soon  as he  could  be  properly  tempted; 
actually  looking round,  ready  to  fall  in  love with  all  the  speed  which  a 
clear  head  and  quick taste could  allow.  He  had  a  heart  for  either  of the 
Miss Musgroves, if they could catch it; a heart,  in short,  for any pleasing 
young  woman  who  came  in  his  way,  excepting Anne  Elliot.  This  was 
his  only  secret exception,  when  he  said  to  his  sister,  in  answer  to  her 
suppositions, 
42 
CHAPTER  VIII 
"Yes,  here  I  am,  Sophia,  quite  ready  to  make  a  foolish  match.  Any 
body between  fifteen  and  thirty  may have me for asking.  A little beauty, 
and  a  few  smiles,  and  a  few  compliments  to  the  navy,  and  I am  a  lost 
man.  Should  not  this  be  enough  for  a  sailor,  who  has  had  no  society 
among  women  to make him  nice?" 
He  said  it,  she  knew,  to be contradicted.  His bright,  proud eye spoke 
the  happy  conviction  that  he  was  nice;  and  Anne  Elliot  was  not  out of 
his  thoughts,  when  he  more  seriously  described  the  woman  he  should 
wish  to  meet  with.  "A strong  mind,  with  sweetness  of manner,"  made 
the first and  the  last of the  description. 
"This  is  the  woman  I  want,"  said  he.  "Something  a  little  inferior  I 
shall  of course  put  up  with,  but  it  must  not  be  much.  If I am  a  fool,  I 
shall  be  a  fool  indeed,  for  I  have  thought  on  the  subject  more  than 
most  men." 
Chapter  VIII 
From  this  time  Captain  Wentworth  and  Anne  Elliot were  repeatedly 
in  the  same  circle.  They were  soon  dining  in  company  together  at  Mr. 
Musgrove's, for the  little boy's state could no longer supply  his aunt with 
a  pretence  for absenting  herself; and  this was but  the beginning of other 
dinings  and  other  meetings. 
Whether  former  feelings were to be renewed,  must  be brought  to  the 
proof; former  times  must  undoubtedly  be brought  to the  recollection of 
each;  they  could  not  but  be  reverted  to;  the  year  of their  engagement 
could  not  but  be  named  by  him,  in  the  little  narratives  or  descriptions 
which conversation called forth.  His profession  qualified  him,  his dispo02
sition  led  him,  to  talk; and  "That  was  in  the  year  six;" "That  happened 
before  I went  to  sea  in  the  year  six," occurred  in  the  course  of the first 
evening  they  spent  together:  and  though  his  voice  did  not  falter,  and 
though  she  had  no  reason  to  suppose  his  eye  wandering  towards  her 
while he spoke, Anne felt the  utter  impossibility, from her knowledge of 
his  mind,  that  he  could  be  unvisited  by  remembrance  any  more  than 
herself.  There  must  be  the  same  immediate  association  of  thought, 
though  she was very far  from  conceiving it to be of equal  pain. 
They  had  no conversation together,  no intercourse but what the com02
monest  civility  required.  Once  so  much  to  each  other!  Now  nothing! 
There  had  been  a time,  when  of all the  large party  now filling the  draw02
ing-room  at  Uppercross, they would  have found  it most difficult to cease 
to  speak  to  one  another.  With  the  exception,  perhaps,  of Admiral  and 
Mrs.  Croft,  who  seemed  particularly  attached  and  happy,  (Anne  could 
allow  no  other  exception even  among  the  married  couples) there  could 
have  been  no  two  hearts  so open,  no  tastes so similar,  no  feelings so in 
unison,  no  countenances  so beloved.  Now  they  were  as strangers;  nay, 
CHAPTER  VIII 
43 
worse than  strangers,  for  they  could  never  become acquainted.  It was a 
perpetual  estrangement. 
When  he  talked,  she  heard  the  same  voice,  and  discerned  the  same 
mind.  There was a very general  ignorance of all naval  matters  through02
out  the  party;  and  he  was  very  much  questioned,  and  especially by  the 
two Miss Musgroves,  who  seemed  hardly  to have  any  eyes but  for  him, 
as to the  manner  of living on  board,  daily regulations,  food,  hours,  etc.; 
and  their surprise  at his accounts, at learning the degree of accommoda02
tion  and  arrangement  which  was  practicable,  drew  from  him  some 
pleasant  ridicule,  which  reminded  Anne  of the  early days when  she  too 
had  been ignorant,  and  she too had  been  accused of supposing  sailors to 
be  living  on  board  without  any  thing  to  eat,  or  any  cook  to  dress  it if 
there were,  or any servant to wait,  or any knife and  fork to  use. 
From  thus  listening  and  thinking,  she  was  roused  by  a  whisper  of 
Mrs.  Musgrove's, who,  overcome by fond  regrets, could not help saying, 
"Ah!  Miss  Anne,  if it  had  pleased  Heaven  to  spare  my  poor  son,  I 
dare say he would  have been  just such  another  by this time." 
Anne  suppressed  a  smile,  and  listened  kindly,  while  Mrs.  Musgrove 
relieved  her  heart  a  little more; and  for  a few  minutes,  therefore,  could 
not keep pace with  the conversation of the  others.―When  she could let 
her  attention  take  its  natural  course  again,  she  found  the  Miss  Mus02
groves just fetching the  navy-list,―(their own  navy list, the first that  had 
ever been  at Uppercross); and  sitting down together to pore  over it,  with 
the  professed  view  of  finding  out  the  ships  which  Captain  Wentworth 
had  commanded. 
"Your first was the  Asp,  I remember; we will look for the Asp." 
"You  will not  find  her  there.―Quite  worn  out  and  broken  up.  I was 
the  last  man  who  commanded  her.―Hardly  fit  for  service  then.― 
Reported fit for home  service for a year or two,―and  so I was sent off to 
the West Indies." 
The  girls looked all  amazement. 
"The  admiralty," he  continued,  "entertain  themselves now and  then, 
with  sending a few hundred men  to sea, in a ship not fit to be employed. 
But  they  have  a  great  many  to  provide  for;  and  among  the  thousands 
that  may  just as well  go to  the  bottom  as  not,  it  is impossible for  them 
to distinguish  the  very set who  may be least missed. " 
"Phoo! phoo!" cried the  admiral,  "what  stuff these young  fellows talk! 
Never  was  a  better  sloop  than  the  Asp  in  her  day.―For  an  old  built 
sloop,  you would  not see her equal.  Lucky fellow to get her!―He  knows 
there  must  have  been  twenty  better  men  than  himself  applying  for  her 
at the  same time.  Lucky fellow to get any  thing  so soon,  with  no  more 
interest8 than  his." 
"I  felt  my  luck,  admiral,  I  assure  you;"  replied  Captain  Wentworth, 
8.  Influence  in high places. 
44 
CHAPTER  VIII 
seriously.―"I  was  as  well  satisfied  with  my  appointment  as  you  can 
desire.  It was a great  object  with  me,  at that  time,  to be at sea,―a very 
great object.  I wanted  to be doing  something. " 
"To  be  sure  you  did.―What  should  a  young  fellow,  like  you,  do 
ashore,  for half a year together?―If a man  has not a wife, he soon  wants 
to be afloat  again." 
"But,  Captain  Wentworth," cried Louisa, "how vexed you  must  have 
been  when  you  came  to  the  Asp,  to  see  what  an  old  thing  they  had 
given  you." 
"I  knew  pretty  well  what  she  was,  before  that  day;" said  he,  smiling. 
"I  had  no  more  discoveries  to  make,  than  you  would  have  as  to  the 
fashion  and  strength  of any  old pelisse,9 which  you  had  seen lent  about 
among  half  your  acquaintance,  ever  since  you  could  remember,  and 
which  at last,  on  some very wet day,  is lent to yourself.―Ah! she was a 
dear  old  Asp  to  me.  She  did  all  that  I  wanted.  I  knew  she  would.―I 
knew that  we should  either go to the bottom  together,  or that  she  would 
be  the  making  of me; and  I  never  had  two  days  of foul  weather  all  the 
time  I  was  at  sea  in  her;  and  after  taking  privateers  enough  to  be  very 
entertaining,  I had the good luck, in my passage home the next autumn, 
to  fall  in  with  the  very  French  frigate  I  wanted.―I  brought  her  into 
Plymouth;  and  here was another  instance of luck.  We had  not been six 
hours  in  the  Sound,  when  a  gale came  on,  which  lasted  four  days  and 
nights,  and  which  would  have  done  for  poor  old  Asp,  in  half  the  time; 
our  touch  with  the  Great  Nation1  not  having  much  improved  our con02
dition.  Four-and-twenty  hours  later,  and  I should  only have been a gal02
lant  Captain  Wentworth,  in  a  small  paragraph  at  one  corner  of  the 
newspapers; and  being lost in  only a sloop,  nobody  would  have  thought 
about  me." 
Anne's  shudderings  were  to  herself,  alone:  but  the  Miss  Musgroves 
could  be  as  open  as  they  were  sincere,  in  their  exclamations  of  pity 
and  horror. 
"And  so then,  I suppose,"  said  Mrs.  Musgrove,  in  a  low  voice,  as if 
thinking  aloud,  "so then  he went away to the Laconia, and  there he  met 
with  our  poor  boy.―Charles,  my  dear,"  (beckoning  him  to  her),  "do 
ask Captain  Wentworth  where  it was he first met with your poor brother. 
I always forget. " 
"It was at Gibraltar,  mother,  I know.  Dick  had  been  left  ill at Gibral02
tar,  with  a  recommendation  from  his former  captain  to Captain  Went02
worth." 
"Oh!―but,  Charles,  tell  Captain  Wentworth,  he  need  not  be  afraid 
of  mentioning  poor  Dick  before me,  for it would  be rather  a pleasure  to 
hear  him  talked of,  by such  a good  friend." 
9.  A long cloak. 
1.  France,  with which Britain had been at war. 
CHAPTER  VIII 
45 
Charles,  being  somewhat  more  mindful  of  the  probabilities  of  the 
case,  only nodded in  reply,  and  walked  away. 
The  girls were now hunting for the  Laconia; and  Captain  Wentworth 
could  not  deny  himself  the  pleasure  of taking  the  precious volume  into 
his own  hands to save them  the  trouble,  and  once more  read  aloud  the 
little  statement  of her  name  and  rate,2  and  present  non-commissioned 
class,  observing  over  it,  that  she  too  had  been  one  of the  best  friends 
man  ever  had. 
"Ah!  those  were  pleasant  days  when  I  had  the  Laconia! How  fast  I 
made  money  in  her.―A friend  of mine,  and  I,  had  such a lovely cruise 
together off the Western  Islands.―Poor Harville,  sister! You know  how 
much  he  wanted  money―worse  than  myself.  He  had  a  wife.―Excel02
lent fellow!  I shall never forget his happiness.  He felt it all, so much  for 
her sake.―I wished for him  again the next summer,  when  I had  still the 
same luck in  the  Mediterranean." 
"And  I am  sure,  Sir," said Mrs.  Musgrove,  "it was a lucky day for  us, 
when  you  were  put  captain  into  that  ship.  We  shall  never  forget  what 
you  did." 
Her  feelings  made  her  speak  low; and  Captain  Wentworth,  hearing 
only  in  part,  and  probably  not  having  Dick  Musgrove  at  all  near  his 
thoughts,  looked rather  in  suspense,  and  as if waiting for  more. 
"My  brother,"  whispered  one  of  the  girls;  "mamma  is  thinking  of 
poor Richard." 
"Poor  dear  fellow!"  continued  Mrs.  Musgrove;  "he  was  grown  so 
steady,  and  such  an  excellent correspondent,  while  he  was  under  your 
care! Ah! it would  have  been  a  happy  thing,  if he  had  never  left you.  I 
assure you,  Captain  Wentworth,  we are very sorry he  ever left  you." 
There  was  a  momentary  expression  in  Captain  Wentworth's  face  at 
this speech, a certain glance of his bright eye, and  curl of his  handsome 
mouth,  which  convinced  Anne,  that  instead  of sharing  in  Mrs.  Mus02
grove's kind  wishes,  as to  her  son,  he  had  probably  been  at  some  pains 
to get  rid  of him;  but  it  was  too  transient  an  indulgence  of self-amuse02
ment  to  be  detected  by  any  who  understood  him  less  than  herself;  in 
another  moment  he  was  perfectly  collected  and  serious;  and  almost 
instantly afterwards  coming up to the sofa, on  which she and  Mrs. Mus02
grove were sitting,  took a place by the  latter,  and  entered  into conversa02
tion  with  her,  in  a  low  voice,  about  her  son,  doing  it  with  so  much 
sympathy  and  natural  grace, as shewed  the  kindest  consideration  for all 
that was real and  unabsurd  in  the parent's feelings. 
They  were  actually  on  the  same  sofa,  for  Mrs.  Musgrove  had  most 
readily made room for him;―they were divided  only by Mrs. Musgrove. 
It was no  insignificant barrier  indeed.  Mrs.  Musgrove was of a comfort-
2.  Classification of vessels based on their size or strength. 
46 
CHAPTER  VIII 
able  substantial  size,  infinitely  more  fitted  by  nature  to  express  good 
cheer  and  good  humour,  than  tenderness  and  sentiment;  and  while  the 
agitations  of Anne's  slender  form,  and  pensive  face,  may  be  considered 
as  very  completely  screened,  Captain  Wentworth  should  be  allowed 
some  credit  for  the  self-command  with  which  he  attended  to  her  large 
fat sighings over the  destiny  of a son,  whom  alive nobody had  cared for. 
Personal  size and  mental  sorrow  have  certainly no  necessary  propor02
tions.  A large bulky  figure  has as good a right to be in deep affliction, as 
the  most  graceful  set  of limbs  in  the  world.  But,  fair  or  not  fair,  there 
are  unbecoming  conjunctions,  which  reason  will  patronize  in  vain,― 
which  taste cannot tolerate,―which  ridicule will seize. 
The admiral,  after taking two or three refreshing  turns about the  room 
with  his hands  behind  him,  being called to order by his wife,  now came 
up  to  Captain  Wentworth,  and  without  any  observation  of  what  he 
might  be interrupting,  thinking  only of his own  thoughts,  began  with, 
"If  you  had  been  a  week  later  at  Lisbon,  last  spring,  Frederick,  you 
would  have  been  asked  to  give  a  passage  to  Lady  Mary  Grierson  and 
her  daughters. " 
"Should  I? I am  glad  I was not  a week later  then." 
The  admiral  abused  him  for  his want  of gallantry.  He defended  him02
self; though  professing that he would  never willingly admit any ladies on 
board  a  ship  of his,  excepting  for  a  ball,  or  a  visit,  which  a  few  hours 
might  comprehend. 
"But,  if I  know  myself,"  said  he,  "this  is  from  no  want  of  gallantry 
towards  them.  It  is  rather  from  feeling  how  impossible  it  is,  with  all 
one's  efforts,  and  all  one's  sacrifices,  to  make  the  accommodations  on 
board,  such as women  ought to have. There can be no want of gallantry, 
admiral,  in rating the claims of women  to every personal  comfort  high― 
and  this  is what  I do.  I hate  to hear  of women  on  board,  or to see them 
on  board; and  no  ship,  under  my  command,  shall ever convey a family 
of  ladies any where,  if I can  help  it. " 
This  brought  his sister upon  him. 
"Oh  Frederick!―But  I  cannot  believe  it  of  you.―All  idle  refine02
ment!―Women  may  be  as comfortable  on  board,  as  in  the  best  house 
in  England.  I  believe  I  have  lived  as  much  on  board  as  most  women, 
and  I know  nothing  superior  to the  accommodations of a man  of war.  I 
declare  I  have  not  a  comfort  or  an  indulgence  about  me,  even  at  Kel02
lynch-hall,"  (with  a  kind  bow  to  Anne)  "beyond  what  I  always  had  in 
most of the  ships  I have  lived  in; and  they  have been five altogether. " 
"Nothing  to the  purpose,"  replied  her brother.  "You were living with 
your  husband;  and  were the  only woman  on  board." 
"But you,  yourself,  brought  Mrs.  Harville,  her  sister,  her cousin,  and 
the  three  children,  round  from  Portsmouth  to  Plymouth.  Where  was 
this  superfine,  extraordinary  sort of gallantry  of yours,  then?" 
"All  merged  in  my  friendship,  Sophia.  I  would  assist  any  brother 
CHAPTER  VIII 
47 
officer's  wife that  I could,  and  I would  bring any thing  of Harville's  from 
the world's  end,  if he wanted  it.  But do  not  imagine that  I did  not feel  it 
an  evil in itself." 
"Depend  upon  it they  were all perfectly comfortable." 
"I  might  not  like them  the better for that,  perhaps.  Such a number of 
women  and  children  have  no  right  to be comfortable on  board." 
"My  dear  Frederick,  you  are  talking  quite  idly.  Pray,  what  would 
become  of us poor  sailors' wives, who  often  want  to be conveyed to  one 
port  or another,  after  our  husbands,  if every body  had  your  feelings?" 
"My  feelings,  you  see, did  not  prevent  my  taking  Mrs.  Harville,  and 
all her family,  to  Plymouth." 
"But  I  hate  to  hear  you  talking  so,  like a  fine  gentleman,  and  as if 
women  were all fine ladies,  instead  of rational  creatures.  We  none  of us 
expect to be in  smooth  water all our  days. " 
"Ah!  my  dear,"  said  the  admiral,  "when  he  has  got  a  wife,  he  will 
sing a  different  tune.  When  he  is married,  if we  have  the  good  luck  to 
live to another  war,  we shall see him  do as you  and  I,  and  a great  many 
others,  have  done.  We  shall  have  him  very  thankful  to  any  body  that 
will bring  him  his wife." 
"Ay,  that  we shall." 
"Now I have done," cried Captain  Wentworth―"When  once  married 
people  begin  to  attack  me  with,  'Oh!  you  will  think  very  differently, 
when  you  are  married.'  I can  only  say,  'No,  I shall  not;'  and  then  they 
say again,  T e s, you  will,' and  there  is an  end  of it." 
He got up  and  moved  away. 
"What a great traveller you  must  have been,  ma'am!" said  Mrs.  Mus02
grove to Mrs.  Croft. 
"Pretty well, ma'am,  in the fifteen years of my marriage; though  many 
women  have  done  more.  I  have  crossed  the  Atlantic  four  times,  and 
have  been  once  to  the  East  Indies,  and  back  again;  and  only  once, 
besides  being  in  different  places  about  home―Cork,  and  Lisbon,  and 
Gibraltar.  But  I  never  went  beyond  the  Streights3―and  never  was  in 
the  West  Indies.  We  do  not  call  Bermuda  or  Bahama,  you  know,  the 
West  Indies. " 
Mrs.  Musgrove had  not  a word  to say in dissent; she could  not accuse 
herself  of  having  ever  called  them  any  thing  in  the  whole  course  of 
her  life. 
"And I do assure you,  ma'am," pursued Mrs. Croft,  "that nothing  can 
exceed  the  accommodations  of  a  man  of  war;  I  speak,  you  know,  of 
the  higher  rates.  When  you  come to  a  frigate,  of course,  you  are  more 
confined―though  any  reasonable  woman  may  be  perfectly  happy  in 
one  of them;  and  I can  safely  say,  that  the  happiest  part  of my  life  has 
been  spent  on  board  a  ship.  While we  were  together,  you  know,  there 
3.  The Strait of Gibraltar. 
48 
CHAPTER  VIII 
was  nothing  to  be  feared.  Thank  God!  I have  always been  blessed  with 
excellent  health,  and  no  climate disagrees  with  me.  A  little  disordered 
always the  first  twenty-four  hours  of going  to  sea,  but  never  knew  what 
sickness was afterwards.  The only time that  I ever really suffered  in body 
or  mind,  the  only  time  that  I  ever  fancied  myself  unwell,  or  had  any 
ideas  of danger,  was  the  winter  that  I  passed  by  myself  at  Deal,  when 
the  Admiral  (Captain  Croft  then)  was  in  the  North  Seas.  I  lived  in 
perpetual  fright  at  that  time,  and  had  all  manner  of  imaginary  com02
plaints  from  not knowing what to do with  myself, or when  I should  hear 
from  him  next; but  as  long  as we could  be  together,  nothing  ever ailed 
me,  and  I never  met with  the  smallest inconvenience. " 
"Ay,  to  be  sure.―Yes, indeed,  oh  yes,  I  am  quite  of your  opinion, 
Mrs.  Croft,"  was  Mrs.  Musgrove's  hearty  answer.  "There  is nothing  so 
bad  as  a  separation.  I am  quite  of your  opinion.  J know  what  it  is,  for 
Mr.  Musgrove  always  attends  the  assizes,4 and  I am  so glad  when  they 
are  over,  and  he  is safe back again." 
The  evening  ended  with  dancing.  On  its  being  proposed,  Anne 
offered  her  services, as usual,  and  though  her  eyes would  sometimes fill 
with  tears  as  she  sat  at  the  instrument,  she  was  extremely  glad  to  be 
employed,  and  desired  nothing  in  return but  to be  unobserved. 
It was a merry,  joyous party,  and  no one seemed in higher spirits  than 
Captain  Wentworth.  She  felt  that  he  had  every  thing  to  elevate  him, 
which  general  attention  and  deference,  and  especially the  attention  of 
all  the  young  women  could  do.  The  Miss  Hayters,  the  females  of the 
family  of cousins  already  mentioned,  were  apparently  admitted  to  the 
honour  of being in  love with  him; and  as for Henrietta  and  Louisa, they 
both  seemed  so entirely  occupied  by  him,  that  nothing  but  the  contin02
ued  appearance  of the most perfect good-will between themselves, could 
have made  it credible that they were not decided  rivals.  If he were a little 
spoilt  by  such  universal,  such  eager  admiration,  who  could  wonder? 
These  were  some  of the  thoughts  which  occupied  Anne,  while  her 
fingers were mechanically at work, proceeding for half an hour  together, 
equally without  error,  and  without  consciousness. Once  she felt that  he 
was looking at herself―observing  her altered features,  perhaps,  trying to 
trace  in  them  the  ruins  of the  face  which  had  once  charmed  him;  and 
once  she  knew  that  he  must  have  spoken  of her;―she  was hardly  aware 
of  it, till she heard  the  answer; but  then  she was sure of his having asked 
his  partner  whether  Miss  Elliot  never  danced?  The  answer  was,  "Oh! 
no,  never; she  has  quite  given  up  dancing.  She had  rather  play.  She is 
never  tired  of playing."  Once,  too,  he  spoke  to  her.  She  had  left  the 
instrument  on  the  dancing  being  over,  and  he  had  sat  down  to  try  to 
make out an  air which  he wished to give the Miss Musgroves an  idea of. 
4.  Periodical sessions of the judges of superior courts,  held in every county. 
CHAPTER 
IX 
49 
Unintentionally she  returned  to that  part of the  room; he  saw her,  and, 
instantly  rising,  said,  with  studied  politeness, 
"I beg your pardon,  madam,  this is your seat;" and  though  she imme02
diately drew back with  a decided  negative,  he  was not  to be  induced  to 
sit down  again. 
Anne  did  not  wish  for  more  of  such  looks  and  speeches.  His  cold 
politeness,  his ceremonious grace, were worse than  any  thing. 
Chapter IX 
Captain  Wentworth  was  come  to  Kellynch as  to  a  home,  to  stay  as 
long as he liked, being as thoroughly  the object  of the Admiral's  fraternal 
kindness  as of his wife's.  He  had  intended,  on  first  arriving,  to  proceed 
very  soon  into  Shropshire,  and  visit the  brother  settled  in  that  county, 
but  the attractions of Uppercross induced  him  to put  this off. There was 
so  much  of  friendliness,  and  of  flattery,  and  of  every  thing  most 
bewitching in  his reception  there; the  old were so hospitable,  the  young 
so  agreeable,  that  he  could  not  but  resolve  to  remain  where  he  was, 
and  take all  the  charms  and  perfections  of Edward's  wife  upon  credit a 
little longer. 
It  was  soon  Uppercross  with  him  almost  every  day.  T he  Musgroves 
could  hardly  be more  ready  to  invite  than  he  to  come,  particularly  in 
the morning,  when  he had  no companion  at home,  for the Admiral  and 
Mrs.  Croft  were  generally  out  of doors  together,  interesting  themselves 
in  their  new  possessions,  their  grass,  and  their  sheep,  and  dawdling 
about  in  a way  not  endurable  to a third  person,  or driving  out  in  a gig, 
lately added to their  establishment. 
Hitherto  there  had  been  but  one  opinion  of  Captain  Wentworth, 
among  the  Musgroves and  their  dependencies.  It was  unvarying,  warm 
admiration  every  where.  But  this  intimate  footing  was  not  more  than 
established,  when  a certain Charles Hayter  returned  among  them,  to be 
a good deal disturbed  by it,  and  to think Captain  Wentworth  very  much 
in the way. 
Charles  Hayter  was the  eldest  of all the  cousins,  and  a very amiable, 
pleasing  young  man,  between  whom  and  Henrietta  there  had  been  a 
considerable  appearance  of  attachment  previous  to  Captain  Went-
worth's  introduction.  He  was  in  orders,5  and  having  a  curacy  in  the 
neighbourhood  where  residence  was  not  required,  lived  at  his  father's 
house,  only  two  miles  from  Uppercross.  A  short  absence  from  home 
had  left  his  fair  one  unguarded  by  his  attentions  at  this  critical  period, 
5.  A clergyman  in the Church  of England.  The curacy  he holds makes him assistant or deputy 
to a rector or vicar. 
50 
CHAPTER 
IX 
and  when  he  came  back  he  had  the  pain  of  finding  very  altered  man02
ners,  and  of seeing Captain  Wentworth. 
Mrs.  Musgrove  and  Mrs.  Hayter  were  sisters.  They  had  each  had 
money,  but  their  marriages  had  made  a  material  difference  in  their 
degree  of consequence.  Mr.  Hayter  had  some property  of his own,  but 
it was insignificant compared  with  Mr.  Musgrove's; and  while the  Mus02
groves were in the first class of society in the country,6 the young  Hayters 
would,  from  their  parents'  inferior,  retired,  and  unpolished  way  of liv02
ing,  and  their own  defective education,  have been  hardly  in any class at 
all,  but  for  their  connexion  with  Uppercross; this  eldest  son  of course 
excepted,  who  had  chosen  to  be  a  scholar  and  a  gentleman,  and  who 
was very superior  in  cultivation  and  manners  to all the  rest. 
The  two  families had  always been  on  excellent terms,  there  being  no 
pride on  one side, and  no envy on  the other,  and  only such a conscious02
ness  of  superiority  in  the  Miss  Musgroves,  as  made  them  pleased  to 
improve  their  cousins.―Charles's  attentions  to  Henrietta  had  been 
observed  by  her  father  and  mother  without  any  disapprobation.  "It 
would  not  be  a  great  match  for  her;  but  if Henrietta  liked  him,―and 
Henrietta  did  seem to like  him." 
Henrietta  fully  thought  so  herself,  before  Captain  Wentworth  came; 
but  from  that  time  Cousin  Charles had  been  very much  forgotten. 
Which  of the  two  sisters was preferred  by Captain  Wentworth  was as 
yet  quite  doubtful,  as  far  as  Anne's  observation  reached.  Henrietta  was 
perhaps  the  prettiest,  Louisa  had  the  higher  spirits;  and  she  knew  not 
now,  whether  the  more  gentle  or  the  more  lively character  were  most 
likely to attract  him. 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Musgrove,  either  from  seeing little,  or  from  an  entire 
confidence  in the discretion  of both  their daughters,  and of all the  young 
men  who  came  near  them,  seemed  to  leave  every  thing  to  take  its 
chance.  There  was  not  the  smallest appearance  of solicitude or  remark 
about  them,  in  the  Mansion-house; but  it was different  at the  Cottage: 
the  young  couple  there  were  more  disposed  to  speculate  and  wonder; 
and  Captain  Wentworth  had  not  been  above  four  or  five  times  in  the 
Miss Musgroves' company,  and  Charles Hayter  had  but  just  reappeared, 
when  Anne  had  to  listen  to the  opinions  of her  brother  and  sister, as to 
which  was the one liked best. Charles gave it for Louisa, Mary for  Henri02
etta,  but  quite  agreeing  that  to  have  him  marry  either  would  be 
extremely  delightful. 
Charles  "had  never  seen  a  pleasanter  man  in  his  life;  and  from  what 
he  had  once  heard  Captain  Wentworth  himself  say,  was very  sure  that 
he  had  not  made  less than  twenty  thousand  pounds  by  the  war.  Here 
was a fortune  at once; besides which,  there would  be the chance of what 
might  be  done  in  any  future  war;  and  he  was sure  Captain  Wentworth 
6.  Neighborhood. 
CHAPTER 
IX 
51 
was as likely a man  to distinguish  himself  as  any officer  in  the  navy.  Oh! 
it  would  be a capital  match  for either of his sisters." 
"Upon  my word  it would,"  replied  Mary.  "Dear me! If he  should  rise 
to  any  very  great  honours!  If he  should  ever be  made  a  Baronet! 'Lady 
Wentworth'  sounds  very well. That would  be a noble thing,  indeed,  for 
Henrietta!  She  would  take  place  of me  then,  and  Henrietta  would  not 
dislike that.  Sir Frederick and  Lady Wentworth!  It would  be  but  a  new 
creation,  however,  and  I never think  much  of your  new creations." 
It  suited  Mary  best to  think  Henrietta  the  one  preferred,  on  the  very 
account  of Charles  Hayter,  whose  pretensions  she  wished  to  see put  an 
end  to.  She looked down  very decidedly  upon  the  Hayters,  and  thought 
it  would  be quite  a misfortune  to have  the  existing connection  between 
the families renewed―very  sad for herself and  her  children. 
"You  know," said she, "I cannot think him  at all a fit match for  Henri02
etta; and  considering the alliances which  the  Musgroves have made,  she 
has no right to throw  herself away.  I do not think  any young  woman  has 
a  right  to  make  a  choice that  may  be  disagreeable  and  inconvenient  to 
the  principal  part of her  family,  and  be giving bad  connections to  those 
who  have  not  been  used  to  them.  And,  pray,  who  is  Charles  Hayter? 
Nothing  but  a  country  curate.  A  most  improper  match  for  Miss  Mus02
grove,  of Uppercross." 
Her  husband,  however,  would  not  agree  with  her  here;  for  besides 
having a regard for his cousin,  Charles Hayter was an  eldest son,  and  he 
saw things as an  eldest son  himself. 
"Now  you  are  talking  nonsense,  Mary," was therefore  his answer.  "It 
would  not  be  a  great  match  for  Henrietta,  but  Charles  has  a  very  fair 
chance,  through  the  Spicers,  of getting  something  from  the  Bishop  in 
the  course  of a year or two; and  you  will  please to  remember,  that  he  is 
the  eldest  son; whenever  my  uncle  dies,  he  steps  into  very  pretty  prop02
erty. The estate at Winthrop  is not less than  two hundred and fifty acres, 
besides  the  farm  near  Taunton,  which  is  some  of the  best  land  in  the 
country.  I  grant  you,  that  any  of  them  but  Charles  would  be  a  very 
shocking match  for  Henrietta,  and  indeed  it could  not be; he  is the  only 
one that  could  be possible; but  he  is a very good-natured,  good  sort of a 
fellow;  and  whenever  Winthrop  comes  into  his  hands,  he  will  make  a 
different  sort  of place of it,  and  live  in  a  very  different  sort  of way;  and 
with that property,  he will never be a contemptible man.  Good,  freehold 
property.7  No,  no; Henrietta  might do worse than  marry Charles  Hayter; 
and  if she  has  him,  and  Louisa  can  get Captain  Wentworth,  I shall  be 
very well satisfied." 
"Charles  may  say  what  he  pleases," cried  Mary  to  Anne,  as  soon  as 
he  was  out  of the  room,  "but  it  would  be  shocking  to  have  Henrietta 
marry  Charles  Hayter;  a  very  bad  thing  for  her,  and  still  worse  for  me; 
7.  Property held for life. 
52 
CHAPTER 
IX 
and  therefore  it is very much  to be wished that Captain  Wentworth  may 
soon  put  him  quite  out  of her  head,  and  I have  very little doubt  that  he 
has.  She took hardly  any  notice of Charles  Hayter  yesterday.  I wish  you 
had  been  there  to  see  her  behaviour.  And  as  to  Captain  Wentworth's 
liking  Louisa  as  well  as  Henrietta,  it  is  nonsense  to  say  so; for  he  cer02
tainly does  like Henrietta  a great deal the best.  But Charles is so positive! 
I wish you  had  been  with  us yesterday,  for then  you  might  have decided 
between  us; and  I am  sure  you  would  have  thought  as I did,  unless you 
had  been  determined  to give it against  me. " 
A  dinner  at  Mr.  Musgrove's  had  been  the  occasion, when  all  these 
things should  have been seen by Anne; but she had  staid at home,  under 
the  mixed plea of a head-ache  of her own,  and  some return of indisposi02
tion  in  little Charles.  She had  thought  only  of avoiding  Captain  Went02
worth;  but  an  escape from  being appealed  to as umpire,  was now added 
to the  advantages  of a quiet  evening. 
As  to  Captain  Wentworth's  views,  she  deemed  it  of  more  conse02
quence  that  he  should  know  his  own  mind,  early  enough  not  to  be 
endangering  the  happiness  of either  sister,  or  impeaching  his own  hon02
our,  than  that  he  should  prefer  Henrietta  to Louisa, or Louisa to  Henri02
etta.  Either of them  would,  in all probability,  make him  an  affectionate, 
good-humoured  wife.  With  regard  to Charles  Hayter,  she  had delicacy 
which  must  be  pained  by  any  lightness  of conduct  in  a  well-meaning 
young  woman,  and  a  heart  to  sympathize  in  any  of the  sufferings  it 
occasioned; but  if Henrietta  found  herself  mistaken  in  the  nature  of her 
feelings,  the  alteration  could  not  be understood  too soon. 
Charles Hayter had  met with  much  to disquiet and  mortify  him  in his 
cousin's  behaviour.  She  had  too  old  a  regard  for  him  to  be  so  wholly 
estranged,  as  might  in  two  meetings  extinguish  every  past  hope,  and 
leave him  nothing to do but to keep away from  Uppercross; but there was 
such  a  change  as  became very  alarming,  when  such  a  man  as  Captain 
Wentworth  was to be regarded  as the probable cause. He had been absent 
only two  Sundays; and  when  they parted,  had  left  her  interested  even  to 
the  height  of  his  wishes,  in  his  prospect  of  soon  quitting  his  present 
curacy, and  obtaining that of Uppercross instead.  It had then  seemed the 
object  nearest her  heart,  that  Dr.  Shirley,  the  rector, who for more  than 
forty years had  been  zealously discharging all the duties of his office,  but 
was now growing  too infirm  for many  of them,  should  be quite  fixed  on 
engaging  a  curate;  should  make  his  curacy  quite  as  good  as  he  could 
afford,  and  should  give Charles Hayter the promise of it. The  advantage 
of  his  having  to  come  only  to  Uppercross,  instead  of going  six  miles 
another  way;  of  his  having,  in  every  respect,  a  better  curacy;  of  his 
belonging to their dear Dr.  Shirley, and of dear,  good Dr.  Shirley's being 
relieved  from  the  duty  which  he  could  no  longer  get  through  without 
most  injurious  fatigue,  had  been  a  great  deal,  even  to  Louisa,  but  had 
been almost every thing to Henrietta.  When  he came back, alas! the zeal 
CHAPTER 
IX 
53 
of the business was gone by.  Louisa could  not listen at all to his account 
of  a  conversation  which  he  had  just  held  with  Dr.  Shirley: she  was  at 
[the] window,  looking  out  for  Captain  Wentworth;  and  even  Henrietta 
had at best only a divided  attention to give, and  seemed to have  forgotten 
all the former doubt  and  solicitude of the négociation. 
"Well,  I am  very glad  indeed,  but  I always  thought  you  would  have 
it; I always thought  you sure.  It did  not appear  to me that―In  short,  you 
know,  Dr.  Shirley must  have a curate,  and  you had secured his promise. 
Is he coming,  Louisa?" 
One  morning,  very soon  after  the  dinner  at  the  Musgroves,  at  which 
Anne  had  not  been  present,  Captain  Wentworth  walked  into the  draw02
ing-room  at  the  Cottage,  where  were  only  herself  and  the  little  invalid 
Charles,  who was lying on  the  sofa. 
The  surprise  of  finding  himself  almost  alone  with  Anne  Elliot, 
deprived  his  manners  of their  usual  composure:  he  started,  and  could 
only  say,  "I  thought  the  Miss  Musgroves  had  been  here―Mrs.  Mus02
grove told  me I should  find  them  here," before he walked to the  window 
to recollect himself,  and  feel  how  he  ought  to behave. 
"They  are  up  stairs  with  my  sister―they  will  be  down  in  a  few 
moments,  I dare say,"―had  been Anne's reply,  in all the confusion  that 
was  natural;  and  if the  child  had  not  called her  to  come  and  do  some02
thing  for  him,  she would  have  been  out  of the  room  the  next  moment, 
and  released Captain  Wentworth  as well as herself. 
He  continued  at the  window;  and  after  calmly and  politely saying,  "I 
hope  the little boy is better," was silent. 
She was obliged to kneel down  by the sofa, and  remain  there to satisfy 
her  patient;  and  thus  they  continued  a  few  minutes,  when,  to  her  very 
great  satisfaction,  she  heard  some  other  person  crossing the  little vesti02
bule.  She hoped,  on  turning  her  head,  to  see the  master  of the  house; 
but  it proved  to be  one  much  less calculated for making  matters  easy― 
Charles Hayter,  probably not at all better pleased by the sight of Captain 
Wentworth,  than  Captain  Wentworth  had  been  by the  sight of Anne. 
She  only attempted  to  say,  "How  do  you  do? Will  not  you  sit  down? 
The  others will be here  presently." 
Captain  Wentworth,  however,  came from  his window,  apparently  not 
ill-disposed  for conversation; but  Charles  Hayter  soon  put  an  end  to  his 
attempts,  by seating himself near the table, and taking up the  newspaper; 
and  Captain  Wentworth  returned  to his  window. 
Another  minute  brought  another  addition.  The  younger  boy,  a 
remarkable  stout,  forward  child,  of two  years  old,  having  got  the  door 
opened  for him  by some one without,  made  his determined  appearance 
among  them,  and  went  straight  to  the  sofa  to  see  what  was  going  on, 
and  put  in his claim to any thing  good that  might be giving away. 
There  being nothing  to be eat,  he  could  only have  some play; and  as 
his  aunt  would  not  let  him  teaze  his  sick  brother,  he  began  to  fasten 
54 
CHAPTER  X 
himself  upon  her,  as  she  knelt,  in  such  a  way  that,  busy  as  she  was 
about Charles, she could not shake him  off. She spoke to  him―ordered, 
intreated,  and  insisted in vain.  Once she did contrive to push him away, 
but  the  boy  had  the  greater  pleasure  in  getting  upon  her  back  again 
directly. 
"Walter,"  said  she,  "get down  this  moment.  You are  extremely trou02
blesome.  I am  very angry with  you." 
"Walter,"  cried  Charles  Hayter,  "why  do  you  not  do  as you  are bid? 
Do  not  you  hear  your  aunt  speak?  Come  to  me,  Walter,  come  to 
cousin  Charles." 
But  not  a bit did  Walter stir. 
In  another  moment,  however,  she found  herself  in  the  state of being 
released  from  him;  some  one  was  taking  him  from  her,  though  he  had 
bent  down  her  head  so  much,  that  his  little sturdy  hands  were  unfast02
ened  from  around  her  neck,  and  he  was  resolutely  borne  away,  before 
she knew that  Captain  Wentworth  had  done  it. 
Her  sensations  on  the  discovery  made  her  perfectly  speechless.  She 
could not even thank him.  She could only hang over little Charles, with 
most disordered  feelings. His kindness in stepping forward  to her relief― 
the  manner―the  silence in  which  it  had  passed―the  little  particulars 
of  the  circumstance―with  the  conviction  soon  forced  on  her  by  the 
noise  he  was  studiously  making  with  the  child,  that  he  meant  to avoid 
hearing her thanks,  and  rather sought to testify that her conversation was 
the  last  of  his  wants,  produced  such  a  confusion  of varying,  but  very 
painful  agitation,  as  she  could  not  recover  from,  till  enabled  by  the 
entrance of Mary and  the  Miss Musgroves to make over her little patient 
to  their  cares,  and  leave  the  room.  She  could  not  stay.  It  might  have 
been  an  opportunity  of watching  the  loves  and  jealousies of the  four; 
they  were  now  all  together,  but  she  could  stay  for  none  of  it.  It  was 
evident  that  Charles  Hayter  was  not  well  inclined  towards  Captain 
Wentworth.  She  had  a  strong  impression  of his  having  said,  in  a vext 
tone  of voice,  after  Captain  Wentworth's  interference,  "You ought  to 
have  minded  me,  Walter; I told  you  not  to teaze your  aunt;" and  could 
comprehend  his  regretting  that  Captain  Wentworth  should  do  what  he 
ought  to  have  done  himself.  But neither  Charles  Hayter's  feelings,  nor 
any body's feelings, could interest her,  till she had a little better arranged 
her  own.  She  was  ashamed  of herself,  quite  ashamed  of being  so  ner02
vous,  so overcome by such  a  trifle; but  so it was; and  it required  a  long 
application  of solitude and  reflection to recover her. 
Chapter  X 
Other  opportunities  of  making  her  observations  could  not  fail  to 
occur.  Anne  had  soon been  in  company with  all the four  together  often 
CHAPTER  X 
55 
enough  to have an  opinion,  though  too wise to acknowledge as much  at 
home,  where she knew it would  have satisfied neither husband  nor wife; 
for while she considered  Louisa to be rather  the favourite,  she could  not 
but  think,  as  far  as  she  might  dare  to  judge  from  memory  and  experi02
ence,  that  Captain  Wentworth  was  not  in  love  with  either.  They  were 
more  in  love with  him;  yet  there  it  was  not  love.  It was  a  little fever of 
admiration; but  it might,  probably must,  end  in love with  some.  Charles 
Hayter seemed aware of being slighted, and  yet Henrietta  had  sometimes 
the  air  of being  divided  between  them.  Anne  longed  for  the  power  of 
representing  to them  all what they were about,  and  of pointing  out  some 
of the evils they were exposing themselves to.  She did  not attribute  guile 
to  any.  It was  the  highest  satisfaction  to  her,  to  believe Captain  Went02
worth  not  in  the  least aware  of the  pain  he  was occasioning. There  was 
no triumph,  no pitiful  triumph  in  his manner.  He had,  probably,  never 
heard,  and  never thought  of any claims of Charles Hayter.  He was only 
wrong  in  accepting the  attentions―(for  accepting  must  be  the  word) of 
two young  women  at once. 
After  a  short  struggle,  however,  Charles  Hayter  seemed  to  quit  the 
field.  Three  days  had  passed  without  his coming  once  to  Uppercross; a 
most  decided  change.  He  had  even  refused  one  regular  invitation  to 
dinner;  and  having  been  found  on  the  occasion by  Mr.  Musgrove  with 
some  large  books  before  him,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Musgrove  were  sure  all 
could  not  be  right,  and  talked,  with  grave  faces,  of his studying  himself 
to death.  It was  Mary's  hope  and  belief,  that  he  had  received a  positive 
dismissal  from  Henrietta,  and  her  husband  lived  under  the  constant 
dépendance  of seeing him to-morrow.  Anne could only feel that  Charles 
Hayter was wise. 
One morning,  about this time, Charles Musgrove and  Captain  Went02
worth  being gone  a  shooting  together,  as the  sisters in  the  cottage  were 
sitting  quietly  at  work,  they  were  visited  at  the  window  by  the  sisters 
from  the  mansion-house. 
It  was  a  very  fine  November  day,  and  the  Miss  Musgroves  came 
through  the little grounds,  and  stopped  for no other purpose  than  to say, 
that they were going to take a long  walk, and,  therefore,  concluded  Mary 
could  not  like  to  go  with  them;  and  when  Mary  immediately  replied, 
with  some  jealousy,  at  not  being  supposed  a  good  walker,  "Oh,  yes,  I 
should  like to join you very much,  I am  very fond  of a long walk," Anne 
felt  persuaded,  by  the  looks  of the  two  girls,  that  it  was  precisely  what 
they  did  not  wish,  and  admired8  again  the  sort  of necessity which  the 
family-habits  seemed  to produce,  of every thing  being  to  be  communi02
cated,  and  every  thing  being  to  be  done  together,  however  undesired 
and  inconvenient.  She tried  to  dissuade  Mary  from  going,  but  in  vain; 
and  that  being  the  case,  thought  it  best  to  accept the  Miss Musgroves' 
8.  Wondered at. 
56 
CHAPTER  X 
much  more  cordial  invitation  to  herself  to go likewise, as she  might  be 
useful  in  turning back with  her  sister,  and  lessening the  interference  in 
any plan  of their  own. 
"I  cannot  imagine  why  they  should  suppose  I should  not  like a  long 
walk!" said  Mary,  as she went  up  stairs.  "Every body  is always  supposing 
that  I am  not a good walker! And  yet they would  not have been  pleased, 
if  we  had  refused  to  join  them.  When  people  come  in  this  manner  on 
purpose to ask us,  how  can  one  say no?" 
Just as they were  setting off,  the  gentlemen  returned.  They had  taken 
out  a  young  dog,  who  had  spoilt their  sport,  and  sent  them  back early. 
Their  time  and  strength,  and  spirits,  were,  therefore,  exactly ready  for 
this walk,  and  they entered  into it with  pleasure.  Could Anne have fore02
seen  such  a  junction,  she  would  have  staid  at  home;  but,  from  some 
feelings  of interest  and  curiosity,  she fancied  now  that  it was too late to 
retract,  and  the  whole  six set  forward  together  in  the  direction  chosen 
by  the  Miss  Musgroves,  who  evidently  considered  the  walk  as  under 
their  guidance. 
Anne's  object  was,  not  to  be  in  the  way  of any  body,  and  where  the 
narrow  paths across the  fields  made  many  separations  necessary, to keep 
with  her brother  and  sister.  Her  pleasure  in the walk must  arise from  the 
exercise  and  the  day,  from  the  view  of the  last smiles of the  year  upon 
the  tawny  leaves  and  withered  hedges,  and  from  repeating  to  herself 
some  few  of the  thousand  poetical  descriptions  extant  of autumn,  that 
season of peculiar  and  inexhaustible influence  on  the  mind  of taste  and 
tenderness,  that  season  which  has  drawn  from  every  poet,  worthy  of 
being  read,  some  attempt  at  description,  or  some  lines  of feeling.  She 
occupied  her  mind  as much  as possible in  such  like musings and  quota02
tions; but  it was not  possible, that  when  within  reach  of Captain  Went02
worth's  conversation  with  either  of the  Miss Musgroves,  she should  not 
try  to  hear  it;  yet  she  caught  little  very  remarkable.  It  was  mere  lively 
chat,―such  as  any  young  persons,  on  an  intimate  footing,  might  fall 
into.  He  was  more  engaged  with  Louisa  than  with  Henrietta.  Louisa 
certainly put  more forward  for his notice than her sister. This distinction 
appeared  to increase, and  there was one speech of Louisa's which  struck 
her.  After  one  of the  many  praises  of the  day,  which  were  continually 
bursting  forth,  Captain  Wentworth  added, 
"What  glorious  weather  for  the  Admiral  and  my  sister! They  meant 
to take a long drive  this morning; perhaps we may hail them  from  some 
of  these  hills.  They  talked  of  coming  into  this  side  of the  country.  I 
wonder  whereabouts  they  will  upset  to-day.  Oh!  it  does  happen  very 
often,  I  assure  you―but  my  sister  makes  nothing  of it―she  would  as 
lieve be tossed out  as not. " 
"Ah! You make  the  most  of it,  I know,"  cried  Louisa,  "but  if it were 
really so,  I should  do  just the  same in  her place. If I loved a man,  as she 
loves  the  Admiral,  I  would  be  always  with  him,  nothing  should  ever 
CHAPTER  X 
57 
separate us,  and  I would  rather be overturned  by him,  than driven  safely 
by anybody  else." 
It was spoken with  enthusiasm. 
"Had  you?" cried  he,  catching  the  same  tone;  "I  honour  you!"  And 
there was silence between  them  for a little while. 
Anne  could  not  immediately  fall  into  a  quotation  again.  The  sweet 
scenes  of autumn  were  for  a while put  by―unless  some tender  sonnet, 
fraught  with  the apt analogy of the declining year, with declining  happi02
ness,  and  the  images of youth  and  hope,  and  spring,  all gone  together, 
blessed  her  memory.  She  roused  herself  to  say,  as  they  struck  by  order 
into another path, "Is not this one of the ways to Winthrop?" But nobody 
heard,  or,  at least,  nobody  answered  her. 
Winthrop,  however,  or its environs―for young  men  are, sometimes, 
to  be  met  with,  strolling  about  near  home,  was  their  destination;  and 
after  another  half mile of gradual  ascent through large enclosures, where 
the ploughs at work, and  the  fresh-made  path spoke the farmer,  counter02
acting the  sweets of poetical despondence,  and  meaning  to  have  spring 
again,  they  gained  the  summit  of  the  most  considerable  hill,  which 
parted  Uppercross  and  Winthrop,  and  soon  commanded  a  full  view of 
the  latter,  at the foot of the  hill  on  the  other side. 
Winthrop,  without  beauty  and  without  dignity,  was  stretched  before 
them;  an  indifferent  house,  standing  low,  and  hemmed  in  by the  barns 
and  buildings  of a  farm-yard. 
Mary  exclaimed,  "Bless  me!  here  is  Winthrop―I  declare  I  had  no 
idea!―well,  now I think we had better turn back; I am excessively tired." 
Henrietta,  conscious  and  ashamed,  and  seeing  no  cousin  Charles 
walking along  any  path,  or leaning  against any  gate,  was  ready  to  do  as 
Mary  wished;  but  "No,"  said  Charles  Musgrove,  and  "No,  no,"  cried 
Louisa  more  eagerly,  and  taking  her  sister aside,  seemed  to  be  arguing 
the  matter  warmly. 
Charles,  in  the  meanwhile,  was  very  decidedly  declaring  his  resolu02
tion  of calling on  his aunt,  now that  he was so near; and  very evidently, 
though  more  fearfully,  trying  to  induce  his wife to go too.  But this  was 
one  of the  points  on  which  the  lady shewed  her  strength,  and  when  he 
recommended  the  advantage  of resting  herself  a  quarter  of an  hour  at 
Winthrop,  as  she  felt  so  tired,  she  resolutely  answered,  "Oh!  no, 
indeed!―walking  up  that  hill  again  would  do  her  more  harm  than  any 
sitting down  could  do  her  good;"―and,  in  short,  her  look and  manner 
declared,  that  go she would  not. 
After  a  little  succession  of these  sort  of debates  and  consultations,  it 
was settled between  Charles and  his two sisters, that  he,  and  Henrietta, 
should  just run  down  for a  few  minutes,  to  see their  aunt  and  cousins, 
while the  rest of the  party  waited  for them  at the  top  of the  hill. Louisa 
seemed  the  principal  arranger  of the  plan;  and,  as she  went  a  little way 
with  them,  down  the  hill,  still  talking  to  Henrietta,  Mary  took  the 
58 
CHAPTER  X 
opportunity  of  looking  scornfully  around  her,  and  saying  to  Captain 
Wentworth, 
"It  is  very  unpleasant,  having  such  connexions! But  I  assure  you,  I 
have  never  been  in  the  house  above twice in  my  life. " 
She  received no  other  answer,  than  an  artificial, assenting smile,  fol02
lowed  by a  contemptuous  glance,  as he  turned  away,  which  Anne  per02
fectly  knew the  meaning  of. 
The  brow of the  hill, where they  remained,  was a cheerful  spot; Lou02
isa returned,  and  Mary  finding  a comfortable seat for herself, on the step 
of a stile, was very well satisfied so long as the others all stood about  her; 
but  when  Louisa drew Captain  Wentworth  away,  to try for a gleaning of 
nuts  in  an  adjoining  hedge-row,  and  they  were  gone  by  degrees  quite 
out  of sight  and  sound,  Mary was happy  no  longer; she quarrelled  with 
her  own  seat,―was  sure  Louisa  had  got  a  much  better  somewhere,― 
and  nothing  could  prevent  her  from  going to look for a better also.  She 
turned  through  the  same gate,―but  could  not  see them.―Anne  found 
a nice seat for her,  on  a dry sunny  bank,  under the hedge-row,  in which 
she  had  no  doubt  of their  still  being―in  some  spot  or  other.  Mary  sat 
down  for a moment,  but  it would  not do; she was sure Louisa had  found 
a better seat somewhere  else,  and  she would  go on,  till she overtook her. 
Anne,  really  tired  herself,  was  glad  to  sit  down;  and  she  very  soon 
heard  Captain  Wentworth  and  Louisa in  the  hedge-row,  behind  her,  as 
if  making  their  way  back,  along  the  rough,  wild  sort  of channel,  down 
the  centre.  They  were  speaking  as  they  drew  near.  Louisa's  voice was 
the  first  distinguished.  She  seemed  to  be  in  the  middle  of some  eager 
speech.  What Anne first heard  was, 
"And so, I made  her go.  I could not bear that she should be  frightened 
from  the  visit by such  nonsense.  What!―would  I be turned  back  from 
doing  a thing  that  I had  determined  to do,  and  that  I knew  to be  right, 
by the  airs and  interference  of such  a  person?―or,  of any person  I may 
say.  No,―I  have  no  idea  of being  so  easily  persuaded.  When  I  have 
made  up  my  mind,  I  have  made  it.  And  Henrietta  seemed  entirely  to 
have  made  up  hers to call  at Winthrop  to-day―and  yet, she was as near 
giving it up,  out  of nonsensical complaisance!" 
"She  would  have turned  back then,  but  for you?" 
"She  would  indeed.  I am  almost ashamed  to say it." 
"Happy  for  her,  to  have  such  a  mind  as  yours  at  hand!―After  the 
hints  you  gave  just now,  which  did  but  confirm  my  own  observations, 
the  last  time  I was  in  company  with  him,  I need  not  affect  to  have  no 
comprehension  of what  is going on.  I see that  more than  a mere  dutiful 
morning-visit  to  your  aunt  was  in  question;―and  woe betide  him,  and 
her  too,  when  it comes to things  of consequence,  when  they are placed 
in  circumstances,  requiring  fortitude  and  strength  of mind,  if she  have 
not  resolution  enough  to  resist idle  interference  in  such  a trifle  as this. 
Your  sister is an  amiable creature; but  yours  is the  character of decision 
CHAPTER  X 
59 
and  firmness,  I  see.  If you  value  her  conduct  or  happiness,  infuse  as 
much  of your  own  spirit  into  her,  as you  can.  But this,  no  doubt,  you 
have been always doing.  It is the worst evil of too yielding and  indecisive 
a  character,  that  no  influence  over  it  can  be  depended  on.―You  are 
never sure  of a good  impression  being durable.  Every body  may sway it; 
let those who  would  be happy be  firm.―Here  is a  nut,"  said  he,  catch02
ing one down from  an  upper bough.  "To exemplify,―a beautiful  glossy 
nut,  which,  blessed with  original strength,  has outlived  all the  storms of 
autumn.  Not  a  puncture,  not  a  weak  spot  any  where.―This  nut,"  he 
continued,  with playful  solemnity,―"while so many of its brethren  have 
fallen  and  been trodden under foot,  is still in possession of all the  happi02
ness  that  a  hazel-nut  can  be  supposed  capable  of. " Then,  returning  to 
his former earnest tone: "My first wish  for all, whom  I am  interested  in, 
is that  they  should  be  firm.  If Louisa Musgrove would  be  beautiful  and 
happy  in  her  November  of life,  she  will  cherish  all  her  present  powers 
of  mind." 
He  had  done,―and  was unanswered.  It would  have  surprised  Anne, 
if  Louisa  could  have  readily  answered  such  a  speech―words  of  such 
interest,  spoken  with  such  serious  warmth!―she  could  imagine  what 
Louisa  was feeling.  For herself―she  feared  to  move,  lest she  should  be 
seen.  While she  remained,  a bush  of low rambling  holly protected  her, 
and  they  were  moving  on.  Before  they  were  beyond  her  hearing,  how02
ever,  Louisa spoke again. 
"Mary  is good-natured  enough  in  many  respects," said  she; "but  she 
does sometimes provoke  me  excessively,  by her  nonsense and  her  pride; 
the  Elliot pride.  She has a great deal too much  of the  Elliot  pride.―We 
do so wish that Charles had  married Anne instead.―I suppose you know 
he wanted  to marry Anne?" 
After  a moment's  pause,  Captain  Wentworth  said, 
"Do you  mean  that  she refused  him?" 
"Oh! yes, certainly." 
"When  did  that  happen?" 
"I do not exactly know,  for Henrietta  and  I were at school at the time; 
but  I  believe  about  a  year  before  he  married  Mary.  I  wish  she  had 
accepted him.  We should  all have liked her a great deal better; and  papa 
and  mamma  always  think  it was  her  great  friend  Lady  Russell's doing, 
that she did  not.―They think Charles might not be learned and bookish 
enough  to please Lady Russell, and  that  therefore,  she persuaded  Anne 
to refuse  him." 
The  sounds  were  retreating,  and  Anne  distinguished  no  more.  Her 
own emotions still kept her  fixed.  She had  much  to recover from,  before 
she  could  move.  T he  listener's  proverbial  fate  was  not  absolutely  hers; 
she  had  heard  no  evil  of  herself,―but  she  had  heard  a  great  deal  of 
very painful  import.  She saw how  her  own  character was considered by 
Captain  Wentworth;  and  there  had  been  just that  degree  of feeling  and 
60 
CHAPTER  X 
curiosity  about  her  in  his  manner,  which  must  give  her  extreme  agi02
tation. 
As  soon  as  she  could,  she  went  after  Mary,  and  having  found,  and 
walked back with  her to their former station,  by the stile,  felt some com02
fort  in  their  whole  party  being  immediately  afterwards  collected,  and 
once  more  in  motion  together.  Her  spirits  wanted  the  solitude  and 
silence which  only numbers  could give. 
Charles  and  Henrietta  returned,  bringing,  as  may  be  conjectured, 
Charles Hayter with them.  The minutiae of the business Anne could  not 
attempt  to understand; even  Captain  Wentworth  did  not seem  admitted 
to perfect confidence here; but that there  had  been a withdrawing  on  the 
gentleman's  side,  and  a  relenting  on  the  lady's,  and  that  they were  now 
very glad  to  be together  again,  did  not  admit  a doubt.  Henrietta  looked 
a  little  ashamed,  but  very  well  pleased;―Charles  Hayter  exceedingly 
happy,  and  they were devoted  to each other almost from  the first instant 
of their all setting forward  for  Uppercross. 
Every thing  now  marked  out  Louisa for Captain  Wentworth;  nothing 
could  be  plainer;  and  where  many  divisions  were  necessary,  or  even 
where  they  were  not,  they  walked  side  by  side,  nearly  as  much  as  the 
other two.  In a long strip of meadow-land,  where there was ample space 
for  all,  they  were  thus  divided―forming  three  distinct  parties;  and  to 
that party of the three which boasted least animation,  and  least complai02
sance,  Anne  necessarily belonged.  She  joined  Charles  and  Mary,  and 
was tired  enough  to  be  very glad  of Charles's other  arm;―but  Charles, 
though  in  very good  humour  with  her,  was out  of temper  with  his wife. 
Mary  had  shewn  herself  disobliging  to  him,  and  was  now  to  reap  the 
consequence,  which  consequence  was  his  dropping  her  arm  almost 
every moment,  to cut off the  heads  of some nettles in the hedge with  his 
switch; and  when  Mary began  to  complain  of it,  and  lament  her  being 
ill-used,  according to  custom,  in  being  on  the  hedge  side,  while  Anne 
was  never  incommoded  on  the  other,  he  dropped  the  arms  of both  to 
hunt after a weasel which he had  a momentary glance of; and they could 
hardly  get him  along at all. 
This  long  meadow  bordered  a  lane,  which  their  footpath,  at  the  end 
of  it,  was  to  cross; and  when  the  party  had  all  reached  the  gate  of exit, 
the  carriage  advancing  in  the  same  direction,  which  had  been  some 
time heard,  was just coming up,  and  proved  to be Admiral Croft's gig.― 
He  and  his  wife  had  taken  their  intended  drive,  and  were  returning 
home.  Upon  hearing  how  long  a  walk  the  young  people  had  engaged 
in,  they kindly offered  a seat to any lady who  might be particularly  tired; 
it would  save  her  full  a  mile,  and  they  were going through  Uppercross. 
The  invitation  was  general,  and  generally  declined.  The  Miss  Mus02
groves were  not  at all tired,  and  Mary was either offended,  by not  being 
asked  before  any  of the  others,  or  what  Louisa  called  the  Elliot  pride 
could  not endure to  make a third  in  a one horse chaise. 
CHAPTER  X 
61 
The  walking-party  had  crossed  the  lane,  and  were  surmounting  an 
opposite  stile; and  the  admiral  was putting his horse  into  motion  again, 
when  Captain  Wentworth  cleared the  hedge  in  a  moment  to say some02
thing to his sister.―The something  might be guessed by its  effects. 
"Miss  Elliot,  I  am  sure  you  are  tired,"  cried  Mrs.  Croft.  "Do  let  us 
have the pleasure  of taking you  home.  Here  is excellent room  for  three, 
I  assure  you.  If we were  all like you,  I believe we might  sit four.―You 
must,  indeed,  you  must." 
Anne  was  still  in  the  lane;  and  though  instinctively  beginning  to 
decline,  she  was  not  allowed  to  proceed.  The  admiral's  kind  urgency 
came  in  support  of  his  wife's;  they  would  not  be  refused;  they  com02
pressed themselves into the smallest possible space to leave her a corner, 
and  Captain  Wentworth,  without  saying  a  word,  turned  to  her,  and 
quietly obliged her to be assisted into the carriage. 
Yes,―he  had  done  it.  She was  in  the  carriage,  and  felt  that  he  had 
placed  her there,  that  his will and  his hands had  done  it,  that  she  owed 
it  to  his  perception  of her  fatigue,  and  his  resolution  to  give  her  rest. 
She  was  very  much  affected  by  the  view  of his  disposition  towards  her 
which  all  these  things  made  apparent.  This little circumstance seemed 
the  completion  of all  that  had  gone  before.  She  understood  him.  He 
could  not  forgive  her,―but  he  could  not  be  unfeeling.  Though  con02
demning her for the past,  and  considering it with high and unjust  resent02
ment,  though  perfectly careless of9  her,  and  though  becoming attached 
to another,  still he  could  not  see her  suffer,  without  the  desire of giving 
her  relief.  It was a  remainder  of former  sentiment;  it was an  impulse of 
pure,  though  unacknowledged  friendship;  it  was  a  proof  of  his  own 
warm  and  amiable  heart,  which  she  could  not  contemplate  without 
emotions  so  compounded  of  pleasure  and  pain,  that  she  knew  not 
which  prevailed. 
Her answers to the  kindness and  the  remarks  of her companions  were 
at first unconsciously given.  They had  travelled  half  their way along  the 
rough  lane,  before  she  was  quite  awake  to  what  they  said.  She  then 
found  them  talking of "Frederick. " 
"He  certainly means  to have  one  or other  of those  two girls,  Sophy," 
said  the  admiral;―"but  there  is no  saying which.  He  has been  running 
after  them,  too,  long  enough,  one  would  think,  to  make  up  his  mind. 
Ay,  this comes of the  peace.  If it were war,  now,  he  would  have  settled 
it long ago.―We sailors, Miss Elliot,  cannot afford  to make long  court02
ships  in  time  of war.  How  many  days  was it,  my dear,  between  the  first 
time of my seeing you,  and  our  sitting down  together  in  our  lodgings  at 
North Yarmouth?" 
"We  had  better not talk about  it,  my dear,"  replied  Mrs. Croft,  pleas02
antly; "for  if Miss  Elliot  were  to  hear  how  soon  we  came  to  an  under-
9.  Not caring for. 
62 
CHAPTER  XI 
standing,  she  would  never  be  persuaded  that  we  could  be  happy 
together.  I had  known  you  by character, however,  long before." 
"Well,  and  I had  heard  of you  as a very pretty  girl; and  what were we 
to wait for besides?―I do  not  like having  such things  so long in hand.  I 
wish  Frederick would  spread  a  little  more  canvas,1  and  bring  us  home 
one  of these  young  ladies  to  Kellynch.  Then,  there  would  always  be 
company for them.―And  very nice young  ladies they both  are; I  hardly 
know one  from  the  other. " 
"Very  good  humoured,  unaffected  girls,  indeed,"  said Mrs.  Croft,  in 
a  tone  of calmer  praise,  such  as  made  Anne  suspect  that  her  keener 
powers  might not consider either of them  as quite worthy of her  brother; 
"and  a very respectable family.  One  could  not be connected with  better 
people.―My dear admiral,  that post!―we shall certainly take that post." 
But  by  coolly  giving the  reins  a  better direction  herself,  they  happily 
passed  the  danger;  and  by  once  afterwards  judiciously  putting  out  her 
hand,  they neither fell  into a rut,  nor ran  foul of a dung-cart;  and  Anne, 
with  some  amusement  at  their  style of driving,  which  she  imagined  no 
bad  representation  of the  general guidance  of their affairs,  found  herself 
safely  deposited  by them  at the cottage. 
Chapter XI 
The  time  now approached  for Lady Russell's return; the day was even 
fixed,  and  Anne,  being engaged  to  join  her as soon  as she was resettled, 
was  looking forward  to  an  early  removal  to  Kellynch, and  beginning  to 
think  how  her  own  comfort was likely to be affected by it. 
It  would  place  her  in  the  same  village  with  Captain  Wentworth, 
within  half a mile of him; they would  have to  frequent  the same church, 
and  there  must  be  intercourse  between  the  two  families.  This  was 
against  her;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  he  spent  so  much  of his  time  at 
Uppercross,  that  in  removing  thence  she  might  be  considered  rather  as 
leaving him  behind,  than  as going  towards  him;  and,  upon  the  whole, 
she believed she must,  on this interesting question,  be the gainer, almost 
as certainly as  in  her  change  of domestic society, in  leaving poor  Mary 
for  Lady Russell. 
She  wished  it  might  be  possible for  her  to  avoid  ever  seeing  Captain 
Wentworth  at  the  hall;―those  rooms  had  witnessed  former  meetings 
which  would  be  brought  too painfully  before her; but  she was yet  more 
anxious for the possibility of Lady Russell and Captain Wentworth  never 
meeting  any  where.  They  did  not  like  each  other,  and  no  renewal  of 
acquaintance  now  could  do  any  good;  and  were  Lady  Russell  to  see 
1.  Put up more or bigger sails, move faster. 
CHAPTER  XI 
63 
them  together,  she  might  think  that  he  had  too  much  self-possession, 
and  she too little. 
These  points  formed  her  chief  solicitude  in  anticipating  her  removal 
from  Uppercross,  where  she  felt  she  had  been  stationed  quite  long 
enough.  Her  usefulness  to little Charles would  always give some  sweet02
ness  to  the  memory  of her  two  months  visit there,  but  he  was  gaining 
strength  apace,  and  she had  nothing  else to stay for. 
The  conclusion of her  visit,  however,  was diversified  in  a way  which 
she  had  not  at  all  imagined.  Captain  Wentworth,  after  being  unseen 
and unheard of at Uppercross for two whole days, appeared  again  among 
them  to justify himself  by a relation  of what  had  kept him  away. 
A  letter  from  his  friend,  Captain  Harville,  having  found  him  out  at 
last, had  brought  intelligence of Captain  Harville's being settled with  his 
family  at  Lyme for  the  winter;  of their  being,  therefore,  quite  unknow02
ingly,  within  twenty  miles  of each  other.  Captain  Harville  had  never 
been  in  good  health  since a  severe wound  which  he  received two  years 
before,  and  Captain  Wentworth's  anxiety  to  see  him  had  determined 
him  to go immediately to Lyme. He had  been there for  four-and-twenty 
hours.  His  acquittal  was  complete,  his  friendship  warmly  honoured,  a 
lively interest excited for his  friend,  and  his description  of the  fine  coun02
try  about  Lyme  so  feelingly  attended  to  by  the  party,  that  an  earnest 
desire  to  see  Lyme  themselves,  and  a  project  for  going  thither  was  the 
consequence. 
The  young  people  were  all  wild  to  see  Lyme.  Captain  Wentworth 
talked  of going  there  again  himself;  it  was  only  seventeen  miles  from 
Uppercross; though  November,  the  weather  was by no  means bad;  and, 
in  short,  Louisa,  who  was  the  most  eager  of the  eager,  having  formed 
the resolution to go, and  besides the pleasure  of doing as she liked, being 
now  armed  with  the  idea  of merit  in  maintaining  her  own  way,  bore 
down  all  the  wishes of her  father  and  mother  for putting  it off till  sum02
mer;  and  to  Lyme  they  were  to  go―Charles,  Mary,  Anne,  Henrietta, 
Louisa,  and  Captain  Wentworth. 
The  first  heedless scheme had  been  to go in  the  morning  and  return 
at night,  but  to this Mr.  Musgrove, for the sake of his horses, would  not 
consent;  and  when  it  came  to  be  rationally  considered,  a  day  in  the 
middle of November would  not leave much  time for seeing a new place, 
after  deducting  seven  hours,  as  the  nature  of the  country  required,  for 
going  and  returning.  They  were  consequently  to  stay  the  night  there, 
and  not  to  be  expected  back till  the  next  day's  dinner.  This was  felt  to 
be  a  considerable  amendment;  and  though  they  all  met  at  the  Great 
House  at  rather  an  early  breakfast  hour,  and  set  off very  punctually,  it 
was so much  past  noon  before the  two carriages, Mr.  Musgrove's coach 
containing  the  four  ladies,  and  Charles's  curricle,  in  which  he  drove 
Captain  Wentworth,  were  descending  the  long  hill  into  Lyme,  and 
entering  upon  the  still  steeper  street  of the  town  itself,  that  it  was  very 
64 
CHAPTER  XI 
evident  they  would  not  have  more  than  time  for  looking  about  them, 
before  the  light and  warmth  of the  day were gone. 
After  securing  accommodations,  and  ordering  a dinner  at  one  of the 
inns,  the  next  thing  to  be  done  was  unquestionably  to  walk  directly 
down to the sea. They were come too late in the year for any  amusement 
or  variety  which  Lyme, as a public  place,  might  offer; the  rooms2  were 
shut  up,  the  lodgers  almost  all  gone,  scarcely  any  family  but  of  the 
residents  left―and,  as there  is nothing  to admire  in the buildings  them02
selves,  the  remarkable  situation  of the  town,  the  principal  street almost 
hurrying into the water,  the walk to the Cobb,3 skirting round the pleas02
ant  little  bay,  which  in  the  season  is animated  with  bathing  machines 
and  company,  the  Cobb  itself,  its old  wonders  and  new  improvements, 
with the very beautiful  line of cliffs  stretching out to the east of the  town, 
are  what  the  stranger's  eye will seek; and  a very strange  stranger  it  must 
be,  who  does  not  see  charms  in  the  immediate  environs  of Lyme,  to 
make  him  wish  to  know  it  better.  The  scenes  in  its  neighbourhood, 
Charmouth,  with  its high  grounds and  extensive sweeps of country,  and 
still more  its sweet retired  bay,  backed by dark  cliffs,  where fragments of 
low  rock  among  the  sands  make  it  the  happiest  spot  for  watching  the 
flow  of  the  tide,  for  sitting  in  unwearied  contemplation;―the  woody 
varieties of the cheerful  village of Up Lyme, and,  above all, Pinny,  with 
its green  chasms between  romantic rocks, where the scattered forest trees 
and  orchards  of luxuriant  growth  declare  that  many  a  generation  must 
have  passed  away  since  the  first  partial  falling  of the  cliff  prepared  the 
ground  for  such  a  state,  where  a  scene  so  wonderful  and  so  lovely  is 
exhibited,  as  may  more  than  equal  any  of the  resembling scenes of the 
far-famed  Isle of Wight: these  places must  be visited,  and  visited again, 
to make the  worth  of Lyme  understood. 
The  party  from  Uppercross  passing  down  by  the  now  deserted  and 
melancholy looking rooms, and  still descending,  soon found  themselves 
on  the  sea  shore,  and  lingering  only,  as  all  must  linger  and  gaze  on  a 
first return  to  the  sea,  who  ever  deserve  to  look on  it at  all,  proceeded 
towards  the  Cobb,  equally  their  object  in  itself  and  on  Captain  Went02
worth's  account;  for  in  a  small  house,  near  the  foot  of an  old  pier of 
unknown  date,  were the  Harvilles settled. Captain  Wentworth  turned in 
to  call  on  his  friend;  the  others  walked  on,  and  he  was to  join them  on 
the Cobb. 
They  were  by  no  means  tired  of wondering  and  admiring;  and  not 
even  Louisa  seemed  to  feel  that  they  had  parted  with  Captain  Went02
worth  long, when  they saw him  coming after them,  with  three  compan02
ions,  all  well  known  already  by  description  to  be  Captain  and  Mrs. 
Harville,  and  a Captain  Benwick, who  was staying with  them. 
Captain  Benwick had  some time ago been first lieutenant of the  Laco-
2.  The public assembly rooms. 
3.  A massive stone breakwater around the harbor. 
CHAPTER  XI 
65 
nia;  and  the  account  which  Captain  Wentworth  had  given  of him,  on 
his  return  from  Lyme  before;  his  warm  praise  of him  as  an  excellent 
young  man  and  an  officer,  whom  he  had  always  valued  highly,  which 
must  have  stamped  him  well  in  the  esteem  of every  listener,  had  been 
followed  by  a  little  history  of his  private  life,  which  rendered  him  per02
fectly  interesting  in  the  eyes of all  the  ladies.  He  had  been  engaged  to 
Captain  Harville's  sister,  and  was  now  mourning  her  loss.  They  had 
been  a  year  or  two  waiting  for  fortune  and  promotion.  Fortune  came, 
his  prize-money  as  lieutenant  being  great,―promotion,  too,  came  at 
last;  but  Fanny Harville did  not live to know it.  She had died the  preced02
ing summer,  while he was at sea. Captain  Wentworth  believed it impos02
sible  for  man  to  be  more  attached  to  woman  than  poor  Benwick  had 
been  to  Fanny  Harville,  or to be more deeply afflicted  under the  dread02
ful  change.  He  considered  his  disposition  as  of  the  sort  which  must 
suffer  heavily,  uniting  very strong feelings with  quiet,  serious,  and  retir02
ing manners,  and  a decided taste for reading,  and  sedentary  pursuits.  To 
finish  the  interest of the  story,  the  friendship  between  him  and  the  Har-
villes seemed,  if possible,  augmented  by the event which  closed all their 
views  of  alliance,  and  Captain  Benwick  was  now  living  with  them 
entirely.  Captain  Harville  had  taken  his  present  house  for  half  a  year, 
his taste,  and  his health,  and  his fortune  all directing him  to a residence 
unexpensive,  and  by the  sea; and  the  grandeur  of the  country,  and  the 
retirement  of Lyme  in  the  winter,  appeared  exactly adapted  to  Captain 
Benwick's  state  of mind.  The  sympathy  and  good-will  excited  towards 
Captain  Benwick was very great. 
"And  yet," said  Anne  to  herself,  as they  now  moved  forward  to  meet 
the  party,  "he  has  not,  perhaps,  a  more  sorrowing  heart  than  I  have.  I 
cannot  believe his  prospects  so blighted  for  ever.  He  is younger  than  I 
am;  younger  in  feeling,  if not  in  fact;  younger  as  a  man.  He  will  rally 
again,  and  be happy  with  another." 
They  all  met,  and  were  introduced.  Captain  Harville was a tall,  dark 
man,  with  a  sensible,  benevolent  countenance; a  little  lame; and  from 
strong  features,  and  want  of health,  looking  much  older  than  Captain 
Wentworth.  Captain  Benwick looked and  was the youngest of the  three, 
and,  compared  with  either  of  them,  a  little  man.  He  had  a  pleasing 
face  and  a  melancholy  air,  just  as  he  ought  to  have,  and  drew  back 
from  conversation. 
Captain  Harville,  though  not  equalling  Captain  Wentworth  in  man02
ners,  was  a  perfect  gentleman,  unaffected,  warm,  and  obliging.  Mrs. 
Harville,  a  degree  less polished  than  her  husband,  seemed  however  to 
have  the  same  good  feelings; and  nothing  could  be  more  pleasant  than 
their  desire  of  considering  the  whole  party  as  friends  of  their  own, 
because  the  friends  of Captain  Wentworth,  or  more  kindly  hospitable 
than  their entreaties for their all promising  to dine  with  them.  The  din02
ner, already ordered  at the inn,  was at last, though  unwillingly, accepted 
66 
CHAPTER  XI 
as  an  excuse;  but  they  seemed  almost  hurt  that  Captain  Wentworth 
should  have  brought  any  such  party  to  Lyme, without  considering  it as 
a  thing  of course that  they should  dine  with  them. 
There was so much  attachment to Captain  Wentworth  in all this,  and 
such  a  bewitching  charm  in  a  degree  of hospitality  so  uncommon,  so 
unlike the usual  style of give-and-take invitations, and dinners  of  formal02
ity and  display,  that  Anne  felt  her spirits not likely to be benefited by an 
increasing acquaintance among  his brother-officers.  "These would  have 
been  all  my friends,"  was her  thought;  and  she had  to struggle against a 
great tendency  to lowness.4 
On  quitting  the  Cobb,  they  all  went  indoors  with  their  new  friends, 
and  found  rooms  so small  as  none  but  those  who  invite  from  the  heart 
could  think  capable of accommodating so many.  Anne had  a  moment's 
astonishment on the subject herself; but it was soon lost in the pleasanter 
feelings  which  sprang  from  the  sight  of all  the  ingenious  contrivances 
and  nice arrangements  of Captain  Harville,  to  turn  the  actual  space  to 
the  best  possible  account,  to  supply  the  deficiencies of  lodging-house 
furniture,  and  defend  the  windows  and  doors  against  the  winter  storms 
to  be  expected.  T he  varieties  in  the  fitting-up  of the  rooms,  where  the 
common  necessaries provided  by the  owner,  in the common  indifferent 
plight,  were  contrasted  with  some few articles of a rare  species of wood, 
excellently  worked  up,  and  with  something  curious  and  valuable  from 
all  the  distant  countries  Captain  Harville  had  visited,  were  more  than 
amusing to Anne: connected as it all was with  his profession,  the fruit of 
its labours,  the  effect  of its influence on  his habits,  the picture  of repose 
and  domestic happiness  it presented,  made  it to her a something  more, 
or less,  than  gratification. 
Captain  Harville  was  no  reader;  but  he  had  contrived  excellent 
accommodations,  and  fashioned  very pretty  shelves, for a tolerable  col02
lection  of well-bound  volumes,  the  property  of Captain  Benwick.  His 
lameness prevented  him  from  taking  much  exercise; but  a mind  of use02
fulness  and  ingenuity  seemed to furnish  him  with  constant employment 
within.  He  drew,  he  varnished,  he carpentered,  he glued; he  made toys 
for  the  children,  he  fashioned  new  netting-needles  and  pins  with 
improvements;  and  if every  thing  else was  done,  sat  down  to  his  large 
fishing-net  at one  corner of the  room. 
Anne  thought  she  left  great  happiness  behind  her  when  they  quitted 
the  house; and  Louisa, by whom  she found  herself  walking,  burst  forth 
into  raptures  of admiration  and  delight  on  the  character of the  navy― 
their  friendliness,  their  brotherliness,  their  openness,  their  uprightness; 
protesting  that  she  was  convinced  of  sailors  having  more  worth  and 
warmth  than  any other  set of men  in  England; that they only knew how 
to live,  and  they  only deserved  to be respected and  loved. 
4.  Depression. 
CHAPTER  XI 
67 
They  went  back  to  dress  and  dine;  and  so  well  had  the  scheme 
answered5  already,  that  nothing  was  found  amiss; though  its being  "so 
entirely  out  of the  season,"  and  the  "no-thorough-fare  of Lyme,"  and 
the "no expectation of company," had  brought  many  apologies  from  the 
heads  of the  inn. 
Anne  found  herself  by this time  growing  so much  more  hardened  to 
being  in  Captain  Wentworth's  company  than  she  had  at  first  imagined 
could  ever  be,  that  the  sitting  down  to  the  same  table  with  him  now, 
and  the  interchange  of  the  common  civilities  attending  on  it―(they 
never got beyond) was become a mere  nothing. 
The  nights  were too dark  for the  ladies to meet again  till the  morrow, 
but  Captain  Harville  had  promised  them  a  visit in  the  evening; and  he 
came,  bringing his friend  also, which was more than  had been expected, 
it  having  been  agreed  that  Captain  Benwick  had  all  the  appearance  of 
being  oppressed  by  the  presence  of  so  many  strangers.  He  ventured 
among  them  again,  however,  though  his  spirits  certainly  did  not  seem 
fit for  the  mirth  of the party  in  general. 
While  Captains  Wentworth  and  Harville  led  the  talk  on  one  side of 
the room,  and,  by recurring to former days,  supplied  anecdotes in  abun02
dance  to  occupy  and  entertain  the  others,  it  fell  to  Anne's  lot  to  be 
placed  rather  apart  with  Captain  Benwick;  and  a  very  good  impulse  of 
her  nature  obliged her to begin an  acquaintance  with  him.  He was shy, 
and  disposed  to  abstraction;  but  the  engaging  mildness  of her  counte02
nance,  and  gentleness of her  manners,  soon  had  their  effect;  and  Anne 
was  well  repaid  the  first  trouble  of exertion.  He  was  evidently  a  young 
man  of considerable taste  in  reading,  though  principally  in  poetry;  and 
besides the  persuasion  of having  given  him  at  least an  evening's  indul02
gence  in  the  discussion  of  subjects,  which  his  usual  companions  had 
probably  no  concern  in,  she had  the  hope  of being of real use to him  in 
some  suggestions  as  to  the  duty  and  benefit  of struggling  against  afflic02
tion,  which  had  naturally  grown  out  of their  conversation.  For,  though 
shy,  he  did  not  seem  reserved;  it  had  rather  the  appearance  of feelings 
glad to burst  their  usual  restraints; and  having  talked  of poetry,  the  rich02
ness of the present  age, and  gone through  a brief comparison  of opinion 
as  to  the  first-rate  poets,  trying  to  ascertain  whether  Marmion  or  The 
Lady  of  the  Lake  were  to be preferred,  and  how  ranked  the  Giaour  and 
The  Bride  of  Abydos;6  and  moreover,  how  the  Giaour  was  to  be  pro02
nounced,  he shewed  himself so intimately acquainted  with  all the  tend-
erest  songs  of  the  one  poet,  and  all  the  impassioned  descriptions  of 
hopeless agony  of the  other;  he  repeated,  with  such  tremulous  feeling, 
the  various  lines which  imaged  a  broken  heart,  or  a  mind  destroyed  by 
wretchedness,  and  looked  so  entirely  as  if he  meant  to  be  understood, 
5.  Suited. 
6.  Titles of romantic  poems by Sir Walter  Scott  (1771-1832)  and George  Gordon,  Lord  Byron 
(1788-1824). 
68 
CHAPTER  XII 
that she ventured  to hope  he did  not always read only poetry; and to say, 
that  she  thought  it  was  the  misfortune  of poetry,  to  be  seldom  safely 
enjoyed  by those who  enjoyed  it completely; and  that the strong feelings 
which  alone  could  estimate  it truly,  were the  very feelings which  ought 
to taste it but  sparingly. 
His  looks shewing  him  not  pained,  but  pleased  with  this  allusion  to 
his  situation,  she  was  emboldened  to  go  on;  and  feeling  in  herself  the 
right  of seniority  of mind,  she  ventured  to  recommend  a  larger allow02
ance of prose in  his daily study; and  on  being requested  to particularize, 
mentioned  such  works of our  best moralists, such  collections of the  fin02
est  letters,  such  memoirs  of  characters  of  worth  and  suffering,  as 
occurred  to  her  at  the  moment  as  calculated  to  rouse  and  fortify  the 
mind  by  the  highest  precepts,  and  the  strongest  examples of moral  and 
religious  endurances. 
Captain  Benwick  listened  attentively,  and  seemed  grateful  for  the 
interest  implied; and  though  with  a shake  of the  head,  and  sighs which 
declared  his  little  faith  in  the  efficacy  of  any  books  on  grief  like  his, 
noted  down  the  names  of  those  she  recommended,  and  promised  to 
procure  and  read  them. 
When  the  evening  was  over,  Anne  could  not  but  be  amused  at  the 
idea  of her  coming  to  Lyme,  to  preach  patience  and  resignation  to  a 
young man  whom  she had  never seen before; nor could she help fearing, 
on  more  serious  reflection,  that,  like  many  other  great  moralists  and 
preachers,  she had  been  eloquent on  a point  in which  her own  conduct 
would  ill bear examination. 
Chapter XII 
Anne  and  Henrietta,  finding  themselves  the  earliest  of the  party  the 
next  morning,  agreed  to  stroll down  to  the  sea before breakfast.―They 
went  to the  sands,  to watch  the  flowing  of the  tide,  which  a  fine  south02
easterly  breeze  was  bringing  in  with  all  the  grandeur  which  so  flat  a 
shore  admitted.  They  praised  the  morning;  gloried  in  the  sea;  sympa02
thized  in  the  delight  of the  fresh-feeling  breeze―and  were  silent; till 
Henrietta  suddenly  began  again,  with. 
"Oh!  yes,―I am  quite  convinced that,  with  very few exceptions, the 
sea-air  always  does  good.  There  can  be  no  doubt  of its  having  been of 
the  greatest  service  to  Dr.  Shirley,  after  his  illness,  last  spring  twelve02
month.7  He  declares  himself,  that  coming  to  Lyme  for  a  month,  did 
him  more  good  than  all  the  medicine  he  took;  and,  that  being  by  the 
sea,  always makes him  feel  young  again.  Now,  I cannot help thinking it 
a  pity  that  he  does  not  live entirely by the  sea.  I do  think  he  had  better 
7.  A year ago last spring. 
CHAPTER  XII 
69 
leave  Uppercross  entirely,  and  fix8  at  Lyme.―Do  not  you,  Anne?― 
Do not you agree with  me,  that  it is the best thing he could do,  both  for 
himself and  Mrs.  Shirley?―She has cousins here,  you know,  and  many 
acquaintance,  which  would  make  it  cheerful  for  her,―and  I  am  sure 
she would  be glad to get to a place where  she could  have medical  atten02
dance  at  hand,  in  case of his  having  another  seizure.  Indeed  I think  it 
quite melancholy to have such excellent people as Dr. and  Mrs. Shirley, 
who  have  been  doing  good  all  their  lives, wearing  out  their  last days  in 
a  place  like  Uppercross,  where,  excepting  our  family,  they  seem  shut 
out  from  all  the  world.  I  wish  his  friends  would  propose  it  to  him.  I 
really  think  they  ought.  And,  as  to  procuring  a  dispensation,9  there 
could be no difficulty at his time of life,  and with  his character.  My only 
doubt  is, whether  any  thing  could  persuade  him  to leave his parish.  He 
is so very  strict and  scrupulous  in  his  notions; over-scrupulous,  I  must 
say.  Do  not  you  think,  Anne,  it  is being  over-scrupulous?  Do  not  you 
think it is quite a mistaken  point of conscience,  when  a clergyman sacri02
fices  his  health  for  the  sake  of duties,  which  may  be  just  as  well  per02
formed  by  another  person?―And  at  Lyme  too,―only  seventeen  miles 
off,―he  would  be near enough  to hear,  if people thought  there was any 
thing  to complain  of. " 
Anne  smiled  more  than  once  to  herself  during  this  speech,  and 
entered  into the subject, as ready to do good by entering into the feelings 
of a young  lady as of a young  man,―though  here it was good of a lower 
standard, for what could be offered but general acquiescence?―She said 
all that was reasonable and  proper  on  the business; felt the claims of Dr. 
Shirley  to  repose,  as  she  ought;  saw  how  very  desirable  it  was  that  he 
should  have  some  active,  respectable young  man,  as  a  resident  curate, 
and was even courteous enough  to hint at the advantage  of such  resident 
curate's being  married. 
"I  wish,"  said  Henrietta,  very  well  pleased  with  her  companion,  "I 
wish Lady Russell lived at Uppercross, and  were intimate with  Dr.  Shir02
ley.  I  have  always  heard  of  Lady  Russell,  as  a  woman  of the  greatest 
influence  with  every body! I always look upon  her as able to persuade  a 
person  to any  thing!  I am  afraid  of her,  as I have  told  you  before,  quite 
afraid  of her,  because she  is so very clever; but  I respect her  amazingly, 
and  wish we had  such  a neighbour  at  Uppercross. " 
Anne  was  amused  by  Henrietta's  manner  of  being  grateful,  and 
amused  also,  that  the  course  of events  and  the  new  interests  of  Henri02
etta's views should  have placed her friend  at all in favour with  any of the 
Musgrove family; she had  only time,  however,  for a general answer,  and 
a wish that  such  another  woman  were at  Uppercross, before all subjects 
suddenly  ceased,  on  seeing  Louisa  and  Captain  Wentworth  coming 
8.  Settle. 
9.  Dr. Shirley would need special permission from the church to be an absentee vicar―to draw 
the income of his post while having Charles  Hayter do the actual work. 
70 
CHAPTER  XII 
towards  them.  They  came  also  for  a  stroll  till  breakfast  was  likely  to 
be  ready; but  Louisa recollecting, immediately  afterwards,  that  she  had 
something  to  procure  at  a  shop,  invited  them  all  to  go  back  with  her 
into the  town.  They were all at her  disposal. 
When  they  came  to  the  steps,  leading  upwards  from  the  beach,  a 
gentleman  at the  same  moment  preparing to come down,  politely drew 
back,  and  stopped  to  give  them  way.  They  ascended  and  passed  him; 
and  as  they  passed,  Anne's  face  caught  his  eye,  and  he  looked  at  her 
with  a degree  of earnest  admiration,  which  she  could  not  be insensible 
of.  She  was  looking  remarkably  well; her  very  regular,  very  pretty  fea02
tures,  having the bloom and  freshness  of youth  restored by the fine wind 
which  had  been  blowing  on  her  complexion,  and  by the  animation  of 
eye  which  it  had  also  produced.  It  was  evident  that  the  gentleman, 
(completely  a  gentleman  in  manner) admired  her  exceedingly. Captain 
Wentworth  looked  round  at  her  instantly  in  a  way  which  shewed  his 
noticing  of it.  He  gave  her  a  momentary  glance,―a  glance  of bright02
ness,  which  seemed to say,  "That man  is struck with  you,―and  even I, 
at this  moment,  see something  like Anne  Elliot  again." 
After  attending  Louisa  through  her  business,  and  loitering  about  a 
little  longer,  they  returned  to  the  inn;  and  Anne  in  passing  afterwards 
quickly  from  her  own  chamber  to  their  dining-room,  had  nearly  run 
against the  very same gentleman,  as he  came out  of an  adjoining  apart02
ment.  She had  before  conjectured  him  to be a stranger  like themselves, 
and  determined  that a well-looking groom,  who was strolling about  near 
the  two  inns  as they  came back, should  be his servant.  Both  master  and 
man  being  in  mourning,  assisted  the  idea.  It  was  now  proved  that  he 
belonged  to the  same  inn  as themselves; and  this second meeting,  short 
as  it  was,  also  proved  again  by  the  gentleman's  looks,  that  he  thought 
hers very lovely, and  by the  readiness and  propriety  of his apologies, that 
he  was  a  man  of exceedingly good  manners.  He  seemed  about  thirty, 
and,  though  not handsome,  had  an  agreeable person.  Anne felt that  she 
should  like to know who  he  was. 
They had  nearly done breakfast, when  the sound  of a carriage, (almost 
the first they  had  heard  since entering  Lyme)  drew  half  the  party  to  the 
window.  "It  was  a  gentleman's  carriage―a  curricle―but  only  coming 
round  from  the  stable-yard  to the  front  door―Somebody must  be going 
away.―It was driven  by a servant  in  mourning." 
The  word  curricle  made  Charles  Musgrove  jump  up,  that  he  might 
compare it with  his own,  the  servant in  mourning  roused Anne's curios02
ity,  and  the  whole  six were  collected to  look,  by the  time  the  owner of 
the  curricle was  to  be  seen  issuing  from  the  door  amidst  the  bows  and 
civilities of the  household,  and  taking his seat,  to drive off. 
"Ah!" cried  Captain  Wentworth,  instantly,  and  with  half  a glance at 
Anne; "it is the  very man  we  passed." 
The  Miss Musgroves agreed  to  it; and  having  all kindly  watched  him 
CHAPTER  X II 
71 
as far up the hill as they could,  they returned  to the  breakfast-table.  The 
waiter came into the  room  soon  afterwards. 
"Pray,"  said  Captain  Wentworth,  immediately,  "can  you  tell  us  the 
name  of the gentleman  who  is just gone away?" 
"Yes,  Sir, a  Mr.  Elliot;  a  gentleman  of large fortune,―came  in  last 
night  from  Sidmouth,―dare  say you  heard  the  carriage,  Sir, while  you 
were  at  dinner;  and  going  on  now  for  Crewkherne,  in  his  way  to  Bath 
and  London." 
"Elliot!"―Many  had  looked  on  each  other,  and  many  had  repeated 
the name,  before all this had  been got through,  even by the smart  rapid02
ity of a waiter. 
"Bless  me!" cried  Mary; "it must  be  our  cousin;―it must  be  our  Mr. 
Elliot,  it must,  indeed!―Charles,  Anne,  must  not  it? In mourning,  you 
see,  just as our  Mr.  Elliot  must  be.  How  very extraordinary!  In  the  very 
same inn  with  us! Anne,  must  not  it be our  Mr.  Elliot; my father's  next 
heir?  Pray  Sir," (turning  to  the  waiter),  "did  not  you  hear―did  not  his 
servant say whether  he belonged to the  Kellynch family?" 
"No,  ma'am,―he  did  not  mention  no  particular  family; but  he  said 
his  master  was  a  very  rich  gentleman,  and  would  be  a  baronight  some 
day. " 
"There!  you  see!" cried  Mary,  in  an  ecstacy,  "Just as  I  said!  Heir  to 
Sir Walter Elliot!―I was sure that would  come out,  if it was so.  Depend 
upon  it,  that  is  a  circumstance which  his  servants  take  care  to  publish 
wherever  he  goes.  But,  Anne,  only  conceive how  extraordinary!  I  wish 
I  had  looked  at  him  more.  I  wish  we  had  been  aware  in  time,  who  it 
was,  that  he  might  have  been  introduced  to  us.  What  a  pity  that  we 
should  not  have  been  introduced  to  each  other!―Do you  think  he  had 
the  Elliot  countenance?  I  hardly  looked  at  him,  I  was  looking  at  the 
horses; but  I think  he  had  something  of the  Elliot  countenance.  I  won02
der  the  arms1  did  not  strike  me! Oh!―the  great-coat was  hanging  over 
the  pannel,  and  hid  the  arms; so it did,  otherwise,  I am  sure,  I  should 
have  observed  them,  and  the  livery too; if the  servant  had  not  been  in 
mourning,  one should  have known  him  by the livery." 
"Putting  all  these  very  extraordinary  circumstances  together,"  said 
Captain  Wentworth,  "we  must  consider  it  to  be  the  arrangement  of 
Providence,  that  you should  not be introduced  to your  cousin." 
When  she  could  command  Mary's  attention,  Anne  quietly  tried  to 
convince  her  that  their  father  and  Mr.  Elliot  had  not,  for  many  years, 
been  on  such  terms as to make the  power of attempting  an  introduction 
at all desirable. 
At  the  same  time,  however,  it  was  a  secret gratification  to  herself  to 
have  seen  her  cousin,  and  to  know  that  the  future  owner  of Kellynch 
was undoubtedly  a gentleman,  and  had  an  air of good sense.  She would 
1.  Coat of arms (which would appear on the side of the  carriage). 
72 
CHAPTER  XII 
not,  upon  any  account,  mention  her  having  met  with  him  the  second 
time;  luckily Mary did  not  much  attend  to  their  having  passed  close by 
him  in their early walk,  but  she would  have felt quite  ill-used by Anne's 
having  actually  run  against  him  in  the  passage,  and  received  his  very 
polite excuses, while she  had  never been  near  him  at all; no,  that cous02
inly little interview  must  remain  a perfect secret. 
"Of  course," said  Mary,  "you  will mention  our  seeing Mr.  Elliot,  the 
next time you  write to Bath. I think  my father  certainly ought  to hear of 
it; do  mention  all about  him." 
Anne  avoided  a  direct  reply,  but  it was  just the  circumstance which 
she  considered  as  not  merely  unnecessary  to  be  communicated,  but  as 
what  ought  to  be  suppressed.  The  offence  which  had  been  given  her 
father,  many  years back,  she knew; Elizabeth's particular  share  in  it she 
suspected; and  that  Mr.  Elliot's idea  always produced  irritation  in  both, 
was  beyond  a  doubt.  Mary  never  wrote  to  Bath  herself;  all  the  toil of 
keeping up  a slow and  unsatisfactory correspondence with  Elizabeth fell 
on  Anne. 
Breakfast  had  not  been  long over,  when  they were  joined by  Captain 
and  Mrs.  Harville,  and  Captain  Benwick,  with  whom  they  had 
appointed  to  take  their  last walk  about  Lyme. They ought  to  be  setting 
off for Uppercross by one,  and  in the meanwhile were to be all together, 
and  out  of doors as long as they  could. 
Anne  found  Captain  Benwick getting  near  her,  as soon  as they  were 
all  fairly  in  the  street.  Their  conversation,  the  preceding  evening,  did 
not  disincline  him  to  seek  her  again;  and  they  walked  together  some 
time,  talking as before of Mr.  Scott and  Lord Byron, and  still as unable, 
as before,  and  as unable  as any  other  two readers,  to think  exactly alike 
of  the  merits  of  either,  till  something  occasioned  an  almost  general 
change  amongst  their  party,  and  instead  of Captain  Benwick, she  had 
Captain  Harville by her side. 
"Miss  Elliot,"  said  he,  speaking  rather  low,  "you  have  done  a  good 
deed  in  making  that  poor  fellow  talk  so  much.  I  wish  he  could  have 
such  company  oftener.  It is bad  for him,  I know,  to be shut up  as he is; 
but  what  can we do? we cannot part. " 
"No,"  said  Anne,  "that  I  can  easily believe to  be  impossible; but  in 
time,  perhaps―we  know what  time does  in  every case of affliction,  and 
you  must  remember,  Captain  Harville,  that  your  friend  may  yet  be 
called  a young  mourner―Only  last summer,  I understand." 
"Ay,  true enough,"  (with a deep sigh) "only June." 
"And  not known  to him,  perhaps,  so soon." 
"Not  till  the  first  week  in  August,  when  he  came  home  from  the 
Cape,―just  made  into  the  Grappler.2  I  was  at  Plymouth,  dreading  to 
2.  Promoted into command of a new ship. 
CHAPTER  XII 
73 
hear  of him;  he  sent  in  letters,  but  the  Grappler  was  under  orders  for 
Portsmouth.  There  the  news  must  follow  him,  but  who  was  to  tell  it? 
not  I.  I  would  as  soon  have  been  run  up  to  the  yard-arm.3  Nobody 
could do it, but that good fellow, (pointing to Captain  Wentworth.) The 
Laconia  had  come  into  Plymouth  the  week  before;  no  danger  of  her 
being  sent  to  sea  again.  He  stood  his  chance for  the  rest―wrote  up  for 
leave of absence,  but without  waiting the return,  travelled night and  day 
till  he  got  to  Portsmouth,  rowed  off to  the  Grappler  that  instant,  and 
never left the poor fellow for a week; that's what  he did,  and  nobody else 
could  have  saved  poor  James.  You  may  think,  Miss Elliot,  whether  he 
is dear to  us!" 
Anne  did  think  on  the  question  with  perfect  decision,  and  said  as 
much  in  reply  as her  own  feelings could  accomplish,  or  as  his  seemed 
able  to  bear,  for  he  was  too  much  affected  to  renew  the  subject―and 
when  he  spoke again,  it was of something totally  different. 
Mrs.  Harville's giving it as her  opinion  that  her  husband  would  have 
quite  walking  enough  by  the  time  he  reached  home,  determined  the 
direction  of all  the  party  in  what  was  to  be  their  last  walk; they  would 
accompany  them  to their  door,  and  then  return  and  set off themselves. 
By  all  their  calculations  there  was  just  time  for  this;  but  as  they  drew 
near  the  Cobb,  there  was  such  a  general  wish  to  walk  along  it  once 
more,  all  were  so  inclined,  and  Louisa  soon  grew  so  determined,  that 
the difference  of a quarter  of an  hour,  it was found,  would  be no  differ02
ence at all, so with all the kind leave-taking, and  all the kind  interchange 
of  invitations  and  promises  which  may  be  imagined,  they  parted  from 
Captain  and  Mrs.  Harville at  their  own  door,  and  still accompanied by 
Captain  Benwick,  who seemed to cling to them  to the last, proceeded  to 
make the proper  adieus  to the Cobb. 
Anne  found  Captain  Benwick again  drawing  near  her.  Lord Byron's 
"dark blue seas"4 could not fail  of being brought forward  by their  present 
view,  and  she gladly gave him  all  her  attention  as long as attention  was 
possible.  It was soon drawn per force another  way. 
There  was  too  much  wind  to  make  the  high  part  of the  new  Cobb 
pleasant  for  the  ladies,  and  they  agreed  to  get  down  the  steps  to  the 
lower,  and  all  were  contented  to  pass  quietly  and  carefully  down  the 
steep flight,  excepting Louisa; she  must  be  jumped  down  them  by Cap02
tain  Wentworth.  In  all  their  walks,  he  had  had  to  jump  her  from  the 
stiles; the sensation was delightful  to her.  The hardness  of the  pavement 
for  her  feet,  made  him  less willing upon  the  present  occasion; he did  it, 
however;  she  was  safely  down,  and  instantly,  to  shew  her  enjoyment, 
ran  up  the  steps  to  be  jumped  down  again.  He  advised  her  against  it, 
thought  the  jar too  great;  but  no,  he  reasoned  and  talked  in  vain;  she 
3.  Hanged. 
4.  Cf. "Roll on, thou deep and dark blue ocean―roll!" (Childe  Harold's Pilgrimage  4.1603). 
74 
CHAPTER  XII 
smiled  and  said,  "I am  determined  I will:" he put  out his hands; she was 
too precipitate  by half  a second,  she fell  on  the  pavement  on  the Lower 
Cobb,  and  was taken  up  lifeless! 
There  was  no  wound,  no  blood,  no  visible bruise; but  her  eyes were 
closed,  she  breathed  not,  her  face  was  like death.―The  horror  of that 
moment  to all who  stood  around! 
Captain  Wentworth,  who  had  caught  her  up,  knelt  with  her  in  his 
arms,  looking  on  her  with  a  face  as  pallid  as  her  own,  in  an  agony of 
silence.  "She is dead! she is dead!" screamed Mary, catching hold of her 
husband,  and  contributing  with  his  own  horror  to  make  him  immove02
able; and  in  another  moment,  Henrietta,  sinking under the conviction, 
lost  her  senses too,  and  would  have  fallen  on  the  steps,  but  for  Captain 
Benwick and  Anne,  who  caught and  supported  her  between  them. 
"Is  there  no  one  to  help  me?" were  the  first  words  which  burst  from 
Captain  Wentworth,  in  a tone  of despair,  and  as if all his  own  strength 
were gone. 
"Go  to  him,  go to  him,"  cried Anne,  "for heaven's  sake go to him.  I 
can  support  her  myself.  Leave me,  and  go to him.  Rub  her  hands,  rub 
her temples; here are salts,5―take them,  take  them." 
Captain  Benwick obeyed,  and  Charles  at  the  same  moment,  disen02
gaging himself  from  his wife,  they  were both  with  him; and  Louisa was 
raised up and  supported  more firmly between them,  and  every thing was 
done  that  Anne  had  prompted,  but  in  vain; while Captain  Wentworth, 
staggering  against  the  wall  for  his  support,  exclaimed  in  the  bitterest 
agony, 
"Oh  God! her father  and  mother!" 
"A surgeon!" said  Anne. 
He caught  the  word;  it seemed to rouse  him  at once, and  saying only 
"True,  true,  a  surgeon  this  instant,"  was  darting  away,  when  Anne 
eagerly  suggested, 
"Captain  Benwick, would  not  it  be  better  for  Captain  Benwick?  He 
knows where  a surgeon  is to be  found." 
Every one  capable of thinking  felt the  advantage  of the  idea,  and  in a 
moment  (it  was  all  done  in  rapid  moments)  Captain  Benwick  had 
resigned  the  poor  corpse-like  figure  entirely  to  the  brother's  care,  and 
was off for the  town  with  the  utmost  rapidity. 
As to  the  wretched  party  left  behind,  it could  scarcely be  said  which 
of the three,  who  were completely rational,  was suffering  most,  Captain 
Wentworth,  Anne,  or  Charles,  who,  really a  very  affectionate  brother, 
hung  over  Louisa with  sobs of grief,  and  could  only turn  his eyes from 
one  sister,  to  see  the  other  in  a  state  as  insensible,  or  to  witness  the 
hysterical agitations of his wife,  calling on  him  for help which  he  could 
not give. 
5.  Smelling salts. 
CHAPTER  XII 
75 
Anne,  attending  with  all  the  strength  and  zeal,  and  thought,  which 
instinct supplied,  to Henrietta,  still tried,  at intervals, to suggest comfort 
to  the  others,  tried  to  quiet  Mary,  to  animate  Charles,  to  assuage  the 
feelings  of Captain  Wentworth.  Both  seemed  to  look  to  her  for  direc02
tions. 
"Anne,  Anne,"  cried  Charles,  "what  is  to  be  done  next?  What,  in 
heaven's name,  is to be done next?" 
Captain  Wentworth's  eyes were also turned  towards  her. 
"Had  not  she  better  be  carried  to  the  inn?  Yes, I am  sure,  carry  her 
gently to the  inn." 
"Yes,  yes,  to  the  inn,"  repeated  Captain  Wentworth,  comparatively 
collected,  and  eager  to  be  doing  something.  "I  will  carry  her  myself. 
Musgrove,  take care of the  others." 
By this time the report  of the accident had spread among the  workmen 
and  boatmen  about  the  Cobb,  and  many  were  collected near  them,  to 
be useful  if wanted,  at any  rate,  to enjoy the  sight of a dead  young  lady, 
nay,  two dead  young  ladies, for it proved  twice as fine as the  first  report. 
To  some  of the  best-looking  of these  good  people  Henrietta  was  con02
signed,  for,  though  partially  revived,  she  was quite  helpless; and  in  this 
manner,  Anne  walking  by  her  side,  and  Charles  attending  to  his  wife, 
they  set  forward,  treading  back  with  feelings  unutterable,  the  ground 
which  so  lately,  so  very  lately,  and  so  light  of heart,  they  had  passed 
along. 
They  were  not  off the  Cobb, before the  Harvilles met  them.  Captain 
Benwick had been seen flying by their house,  with a countenance which 
shewed  something  to  be  wrong;  and  they  had  set  off  immediately, 
informed  and  directed,  as  they  passed,  towards  the  spot.  Shocked  as 
Captain  Harville  was,  he  brought  senses  and  nerves  that  could  be 
instantly  useful;  and  a  look between  him  and  his wife decided  what  was 
to  be  done.  She  must  be  taken  to  their  house―all  must  go  to  their 
house―and  wait  the  surgeon's  arrival  there.  They  would  not  listen  to 
scruples: he  was obeyed; they  were all  beneath  his  roof; and  while Lou02
isa,  under  Mrs.  Harville's direction,  was  conveyed  up  stairs,  and  given 
possession  of  her  own  bed,  assistance,  cordials,  restoratives  were  sup02
plied by her husband  to all who  needed  them. 
Louisa  had  once opened  her  eyes, but  soon  closed them  again,  with02
out  apparent  consciousness. This had  been  a  proof of life,  however,  of 
service to  her  sister; and  Henrietta,  though  perfectly  incapable of being 
in  the  same  room  with  Louisa,  was  kept,  by  the  agitation  of hope  and 
fear,  from  a  return  of  her  own  insensibility.  Mary,  too,  was  growing 
calmer. 
The  surgeon  was  with  them  almost  before  it  had  seemed  possible. 
They were sick with  horror while he examined; but he was not hopeless. 
The head had  received a severe contusion,  but he had  seen greater  injur02
ies recovered from: he was by no  means hopeless; he spoke cheerfully. 
76 
CHAPTER  XII 
That  he  did  not  regard  it  as  a  desperate  case―that  he  did  not  say a 
few  hours  must  end  it―was  at  first  felt,  beyond  the  hope  of most;  and 
the  ecstasy  of  such  a  reprieve,  the  rejoicing,  deep  and  silent,  after  a 
few  fervent  ejaculations  of gratitude  to  Heaven  had  been  offered,  may 
be conceived. 
The  tone,  the  look, with  which  "Thank God!" was uttered  by Captain 
Wentworth,  Anne  was  sure  could  never  be  forgotten  by  her;  nor  the 
sight of him  afterwards,  as he  sat near a table, leaning over it with  folded 
arms,  and  face  concealed,  as  if overpowered  by  the  various  feelings of 
his soul,  and  trying  by prayer  and  reflection to calm  them. 
Louisa's  limbs had  escaped.  There was no  injury  but  to the  head. 
It now  became necessary for the  party  to consider what  was best to be 
done,  as to their  general situation.  They were  now able to speak to each 
other,  and  consult.  That  Louisa  must  remain  where  she  was,  however 
distressing  to  her  friends  to  be  involving  the  Harvilles  in  such  trouble, 
did  not  admit  a  doubt.  Her  removal  was  impossible.  The  Harvilles 
silenced  all  scruples;  and,  as  much  as  they  could,  all  gratitude.  They 
had  looked forward  and  arranged  every thing,  before the others began  to 
reflect.  Captain  Benwick  must  give up  his  room  to them,  and  get a bed 
elsewhere―and  the  whole  was  settled.  They  were  only  concerned  that 
the house  could  accommodate  no  more; and  yet perhaps by "putting the 
children  away  in  the  maids'  room,  or  swinging  a cot somewhere,"  they 
could  hardly  bear to  think  of not  finding  room  for two or three  besides, 
supposing  they might wish to stay; though,  with  regard to any  attendance 
on  Miss Musgrove,  there  need  not be the  least uneasiness  in leaving her 
to  Mrs.  Harville's  care  entirely.  Mrs.  Harville  was  a  very  experienced 
nurse;  and  her  nursery-maid,  who  had  lived  with  her  long  and  gone 
about  with  her  every where,  was  just such  another.  Between those  two, 
she  could  want  no  possible attendance  by day  or night.  And  all this was 
said with  a truth  and  sincerity of feeling irresistible. 
Charles,  Henrietta,  and  Captain  Wentworth  were  the  three  in  con02
terror.  "Uppercross,―the  necessity  of  some  one's  going 
sultation,  and  for  a  little while  it was  only  an  interchange  of perplexity 
and 
to 
Uppercross,―the  news  to be conveyed―how  it could  be broken  to Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Musgrove―the  lateness  of  the  morning,―an  hour  already 
gone  since  they  ought  to  have  been  off,―the  impossibility  of being  in 
tolerable  time.  At  first,  they  were  capable  of nothing  more  to  the  pur02
pose  than  such  exclamations; but,  after  a  while,  Captain  Wentworth, 
exerting himself,  said, 
"We  must  be decided,  and  without  the  loss of another  minute.  Every 
minute  is  valuable.  Some  must  resolve  on  being  off  for  Uppercross 
instantly.  Musgrove,  either you  or  I must  go. " 
Charles  agreed;  but  declared  his  resolution  of  not  going  away.  He 
would  be as little incumbrance  as possible to Captain  and  Mrs.  Harville; 
but  as to  leaving  his  sister in  such  a state,  he  neither  ought,  nor  would. 
CHAPTER  XII 
77 
So  far  it  was  decided;  and  Henrietta  at  first  declared  the  same.  She, 
however,  was soon persuaded  to think  differently.  T he  usefulness  of her 
staying!―She,  who  had  not been  able to remain  in  Louisa's room,  or to 
look at her,  without  sufferings  which  made  her worse than helpless! She 
was  forced  to  acknowledge  that  she  could  do  no  good;  yet  was  still 
unwilling  to  be  away,  till  touched  by  the  thought  of  her  father  and 
mother,  she gave it up; she consented,  she was anxious to be at  home. 
The  plan  had  reached  this  point,  when  Anne,  coming  quietly  down 
from  Louisa's room,  could  not  but  hear  what  followed,  for  the  parlour 
door  was  open. 
'Then  it  is settled,  Musgrove,"  cried  Captain  Wentworth,  "that  you 
stay,  and  that  I take  care  of your  sister home.  But as  to  the  rest;―as  to 
the  others;―If  one  stays to  assist  Mrs.  Harville,  I think  it  need  be  only 
one.―Mrs.  Charles  Musgrove  will,  of course,  wish  to  get  back  to  her 
children;  but,  if Anne  will stay,  no  one  so proper,  so capable as Anne!" 
She paused  a moment  to  recover from  the  emotion  of hearing  herself 
so  spoken  of.  The  other  two  warmly  agreed  to  what  he  said,  and  she 
then  appeared. 
"You  will  stay,  I  am  sure;  you  will  stay  and  nurse  her;"  cried  he, 
turning  to  her  and  speaking  with  a  glow,  and  yet  a  gentleness,  which 
seemed  almost  restoring  the  past.―She  coloured  deeply;  and  he  recol02
lected  himself,  and  moved  away.―She  expressed  herself  most  willing, 
ready,  happy  to  remain.  "It  was  what  she  had  been  thinking  of,  and 
wishing  to  be  allowed  to  do.―A  bed  on  the  floor  in  Louisa's  room 
would  be sufficient  for her,  if Mrs.  Harville would  but  think  so." 
One thing  more, and  all seemed arranged.  Though  it was rather  desir02
able that  Mr. and  Mrs. Musgrove should  be previously alarmed  by some 
share  of delay;  yet  the  time  required  by  the  Uppercross  horses  to  take 
them  back,  would  be  a  dreadful  extension  of  suspense;  and  Captain 
Wentworth  proposed,  and  Charles  Musgrove  agreed,  that  it  would  be 
much  better  for him  to take a chaise  from  the  inn,  and  leave Mr.  Mus02
grove's  carriage  and  horses  to  be  sent  home  the  next  morning  early, 
when  there  would  be  the  farther  advantage  of  sending  an  account  of 
Louisa's  night. 
Captain  Wentworth  now  hurried  off to  get  every  thing  ready  on  his 
part,  and  to  be  soon  followed  by  the  two  ladies.  When  the  plan  was 
made  known  to Mary,  however,  there  was an  end  of all peace in  it.  She 
was so wretched,  and  so vehement,  complained  so much  of injustice  in 
being  expected  to  go  away,  instead  of Anne;―Anne,  who  was  nothing 
to  Louisa,  while  she  was  her  sister,  and  had  the  best  right  to  stay  in 
Henrietta's  stead! Why  was  not  she  to  be  as  useful  as Anne?  And  to  go 
home  without  Charles,  too―without  her  husband!  No,  it  was  too 
unkind! And,  in short,  she said more than her husband  could long  with02
stand;  and  as none  of the  others  could  oppose  when  he  gave way,  there 
was no help for  it: the  change  of Mary for Anne was inevitable. 
78 
CHAPTER  XII 
Anne  had  never  submitted  more  reluctantly  to  the  jealous  and  ill-
judging  claims of Mary; but  so it must  be,  and  they  set off for the  town, 
Charles  taking  care of his sister,  and  Captain  Benwick attending  to  her. 
She  gave  a  moment's  recollection,  as  they  hurried  along,  to  the  little 
circumstances which  the  same  spots  had  witnessed  earlier in  the  morn02
ing.  There she had  listened to Henrietta's  schemes for Dr.  Shirley's leav02
ing  Uppercross;  farther  on,  she  had  first  seen  Mr.  Elliot;  a  moment 
seemed  all that  could  now be given to any one but  Louisa, or those  who 
were wrapt up  in  her  welfare. 
Captain  Benwick was most considerately attentive  to her; and,  united 
as they all seemed by the distress  of the day,  she felt an  increasing degree 
of good-will  towards  him,  and  a pleasure  even  in thinking  that  it  might, 
perhaps,  be the  occasion of continuing  their  acquaintance. 
Captain  Wentworth  was on  the watch  for them,  and  a chaise and  four 
in  waiting,  stationed  for  their  convenience  in  the  lowest  part  of  the 
street;  but  his  evident  surprise  and  vexation,  at  the  substitution  of one 
sister  for  the  other―the  change  of  his  countenance―the  astonish02
ment―the  expressions  begun  and  suppressed,  with  which  Charles  was 
listened  to,  made  but  a  mortifying  reception  of Anne;  or  must  at  least 
convince  her  that  she was valued  only as she could  be useful  to Louisa. 
She  endeavoured  to be composed,  and  to be  just. Without  emulating 
the  feelings of an  Emma  towards  her  Henry,6  she  would  have  attended 
on  Louisa with  a zeal  above the  common  claims of regard,  for  his sake; 
and  she  hoped  he  would  not  long  be  so unjust  as to suppose  she  would 
shrink  unnecessarily  from  the  office  of a  friend. 
In  the  meanwhile  she was in  the  carriage.  He  had  handed  them  both 
in,  and  placed  himself  between  them;  and  in  this  manner,  under  these 
circumstances  full  of astonishment  and  emotion  to  Anne,  she  quitted 
Lyme.  How  the  long  stage  would  pass;  how  it was  to  affect  their  man02
ners;  what  was  to  be  their  sort  of intercourse,  she  could  not  foresee.  It 
was  all  quite  natural,  however.  He  was  devoted  to  Henrietta;  always 
turning  towards  her;  and  when  he  spoke  at  all,  always with  the  view of 
supporting  her  hopes  and  raising  her  spirits.  In  general,  his  voice  and 
manner  were studiously  calm. To spare Henrietta  from  agitation  seemed 
the  governing  principle.  Once  only,  when  she  had  been  grieving  over 
the  last  ill-judged,  ill-fated  walk  to  the  Cobb,  bitterly  lamenting  that  it 
ever had  been  thought  of,  he  burst  forth,  as if wholly overcome― 
"Don't  talk  of it,  don't  talk  of it,"  he  cried.  "Oh  God! that  I had  not 
given  way  to  her  at  the  fatal  moment!  Had  I  done  as  I  ought!  But  so 
eager and  so resolute! Dear,  sweet Louisa!" 
Anne  wondered  whether  it  ever  occurred  to  him  now,  to  question 
the  justness  of his  own  previous  opinion  as to  the  universal  felicity  and 
advantage  of  firmness  of character; and  whether  it might  not strike  him, 
6.  An allusion to Henry  and  Emma,  a  Poem,  upon  the Model  of the Nut-Brown  Maid,  by Mat02
thew Prior (1644-1721),  which celebrates at length devoted mutual love. 
CHAPTER  XIII 
79 
that,  like all  other  qualities  of the  mind,  it should  have  its  proportions 
and  limits.  She thought  it could  scarcely escape him  to feel,  that  a  per02
suadable  temper  might  sometimes  be  as  much  in  favour  of  happiness, 
as a very resolute character. 
They got on fast.  Anne was astonished to recognise the same hills and 
the same objects so soon. Their actual speed,  heightened  by some  dread 
of  the  conclusion,  made  the  road  appear  but  half  as long as on  the  day 
before.  It  was  growing  quite  dusk,  however,  before  they  were  in  the 
neighbourhood  of Uppercross,  and  there  had  been  total  silence  among 
them  for some time,  Henrietta  leaning back in  the  corner,  with  a  shawl 
over her face,  giving the  hope of her having cried herself to sleep; when, 
as  they  were  going  up  their  last  hill,  Anne  found  herself  all  at  once 
addressed  by Captain  Wentworth.  In  a low,  cautious  voice,  he  said, 
"I  have  been  considering  what  we had  best do.  She must  not  appear 
at  first.  She  could  not  stand  it.  I  have  been  thinking  whether  you  had 
not  better  remain  in  the  carriage with  her,  while  I go in  and  break  it to 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Musgrove.  Do you  think this a good plan?" 
She did: he was satisfied,  and  said  no  more.  But the  remembrance of 
the  appeal  remained  a pleasure  to her―as  a  proof  of friendship,  and of 
deference  for her  judgment,  a great pleasure; and  when  it became a sort 
of parting proof,  its value did  not lessen. 
When  the distressing communication  at  Uppercross was over,  and  he 
had  seen  the  father  and  mother  quite  as  composed  as  could  be  hoped, 
and  the  daughter  all  the  better  for  being  with  them,  he  announced  his 
intention  of  returning  in  the  same  carriage  to  Lyme;  and  when  the 
horses were baited,7  he was off. 
Chapter  XIII 
The  remainder  of Anne's  time  at  Uppercross,  comprehending  only 
two  days,  was  spent  entirely  at  the  mansion-house,  and  she  had  the 
satisfaction  of knowing  herself extremely useful  there,  both  as an  imme02
diate  companion,  and  as  assisting  in  all  those  arrangements  for  the 
future,  which,  in  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Musgrove's  distressed  state  of  spirits, 
would  have been  difficulties. 
They  had  an  early account from  Lyme the  next morning.  Louisa was 
much  the same. No symptoms worse than before had  appeared.  Charles 
came  a  few  hours  afterwards,  to  bring  a  later  and  more  particular 
account.  He  was tolerably cheerful.  A speedy  cure  must  not  be  hoped, 
but  every thing  was going on  as well as the  nature of the  case  admitted. 
In  speaking  of the  Harvilles,  he  seemed  unable  to  satisfy  his  own  sense 
of their kindness,  especially of Mrs.  Harville's exertions as a nurse.  "She 
7. Fed. 
80 
CHAPTER  XIII 
really  left  nothing  for  Mary  to do.  He  and  Mary  had  been  persuaded  to 
go  early  to  their  inn  last  night.  Mary  had  been  hysterical  again  this 
morning.  When  he  came away,  she was going to walk out with  Captain 
Benwick,  which,  he  hoped,  would  do  her  good.  He  almost  wished  she 
had  been  prevailed  on  to come home  the  day before; but  the truth was, 
that  Mrs.  Harville  left  nothing  for any body  to  do." 
Charles was to return to Lyme the  same afternoon,  and  his father  had 
at  first  half  a  mind  to  go with  him,  but  the  ladies could  not  consent.  It 
would  be  going  only  to  multiply  trouble  to  the  others,  and  increase his 
own  distress; and  a  much  better  scheme  followed  and  was  acted  upon. 
A  chaise  was  sent  for  from  Crewkheme,  and  Charles  conveyed  back a 
far  more  useful  person  in  the  old  nursery-maid  of the  family,  one  who 
having  brought  up  all the  children,  and  seen  the  very last,  the  lingering 
and  long-petted  master  Harry,  sent to school after  his brothers,  was  now 
living in her deserted  nursery to mend  stockings, and dress all the blains  8 
and  bruises  she  could  get  near  her,  and  who,  consequently,  was  only 
too  happy  in  being  allowed  to  go  and  help  nurse  dear  Miss  Louisa. 
Vague wishes of getting  Sarah thither,  had  occurred before to Mrs. Mus02
grove  and  Henrietta;  but  without  Anne,  it  would  hardly  have  been 
resolved  on,  and  found  practicable so soon. 
They  were  indebted,  the  next  day,  to  Charles  Hayter  for  all  the 
minute  knowledge  of Louisa,  which  it  was  so  essential  to  obtain  every 
twenty-four  hours.  He  made  it  his  business  to  go  to  Lyme,  and  his 
account was still encouraging.  The  intervals  of sense and  consciousness 
were  believed  to  be  stronger.  Every  report  agreed  in  Captain  Went02
worth's  appearing  fixed  in  Lyme. 
Anne  was  to  leave  them  on  the  morrow,  an  event  which  they  all 
dreaded.  "What  should  they  do  without  her? They were wretched  com02
forters  for  one  another!"  And  so  much  was  said  in  this  way,  that  Anne 
thought  she  could  not  do  better  than  impart  among  them  the  general 
inclination to which  she was privy,  and  persuade  them  all to go to Lyme 
at once.  She had  little difficulty;  it was soon determined  that they  would 
go,  go  to-morrow,  fix  themselves  at  the  inn,  or  get  into  lodgings,  as  it 
suited,  and  there  remain  till  dear  Louisa  could  be  moved.  They  must 
be  taking  off  some  trouble  from  the  good  people  she  was  with;  they 
might  at  least  relieve  Mrs.  Harville  from  the  care  of her  own  children; 
and  in  short they were so happy in the decision, that Anne was delighted 
with  what  she had  done,  and  felt that she could  not spend  her last  morn02
ing at  Uppercross better than  in assisting their  preparations,  and  sending 
them  off at  an  early  hour,  though  her  being  left  to the  solitary  range of 
the  house  was the  consequence. 
She  was  the  last,  excepting  the  little boys  at  the  cottage,  she  was  the 
very  last,  the  only  remaining  one  of all  that  had  filled  and  animated 
8.  Chilblains (inflammatory  swellings produced by cold). 
CHAPTER  XIII 
81 
both  houses,  of all  that  had  given  Uppercross  its cheerful  character.  A 
few days had  made  a change  indeed! 
If  Louisa  recovered,  it  would  all  be  well  again.  More  than  former 
happiness  would  be  restored.  There  could  not  be  a doubt,  to  her  mind 
there  was  none,  of  what  would  follow  her  recovery.  A  few  months 
hence,  and  the  room  now  so deserted,  occupied  but  by her  silent,  pen02
sive self,  might  be  filled  again  with  all  that  was  happy  and  gay,  all  that 
was  glowing  and  bright  in  prosperous  love,  all  that  was  most  unlike 
Anne  Elliot! 
An  hour's  complete  leisure  for  such  reflections  as  these,  on  a  dark 
November  day,  a  small9  thick  rain  almost  blotting  out  the  very  few 
objects  ever to be discerned  from  the  windows,  was enough  to make  the 
sound  of Lady  Russell's carriage exceedingly welcome; and  yet,  though 
desirous  to  be  gone,  she  could  not  quit  the  mansion-house,  or  look  an 
adieu  to  the  cottage,  with  its black,  dripping,  and  comfortless  veranda, 
or  even  notice  through  the  misty  glasses the  last  humble  tenements  of 
the  village,  without  a  saddened  heart.―Scenes  had  passed 
in 
Uppercross,  which  made  it precious.  It stood  the  record  of many  sensa02
tions  of pain,  once  severe,  but  now  softened;  and  of some  instances of 
relenting  feeling,  some  breathings  of  friendship  and  reconciliation, 
which  could  never be looked for again,  and  which  could  never  cease to 
be  dear.  She  left  it  all  behind  her;  all  but  the  recollection  that  such 
things  had  been. 
Anne  had  never  entered  Kellynch  since  her  quitting  Lady  Russell's 
house,  in  September.  It had  not  been  necessary,  and  the  few occasions 
of  its being  possible for  her  to  go to  the  hall  she  had  contrived  to  evade 
and  escape from.  Her  first  return,  was to  resume  her  place  in  the  mod02
ern  and  elegant  apartments  of  the  lodge,  and  to  gladden  the  eyes  of 
its mistress. 
There  was  some  anxiety  mixed  with  Lady  Russell's  joy  in  meeting 
her.  She  knew  who  had  been  frequenting  Uppercross.  But  happily, 
either  Anne  was  improved  in  plumpness  and  looks,  or  Lady  Russell 
fancied  her  so; and  Anne,  in  receiving  her  compliments  on  the  occa02
sion,  had  the amusement  of connecting them  with  the silent  admiration 
of  her  cousin,  and  of hoping  that  she  was  to  be  blessed  with  a  second 
spring  of youth  and  beauty. 
When  they  came  to  converse,  she  was  soon  sensible of some  mental 
change.  The  subjects  of which  her  heart  had  been  full  on  leaving  Kel02
lynch,  and  which  she had  felt slighted,  and  been  compelled  to  smother 
among  the  Musgroves, were  now become but  of secondary  interest.  She 
had  lately  lost  sight  even  of her  father  and  sister  and  Bath.  Their  con02
cerns had  been  sunk  under those of Uppercross,  and  when  Lady Russell 
reverted  to  their  former  hopes  and  fears,  and  spoke  her  satisfaction  in 
9.  Gentle. 
82 
CHAPTER  XIII 
the  house  in  Camden-place,  which  had  been  taken,  and  her  regret  that 
Mrs.  Clay should  still be with  them,  Anne would  have been ashamed  to 
have  it known,  how  much  more  she was thinking  of Lyme,  and  Louisa 
Musgrove,  and  all  her  acquaintance  there; how  much  more  interesting 
to  her  was  the  home  and  the  friendship  of the  Harvilles  and  Captain 
Benwick,  than  her  own  father's  house  in  Camden-place,  or  her  own 
sister's intimacy with  Mrs. Clay. She was actually forced to exert herself, 
to meet  Lady Russell with  any thing  like the  appearance  of equal  solici02
tude,  on  topics which  had  by nature the  first claim on  her. 
There  was  a  little  awkwardness  at  first  in  their  discourse  on  another 
subject.  They must  speak of the accident at Lyme. Lady Russell had  not 
been  arrived  five  minutes  the  day  before,  when  a  full  account  of  the 
whole  had  burst  on  her;  but  still  it  must  be  talked  of,  she  must  make 
enquiries,  she  must  regret the  imprudence,  lament the  result,  and  Cap02
tain  Wentworth's  name  must  be  mentioned  by  both.  Anne  was  con02
scious  of not  doing  it  so well  as  Lady  Russell.  She could  not  speak  the 
name,  and  look  straight  forward  to  Lady  Russell's  eye,  till  she  had 
adopted  the  expedient  of  telling  her  briefly  what  she  thought  of  the 
attachment  between  him  and  Louisa.  When  this  was  told,  his  name 
distressed  her  no  longer. 
Lady  Russell  had  only  to  listen  composedly,  and  wish  them  happy; 
but  internally her heart  revelled in angry pleasure,  in pleased  contempt, 
that  the  man  who  at  twenty-three  had  seemed  to  understand  somewhat 
of  the  value  of  an  Anne  Elliot,  should,  eight  years  afterwards,  be 
charmed  by a Louisa Musgrove. 
The first three or four  days passed  most quietly, with  no circumstance 
to  mark  them  excepting the  receipt of a  note  or two  from  Lyme, which 
found  their  way to Anne,  she  could  not  tell  how,  and  brought  a  rather 
improving  account of Louisa.  At the  end  of that  period,  Lady Russell's 
politeness  could  repose  no  longer,  and  the  fainter  self-threatenings  of 
the  past,  became in  a decided  tone,  "I must  call  on  Mrs.  Croft; I really 
must  call  upon  her  soon.  Anne,  have  you  courage  to  go with  me,  and 
pay  a visit in  that  house? It will be some trial to us  both." 
Anne did  not shrink  from  it; on  the contrary,  she truly felt as she said, 
in  observing, 
"I think  you  are very likely to suffer  the  most of the two; your feelings 
are less reconciled to the  change than  mine.  By remaining  in the  neigh02
bourhood,  I am  become inured  to it. " 
She  could  have  said  more  on  the  subject; for  she  had  in  fact so high 
an  opinion  of the  Crofts,  and  considered  her  father  so very fortunate  in 
his tenants,  felt the  parish  to be so sure of a good example, and  the  poor 
of  the  best attention  and  relief,  that  however  sorry and  ashamed  for  the 
necessity  of the  removal,  she  could  not  but  in  conscience feel  that  they 
were  gone  who  deserved  not  to  stay,  and  that  Kellynch-hall had  passed 
into  better  hands  than  its owners'.  These convictions must  unquestion-
CHAPTER  XIII 
83 
ably  have  their  own  pain,  and  severe  was  its  kind;  but  they  precluded 
that  pain  which  Lady Russell would  suffer  in  entering  the  house  again, 
and  returning through  the  well-known  apartments. 
In  such  moments  Anne  had  no  power  of saying  to  herself,  "These 
rooms  ought  to  belong  only to  us.  Oh,  how  fallen  in  their  destination! 
How  unworthily  occupied!  An  ancient  family  to  be  so  driven  away! 
Strangers  filling  their  place!"  No,  except  when  she  thought  of  her 
mother,  and  remembered  where  she  had  been  used  to  sit  and  preside, 
she had  no sigh of that  description  to heave. 
Mrs.  Croft  always  met  her  with  a  kindness  which  gave  her  the  plea02
sure of fancying herself a favourite; and  on  the  present  occasion, receiv02
ing her  in  that  house,  there was particular  attention. 
The  sad accident at Lyme was soon the  prevailing topic; and  on  com02
paring  their  latest  accounts  of the  invalid,  it  appeared  that  each  lady 
dated  her  intelligence from  the  same hour  of yester morn,  that  Captain 
Wentworth  had  been  in  Kellynch  yesterday―(the  first  time  since  the 
accident) had  brought  Anne  the  last note,  which  she  had  not been  able 
to trace the exact steps of,  had  staid a few hours  and  then  returned  again 
to Lyme―and  without  any  present  intention  of quitting  it any  more.― 
He  had  enquired  after  her,  she  found,  particularly;―had  expressed  his 
hope  of  Miss  Elliot's  not  being  the  worse  for  her  exertions,  and  had 
spoken  of those exertions as great.―This was handsome,―and  gave her 
more pleasure than  almost any thing  else could  have  done. 
As to the sad catastrophe  itself, it could be canvassed only in  one style 
by  a  couple  of steady,  sensible  women,  whose  judgments  had  to  work 
on  ascertained  events; and  it was  perfectly decided  that  it had  been  the 
consequence  of much  thoughtlessness  and  much  imprudence;  that  its 
effects  were  most  alarming,  and  that  it was frightful  to  think,  how  long 
Miss  Musgrove's  recovery  might  yet  be  doubtful,  and  how  liable  she 
would  still remain  to suffer  from  the concussion hereafter!―The  Admi02
ral wound  it all  up  summarily  by exclaiming, 
"Ay, a very bad business indeed.―A  new sort of way this,  for a  young 
fellow  to  be  making  love,  by  breaking  his  mistress's  head!―is  not  it, 
Miss Elliot?―This  is breaking a head  and  giving a plaister  truly!"1 
Admiral  Croft's  manners  were  not quite  of the  tone to suit Lady Rus02
sell,  but  they  delighted  Anne.  His  goodness  of heart  and  simplicity of 
character were irresistible. 
"Now,  this must  be very bad for you," said he,  suddenly  rousing  from 
a  little  reverie,  "to  be  coming  and  finding  us  here.―I  had  not  recol02
lected  it before,  I declare,―but  it must  be very bad.―But now,  do  not 
stand  upon  ceremony.―Get up  and  go over all the  rooms  in  the  house 
if you  like it. " 
"Another time,  Sir, I thank  you,  not  now." 
1.  "To break  a  man's  head  and give  him  a  plaster" was a  proverbial  expression,  meaning that 
someone both gives and remedies an injury. 
84 
CHAPTER  XIII 
"Well,  whenever  it suits you.―You can slip in from  the shrubbery  at 
any  time.  And  there  you  will  find  we  keep  our  umbrellas,  hanging  up 
by  that  door.  A good  place,  is not  it? But" (checking himself) "you will 
not think it a good place, for yours were always kept in the butler's  room. 
Ay,  so  it  always  is,  I  believe.  One  man's  ways  may  be  as  good  as 
another's,  but  we  all  like  our  own  best.  And  so  you  must  judge  for 
yourself,  whether  it  would  be  better  for  you  to  go  about  the  house  or 
not." 
Anne,  finding  she might  decline it,  did  so, very  gratefully. 
"We  have  made  very  few  changes  either!"  continued  the  Admiral, 
after  thinking  a  moment.  "Very  few.―We told  you  about  the  laundry-
door,  at Uppercross. That has been a very great improvement.  The won02
der  was,  how any  family upon  earth  could  bear with  the inconvenience 
of  its opening  as it did,  so long!―You will tell  Sir Walter what  we have 
done,  and  that  Mr.  Shepherd  thinks  it  the  greatest  improvement  the 
house  ever had.  Indeed,  I must  do  ourselves the  justice to say,  that  the 
few  alterations  we  have  made  have  been  all  very  much  for  the  better. 
My wife should  have the credit of them,  however.  I have done very little 
besides sending away some of the large looking-glasses from  my dressing-
room,  which  was  your  father's.  A  very  good  man,  and  very  much  the 
gentleman  I  am  sure―but  I  should  think,  Miss  Elliot"  (looking  with 
serious reflection) "I should  think  he  must  be rather a dressy man  for his 
time  of life.―Such  a  number  of looking-glasses! oh  Lord! there  was  no 
getting  away  from  oneself.  So I got  Sophy  to  lend  me  a  hand,  and  we 
soon  shifted  their  quarters;  and  now  I  am  quite  snug,  with  my  little 
shaving  glass  in  one  corner,  and  another  great  thing  that  I  never  go 
near." 
Anne,  amused  in  spite of herself,  was rather  distressed  for an  answer, 
and  the  Admiral,  fearing  he  might  not  have been  civil  enough,  took  up 
the  subject again,  to say, 
"The  next time  you  write  to  your  good  father,  Miss Elliot,  pray  give 
my compliments and  Mrs. Croft's,  and  say that we are settled here  quite 
to our  liking,  and  have  no  fault  at all to  find  with  the  place. The break02
fast-room  chimney  smokes a  little,  I grant  you,  but  it is only when  the 
wind  is due  north  and  blows hard,  which  may  not happen three times a 
winter.  And  take  it altogether,  now  that  we  have  been  into  most  of the 
houses  hereabouts  and  can  judge,  there  is  not  one  that  we  like  better 
than this.  Pray say so, with  my compliments.  He will be glad to hear it." 
Lady  Russell and  Mrs.  Croft  were  very well  pleased  with  each  other; 
but  the acquaintance which  this visit began,  was fated  not to proceed far 
at  present;  for  when  it was  returned,  the  Crofts  announced  themselves 
to be going away for a few weeks, to visit their  connexions2 in the  north 
2.  Relatives. 
CHAPTER  X IV 
85 
of  the  county,  and  probably  might  not  be  at  home  again  before  Lady 
Russell would  be removing  to  Bath. 
So  ended  all  danger  to  Anne  of meeting  Captain  Wentworth  at  Kel02
lynch-hall,  or  of seeing  him  in  company  with  her  friend.  Every  thing 
was safe enough,  and  she smiled over the  many anxious feelings she  had 
wasted  on  the subject. 
Chapter XIV 
Though  Charles  and  Mary  had  remained  at  Lyme much  longer  after 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Musgrove's  going,  than  Anne  conceived they  could  have 
been  at  all  wanted,  they  were  yet  the  first  of the  family  to  be  at  home 
again,  and  as soon as possible after their return to Uppercross,  they  drove 
over  to  the  lodge.―They  had  left  Louisa  beginning  to  sit  up;  but  her 
head,  though  clear, was exceedingly weak,  and  her  nerves susceptible to 
the highest extreme of tenderness; and  though  she might be  pronounced 
to  be altogether  doing  very  well,  it was  still  impossible to  say when  she 
might  be  able  to  bear  the  removal  home;  and  her  father  and  mother, 
who must return in time to receive their younger children  for the  Christ02
mas  holidays,  had  hardly  a  hope  of  being  allowed  to  bring  her  with 
them. 
They  had  been  all  in  lodgings  together.  Mrs.  Musgrove had  got Mrs. 
Harville's  children  away  as  much  as  she  could,  every  possible  supply 
from  Uppercross  had  been  furnished,  to  lighten  the  inconvenience  to 
the  Harvilles,  while  the  Harvilles  had  been  wanting  them  to  come  to 
dinner  every  day;  and  in  short,  it  seemed  to  have  been  only  a  struggle 
on  each side as to which  should  be  most disinterested  and  hospitable. 
Mary  had  had  her  evils;  but  upon  the  whole,  as  was  evident  by  her 
staying  so  long,  she  had  found  more  to  enjoy  than  to  suffer.―Charles 
Hayter  had  been  at  Lyme oftener  than  suited  her,  and  when  they  dined 
with  the  Harvilles  there  had  been  only  a  maid-servant  to  wait,  and  at 
first,  Mrs.  Harville  had  always  given  Mrs.  Musgrove  precedence;  but 
then,  she had  received so very handsome  an  apology from her on  finding 
out  whose  daughter  she  was,  and  there  had  been  so  much  going  on 
every day,  there  had  been  so many  walks between  their  lodgings and  the 
Harvilles,  and  she  had  got books  from  the  library  and  changed  them  so 
often,  that  the balance had  certainly been  much  in favour  of Lyme.  She 
had  been  taken  to  Charmouth  too,  and  she  had  bathed,3  and  she  had 
gone  to  church,  and  there  were  a great  many  more  people  to  look at  in 
the  church  at  Lyme  than  at  Uppercross,―and  all  this,  joined  to  the 
sense of being so very useful,  had  made  really an  agreeable  fortnight. 
3.  In the public baths of mineral water alleged to have healing properties. 
86 
CHAPTER  XIV 
Anne  enquired  after  Captain  Benwick.  Mary's  face  was  clouded 
directly.  Charles  laughed. 
"Oh!  Captain  Benwick is  very  well,  I  believe,  but  he  is  a  very  odd 
young  man.  I do not know what  he would be at.  We asked him  to come 
home  with  us  for  a  day  or  two;  Charles  undertook  to  give  him  some 
shooting,  and  he  seemed  quite  delighted,  and  for  my part,  I thought  it 
was all settled; when  behold! on Tuesday night,  he made a very awkward 
sort  of  excuse;  "he  never  shot"  and  he  had  "been  quite  misunder02
stood,"―and  he  had  promised  this  and  he  had  promised  that,  and  the 
end  of it was,  I found,  that  he  did  not  mean  to come.  I suppose  he was 
afraid  of  finding  it  dull;  but  upon  my  word  I  should  have  thought  we 
were  lively enough  at the  Cottage for  such  a  heart-broken  man  as Cap02
tain  Benwick. " 
Charles laughed  again and  said, "Now Mary, you know very well how 
it  really  was.―It  was  all  your  doing,"  (turning  to  Anne.)  "He  fancied 
that  if he  went  with  us,  he  should  find  you  close by; he  fancied  every 
body to be living in  Uppercross; and  when  he discovered that Lady Rus02
sell  lived  three  miles off,  his  heart  failed  him,  and  he  had  not  courage 
to come. That  is the  fact,  upon  my honour.  Mary knows it is." 
But  Mary did  not  give into  it very graciously; whether  from  not  con02
sidering  Captain  Benwick entitled  by  birth  and  situation  to  be  in  love 
with  an  Elliot,  or  from  not  wanting  to believe Anne  a greater  attraction 
to  Uppercross  than  herself,  must  be  left  to  be  guessed.  Anne's  good02
will,  however,  was  not  to  be  lessened  by  what  she  heard.  She  boldly 
acknowledged  herself  flattered,  and  continued  her  enquiries. 
"Oh!  he  talks  of you,"  cried  Charles,  "in  such  terms,"―Mary  inter02
rupted him.  "I declare, Charles, I never heard  him  mention Anne twice 
all the  time  I was there.  I declare, Anne,  he  never talks of you at all." 
"No,"  admitted  Charles,  "I do  not  know  that  he  ever does,  in  a gen02
eral  way―but  however,  it  is  a  very  clear  thing  that  he  admires  you 
exceedingly.―His  head  is  full  of some  books  that  he  is  reading  upon 
your  recommendation,  and  he  wants  to talk to  you  about  them;  he  has 
found  out  something  or  other  in  one  of them  which  he  thinks―Oh!  I 
cannot  pretend  to  remember  it,  but  it was something very  fine―I  over02
heard  him  telling Henrietta  all about  it―and  then  'Miss Elliot' was spo02
ken  of in  the  highest  terms!―Now  Mary,  I declare  it was so,  I heard  it 
myself,  and  you  were  in  the  other  room.―'Elegance,  sweetness, 
beauty,'  Oh! there  was no  end  of Miss Elliot's charms." 
"And  I am  sure,"  cried  Mary warmly,  "it was very little to his  credit, 
if  he  did.  Miss  Harville  only  died  last June.  Such  a  heart  is very  little 
worth  having; is it,  Lady Russell? I am  sure you will agree with  me." 
"I  must  see  Captain  Benwick before  I  decide,"  said  Lady  Russell, 
smiling. 
"And  that  you  are very likely to do very soon,  I can tell you,  ma'am," 
said  Charles.  "Though  he  had  not  nerves for  coming away with  us  and 
CHAPTER  XIV 
87 
setting  off again  afterwards  to  pay  a  formal  visit  here,  he  will  make  his 
way  over to  Kellynch one  day  by  himself,  you  may  depend  on  it.  I told 
him  the  distance  and  the  road,  and  I told  him  of the  church's  being  so 
very  well  worth  seeing,  for  as  he  has  a  taste  for  those  sort  of  things, 
I  thought  that  would  be  a  good  excuse,  and  he  listened  with  all  his 
understanding  and  soul;  and  I  am  sure  from  his  manner  that  you  will 
have  him  calling here  soon.  So, I give you  notice,  Lady Russell." 
"Any  acquaintance  of Anne's  will  always  be  welcome  to  me,"  was 
Lady  Russell's kind  answer. 
"Oh!  as  to  being  Anne's  acquaintance,"  said  Mary,  "I  think  he  is 
rather  my  acquaintance,  for  I  have  been  seeing  him  every  day  this  last 
fortnight. " 
"Well,  as your  joint acquaintance,  then,  I shall  be  very  happy  to see 
Captain Benwick." 
"You  will  not  find  any  thing  very  agreeable  in  him,  I  assure  you, 
ma'am.  He  is  one  of  the  dullest  young  men  that  ever  lived.  He  has 
walked  with  me,  sometimes,  from  one  end  of the  sands  to  the  other, 
without  saying  a  word.  He  is  not  at  all  a  well-bred  young  man.  I  am 
sure you  will not  like  him." 
"There we differ,  Mary," said Anne.  "I think  Lady Russell would  like 
him.  I  think  she  would  be  so  much  pleased  with  his  mind,  that  she 
would  very soon  see no deficiency in  his manner. " 
"So  do  I,  Anne,"  said  Charles.  "I  am  sure  Lady  Russell  would  like 
him.  He  is  just  Lady  Russell's sort.  Give him  a  book,  and  he  will  read 
all day  long. " 
"Yes,  that  he  will!" exclaimed  Mary,  tauntingly.  "He  will  sit  poring 
over his book,  and  not  know when  a person  speaks to him,  or when  one 
drops one's scissors, or any  thing  that  happens.  Do you  think  Lady Rus02
sell would  like that?" 
Lady  Russell could  not  help  laughing.  "Upon  my  word,"  said  she,  "I 
should  not have supposed  that  my opinion  of any one could have  admit02
ted  of such  difference  of conjecture,  steady  and  matter  of fact  as  I  may 
call  myself.  I  have  really  a  curiosity  to  see  the  person  who  can  give 
occasion  to such  directly opposite  notions.  I wish  he  may  be induced  to 
call  here.  And  when  he  does,  Mary,  you  may  depend  upon  hearing  my 
opinion; but  I am  determined  not to  judge  him  before-hand." 
"You  will not like him,  I will answer  for  it." 
Lady  Russell  began  talking  of something  else.  Mary  spoke  with  ani02
mation  of their  meeting  with,  or rather  missing,  Mr.  Elliot so extraordi02
narily. 
"He  is a  man,"  said  Lady  Russell, "whom  I have  no  wish  to  see.  His 
declining  to  be  on  cordial  terms  with  the  head  of his  family,  has  left  a 
very strong  impression  in  his disfavour  with  me." 
This decision  checked Mary's eagerness,  and  stopped  her  short  in  the 
midst  of the  Elliot  countenance. 
88 
CHAPTER  X IV 
With  regard  to  Captain  Wentworth,  though  Anne  hazarded  no 
enquiries, there was voluntary  communication sufficient.  His spirits had 
been  greatly  recovering  lately,  as  might  be  expected.  As  Louisa 
improved,  he  had  improved;  and  he  was  now  quite  a different  creature 
from  what  he  had  been  the  first week.  He  had  not seen  Louisa; and  was 
so  extremely  fearful  of any  ill  consequence  to  her  from  an  interview, 
that  he  did  not  press for  it at all; and,  on  the  contrary,  seemed to have a 
plan  of going  away  for  a  week  or  ten  days,  till  her  head  were  stronger. 
He  had  talked  of going  down  to  Plymouth  for  a  week,  and  wanted  to 
persuade  Captain  Benwick to  go with  him;  but,  as Charles  maintained 
to  the  last,  Captain  Benwick seemed  much  more  disposed  to  ride  over 
to Kellynch. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Lady  Russell and  Anne  were both  occa02
sionally  thinking  of  Captain  Benwick,  from  this  time.  Lady  Russell 
could  not  hear  the  door-bell  without  feeling that  it might be his  herald; 
nor  could  Anne  return  from  any  stroll  of  solitary  indulgence  in  her 
father's grounds,  or any visit of charity in the village, without  wondering 
whether  she  might  see him  or hear  of him.  Captain  Benwick came not, 
however.  He  was either  less disposed  for  it than  Charles had  imagined, 
or  he  was too shy; and  after  giving him  a week's indulgence,  Lady Rus02
sell  determined  him  to  be  unworthy  of the  interest  which  he  had  been 
beginning to  excite. 
The  Musgroves came back to  receive their happy boys and  girls from 
school,  bringing  with  them  Mrs.  Harville's  little  children,  to  improve 
the  noise  of Uppercross,  and  lessen  that  of Lyme.  Henrietta  remained 
with  Louisa;  but  all  the  rest  of  the  family  were  again  in  their  usual 
quarters. 
Lady  Russell and  Anne  paid  their  compliments to  them  once,  when 
Anne  could  not  but  feel  that  Uppercross  was  already  quite  alive again. 
Though  neither Henrietta,  nor Louisa, nor Charles Hayter,  nor Captain 
Wentworth  were there,  the  room  presented  as strong a contrast as could 
be wished,  to the  last state she had  seen  it  in. 
Immediately  surrounding  Mrs.  Musgrove  were  the  little  Harvilles, 
whom  she was sedulously guarding from  the tyranny  of the two children 
from  the  Cottage,  expressly arrived  to  amuse  them.  On  one  side  was a 
table,  occupied by some chattering  girls, cutting  up  silk and  gold  paper; 
and  on  the  other  were  tressels4 and  trays,  bending  under  the  weight of 
brawn  and  cold  pies,  where  riotous  boys  were  holding  high  revel;  the 
whole completed by a roaring Christmas  fire,  which seemed  determined 
to be heard,  in spite of all the  noise of the others.  Charles and  Mary also 
came  in,  of course, during their visit; and  Mrs.  Musgrove made  a  point 
of  paying  his  respects to  Lady Russell, and  sat down close to her for  ten 
minutes,  talking  with  a  very  raised  voice,  but,  from  the  clamour  of the 
4.  Trestles,  supports for the trays that converted them to tables. 
CHAPTER  XIV 
89 
children  on  his knees, generally in  vain.  It was a fine family-piece. 
Anne,  judging from  her own  temperament,  would  have deemed  such 
a  domestic  hurricane  a  bad  restorative  of  the  nerves,  which  Louisa's 
illness  must  have  so greatly  shaken; but  Mrs.  Musgrove,  who  got  Anne 
near her on purpose to thank  her most cordially, again and  again,  for all 
her attentions to them,  concluded a short recapitulation  of what she  had 
suffered  herself, by observing, with  a happy glance round the room,  that 
after  all she had  gone through,  nothing  was so likely to do  her good as a 
little quiet cheerfulness at  home. 
Louisa  was  now  recovering  apace.  Her  mother  could  even  think  of 
her being able to join their party at home,  before her brothers and  sisters 
went  to  school  again.  The  Harvilles  had  promised  to  come  with  her 
and  stay at Uppercross, whenever she returned.  Captain  Wentworth  was 
gone,  for the present,  to see his brother  in  Shropshire. 
"I  hope  I  shall  remember,  in  future,"  said  Lady  Russell,  as  soon  as 
they  were  reseated  in  the  carriage,  "not  to  call  at  Uppercross  in  the 
Christmas  holidays." 
Every  body  has  their  taste  in  noises  as  well  as  in  other  matters;  and 
sounds  are quite  innoxious,  or most distressing,  by their sort rather  than 
their  quantity.  When  Lady  Russell,  not  long  afterwards,  was  entering 
Bath  on  a wet afternoon,  and  driving  through  the  long course  of streets 
from  the  Old  Bridge to  Camden-place,  amidst  the  dash  of  other  car02
riages,  the  heavy  rumble  of carts  and  drays,  the  bawling  of  newsmen, 
muffin-men  and  milk-men,  and  the ceaseless clink of pattens,  she  made 
no complaint.  No,  these were noises which belonged to the winter  plea02
sures;  her  spirits  rose  under  their  influence;  and,  like  Mrs.  Musgrove, 
she was feeling, though  not saying,  that,  after being long in the  country, 
nothing  could be so good for her as a little quiet  cheerfulness. 
Anne did  not share these feelings. She persisted in a very  determined, 
though  very  silent,  disinclination  for  Bath;  caught  the  first  dim  view of 
the  extensive  buildings,  smoking  in  rain,  without  any  wish  of  seeing 
them  better;  felt  their  progress  through  the  streets  to  be,  however  dis02
agreeable,  yet  too  rapid;  for  who  would  be  glad  to  see  her  when  she 
arrived? And  looked back, with  fond  regret,  to the  bustles of Uppercross 
and  the  seclusion of Kellynch. 
Elizabeth's  last  letter  had  communicated  a  piece  of  news  of  some 
interest.  Mr.  Elliot  was  in  Bath.  He  had  called  in  Camden-place;  had 
called  a second time,  a third;  had  been  pointedly  attentive: if Elizabeth 
and  her  father  did  not  deceive  themselves,  had  been  taking  as  much 
pains  to  seek the  acquaintance,  and  proclaim  the  value  of the  connec02
tion,  as  he  had  formerly  taken  pains  to  shew  neglect.  This  was  very 
wonderful,  if it were true; and  Lady Russell was in  a state of very agree02
able curiosity and perplexity about Mr.  Elliot,  already recanting the sen02
timent  she  had  so lately expressed  to  Mary,  of his being  "a  man  whom 
she  had  no  wish  to  see." She  had  a  great  wish  to  see  him.  If he  really 
90 
CHAPTER  XV 
sought  to  reconcile himself  like a  dutiful  branch,  he  must  be  forgiven 
for  having  dismembered  himself from  the paternal  tree. 
Anne  was  not  animated  to  an  equal  pitch  by  the  circumstance; but 
she  felt that  she would  rather  see Mr.  Elliot  again  than  not,  which  was 
more than  she could  say for many  other persons  in Bath. 
She  was put  down  in  Camden-place; and  Lady Russell then  drove  to 
her  own  lodgings,  in Rivers-street. 
Chapter XV 
Sir  Walter  had  taken  a  very  good  house  in  Camden-place,  a  lofty, 
dignified  situation,  such  as  becomes a  man  of consequence; and  both 
he and  Elizabeth were settled there,  much  to their satisfaction. 
Anne  entered  it  with  a  sinking  heart,  anticipating  an  imprisonment 
of  many  months,  and  anxiously  saying  to  herself,  "Oh!  when  shall  I 
leave  you  again?" A  degree  of unexpected  cordiality,  however,  in  the 
welcome  she  received,  did  her  good.  Her  father  and  sister were glad  to 
see  her,  for  the  sake  of shewing  her  the  house  and  furniture,  and  met 
her with  kindness.  Her  making a fourth,  when  they sat down to  dinner, 
was noticed as an  advantage. 
Mrs.  Clay was very pleasant,  and  very smiling; but  her courtesies and 
smiles  were  more  a  matter  of  course.  Anne  had  always  felt  that  she 
would  pretend  what  was  proper  on  her  arrival; but  the  complaisance of 
the  others  was  unlooked  for.  They  were  evidently  in  excellent spirits, 
and  she  was  soon  to  listen  to  the  causes.  They  had  no  inclination  to 
listen  to  her.  After  laying  out5  for  some  compliments  of being  deeply 
regretted  in  their  old  neighbourhood,  which  Anne  could  not  pay,  they 
had  only  a few faint  enquiries  to  make,  before the  talk must  be all their 
own.  Uppercross excited no interest,  Kellynch very little, it was all Bath. 
They  had  the  pleasure  of assuring  her  that  Bath more  than  answered 
their  expectations  in  every  respect.  Their  house  was  undoubtedly  the 
best  in  Camden-place;  their  drawing-rooms  had  many  decided  advan02
tages over all the  others which  they  had  either seen or heard  of; and  the 
superiority  was not  less in  the  style of the  fitting-up,6  or the  taste of the 
furniture.  Their acquaintance was exceedingly sought  after.  Every body 
was  wanting  to  visit them.  They  had  drawn  back  from  many  introduc02
tions,  and  still  were  perpetually  having  cards  left  by  people  of  whom 
they knew  nothing. 
Here  were  funds  of enjoyment!  Could  Anne  wonder  that  her  father 
and  sister  were  happy?  She  might  not  wonder,  but  she  must  sigh  that 
her  father  should  feel  no  degradation  in  his change; should  see  nothing 
5.  Exerting themselves to gain an object. 
6.  Decorating. 
CHAPTER  XV 
91 
to  regret  in  the  duties  and  dignity  of the  resident  land-holder;  should 
find  so  much  to  be  vain  of in  the  littlenesses  of a  town;  and  she  must 
sigh,  and  smile,  and  wonder  too,  as  Elizabeth  threw  open  the  folding-
doors,  and  walked  with  exultation  from  one  drawing-room  to the  other, 
boasting  of their  space,  at  the  possibility of that  woman,  who  had  been 
mistress  of  Kellynch  Hall,  finding  extent  to  be  proud  of between  two 
walls,  perhaps thirty  feet  asunder. 
But  this  was  not  all  which  they  had  to  make  them  happy.  They  had 
Mr.  Elliot,  too. Anne  had  a great deal  to hear  of Mr.  Elliot.  He  was  not 
only  pardoned,  they  were  delighted  with  him.  He  had  been  in  Bath 
about  a fortnight;  (he had  passed  through  Bath in  November,  in  his way 
to London,  when  the  intelligence of Sir Walter's being settled there  had 
of course reached  him,  though  only twenty-four  hours  in  the  place,  but 
he  had  not  been  able  to  avail  himself  of  it): but  he  had  now  been  a 
fortnight  in  Bath, and  his first object,  on  arriving,  had  been  to  leave his 
card  in  Camden-place,  following  it up  by such  assiduous  endeavours  to 
meet,  and,  when  they  did  meet,  by  such  great  openness  of  conduct, 
such  readiness  to  apologize  for  the  past,  such  solicitude  to  be  received 
as a relation again,  that  their former  good understanding was completely 
re-established. 
They  had  not  a  fault  to  find  in  him.  He  had  explained  away  all  the 
appearance  of neglect  on  his  own  side.  It  had  originated  in  misappre02
hension  entirely.  He  had  never  had  an  idea  of throwing  himself  off;  he 
had  feared  that  he  was thrown  off,  but  knew  not  why; and  delicacy  had 
kept him  silent.  Upon  the  hint  of having  spoken  disrespectfully  or care02
lessly  of the  family,  and  the  family  honours,  he  was  quite  indignant. 
He,  who  had  ever boasted  of being  an  Elliot,  and  whose  feelings,  as  to 
connection,  were  only too strict to suit  the  unfeudal  tone  of the  present 
day!  He  was astonished,  indeed!  But his  character  and  general  conduct 
must  refute  it.  He  could  refer  Sir  Walter  to  all  who  knew  him;  and, 
certainly,  the  pains  he  had  been  taking  on  this,  the  first  opportunity 
of  reconciliation,  to  be  restored  to  the  footing  of a  relation  and  heir-
presumptive,  was a strong  proof of his opinions  on  the  subject. 
The  circumstances of his  marriage  too  were  found  to  admit  of  much 
extenuation.  This was  an  article  not  to  be  entered  on  by  himself; but  a 
very intimate  friend  of his,  a Colonel Wallis,  a highly  respectable  man, 
perfectly  the gentleman,  (and  not an  ill-looking man,  Sir Walter  added) 
who  was  living  in  very  good  style  in  Marlborough  Buildings,  and  had, 
at  his  own  particular  request,  been  admitted  to  their  acquaintance 
through  Mr.  Elliot,  had  mentioned  one  or  two  things  relative  to  the 
marriage,  which  made  a  material  difference  in  the  discredit  of it. 
Colonel Wallis had  known  Mr.  Elliot long,  had  been well  acquainted 
also  with  his  wife,  had  perfectly  understood  the  whole  story.  She  was 
certainly not a woman  of family,  but well educated,  accomplished,  rich, 
and  excessively in  love with  his friend.  There had  been  the  charm.  She 
92 
CHAPTER  XV 
had  sought  him.  Without  that  attraction,  not all her money would  have 
tempted  Elliot,  and  Sir  Walter  was,  moreover,  assured  of her  having 
been  a  very  fine7  woman.  Here  was a great  deal  to  soften  the  business. 
A  very  fine  woman,  with  a  large  fortune,  in  love with  him!  Sir Walter 
seemed  to  admit  it  as  complete  apology,  and  though  Elizabeth  could 
not see the  circumstance in quite  so favourable  a light,  she allowed it be 
a great  extenuation. 
Mr.  Elliot  had  called  repeatedly,  had  dined  with  them  once,  evi02
dently  delighted  by the  distinction  of being asked,  for they gave no  din02
ners  in  general;  delighted,  in  short,  by  every  proof of cousinly notice, 
and  placing  his  whole  happiness  in  being  on  intimate  terms  in  Cam02
den-place. 
Anne  listened,  but  without  quite  understanding  it.  Allowances, large 
allowances,  she  knew,  must  be  made  for  the  ideas  of those  who  spoke. 
She  heard  it  all  under  embellishment.  All that  sounded  extravagant  or 
irrational  in  the  progress  of the  reconciliation might  have  no  origin  but 
in  the  language  of the  relators.  Still,  however,  she  had  the  sensation of 
there  being something  more than  immediately appeared,  in  Mr.  Elliot's 
wishing,  after an  interval  of so many  years, to be well received by  them. 
In  a  worldly  view,  he  had  nothing  to  gain  by  being  on  terms  with  Sir 
Walter,  nothing  to  risk by  a  state  of variance.  In  all  probability  he  was 
already the  richer of the two,  and  the  Kellynch estate would  as surely be 
his  hereafter  as the  title.  A sensible man!  and  he  had  looked  like a  very 
sensible  man,  why  should  it be  an  object  to  him?  She could  only  offer 
one  solution;  it  was,  perhaps,  for  Elizabeth's  sake.  There  might  really 
have  been  a  liking  formerly,  though  convenience  and  accident  had 
drawn him  a different  way,  and  now  that  he  could afford  to please  him02
self,  he  might  mean  to pay  his addresses  to her.  Elizabeth was certainly 
very  handsome,  with  well-bred,  elegant  manners,  and  her  character 
might  never  have  been  penetrated  by  Mr.  Elliot,  knowing  her  but  in 
public,  and  when  very young  himself.  How her temper and  understand02
ing  might  bear  the  investigation  of his  present  keener  time  of life  was 
another  concern,  and  rather  a  fearful  one.  Most earnestly  did  she  wish 
that  he  might  not  be  too  nice,  or  too  observant,  if Elizabeth  were  his 
object;  and  that  Elizabeth  was  disposed  to  believe  herself  so,  and  that 
her  friend  Mrs.  Clay  was  encouraging  the  idea,  seemed  apparent  by 
a  glance  or  two  between  them,  while  Mr.  Elliot's  frequent  visits  were 
talked  of. 
Anne  mentioned  the  glimpses she had  had  of him  at Lyme, but  with02
out  being  much  attended  to.  "Oh! yes, perhaps,  it had  been  Mr.  Elliot. 
They  did  not know.  It might be him,  perhaps." They could  not listen to 
her  description  of him.  They were describing him  themselves; Sir Wal02
ter  especially.  He  did  justice to  his  very  gentlemanlike  appearance,  his 
7.  Good-looking. 
CHAPTER  XV 
93 
air of elegance and  fashion,  his good  shaped  face,  his sensible eye,  but, 
at  the  same  time,  "must  lament  his  being  very  much  under-hung,8  a 
defect which time seemed to have increased; nor could he pretend  to say 
that  ten  years  had  not  altered  almost  every  feature  for  the  worse.  Mr. 
Elliot  appeared  to  think  that  he  (Sir Walter) was  looking  exactly as  he 
had  done  when  they  last parted;"  but  Sir Walter  had  "not  been  able  to 
return  the  compliment  entirely,  which  had  embarrassed  him.  He  did 
not  mean  to  complain,  however.  Mr.  Elliot  was  better  to  look at  than 
most men,  and  he had  no objection to being seen with  him  any  where." 
Mr.  Elliot,  and  his friends  in  Marlborough  Buildings, were talked of 
the  whole  evening.  "Colonel Wallis had  been  so impatient  to  be  intro02
duced  to  them!  and  Mr.  Elliot  so  anxious  that  he  should!"  And  there 
was a Mrs. Wallis,  at present only known  to them  by description,  as she 
was  in  daily  expectation  of her  confinement;9  but  Mr.  Elliot  spoke of 
her as "a most charming woman,  quite worthy  of being known  in  Cam02
den-place," and  as  soon  as  she  recovered,  they  were  to  be  acquainted. 
Sir  Walter thought  much  of Mrs.  Wallis;  she  was  said  to  be  an  exces02
sively  pretty  woman,  beautiful.  "He  longed  to  see  her.  He  hoped  she 
might make some amends  for the many very plain  faces he was continu02
ally passing in the streets. The worst of Bath was, the  number  of its plain 
women.  He  did  not  mean  to  say that  there  were  no  pretty  women,  but 
the  number  of the  plain  was  out  of all  proportion.  He  had  frequently 
observed,  as  he  walked,  that  one  handsome  face  would  be  followed  by 
thirty,  or five and  thirty  frights;  and  once,  as he  had  stood  in  a  shop  in 
Bond-street,  he  had  counted  eighty-seven  women  go  by,  one  after 
another,  without  there  being a  tolerable face  among  them.  It had  been 
a frosty morning,  to be sure,  a sharp frost,  which hardly  one woman  in a 
thousand  could stand the test of. But still, there certainly were a  dreadful 
multitude  of ugly  women  in  Bath; and  as  for  the  men!  they  were  infi02
nitely worse.  Such scare-crows as the  streets were full  of! It was  evident 
how  little the  women  were  used  to  the  sight  of any  thing  tolerable,  by 
the  effect  which  a  man  of decent  appearance  produced.  He  had  never 
walked  any  where  arm  in  arm  with  Colonel  Wallis,  (who  was  a  fine 
military  figure,  though  sandy-haired)  without  observirig  that  every 
woman's  eye  was  upon  him;  every  woman's  eye  was  sure  to  be  upon 
Colonel  Wallis."  Modest  Sir  Walter!  He  was  not  allowed  to  escape, 
however.  His  daughter  and  Mrs.  Clay  united  in  hinting  that  Colonel 
Wallis's companion  might  have as good a figure as Colonel Wallis,  and 
certainly was not  sandy-haired. 
"How  is  Mary  looking?" said  Sir  Walter,  in  the  height  of his  good 
humour.  "The last time  I saw  her,  she  had  a  red  nose,  but  I hope  that 
may not happen  every  day." 
"Oh!  no,  that  must  have  been  quite  accidental.  In  general  she  has 
8.  Having a projecting lower jaw. 
9.  Lying-in for childbirth. 
94 
CHAPTER  XV 
been  in very good health,  and  very good looks since Michaelmas. " 
"If  I  thought  it  would  not  tempt  her  to  go  out  in  sharp  winds,  and 
grow coarse, I would  send  her  a new hat and pelisse." 
Anne  was  considering  whether  she  should  venture  to  suggest  that  a 
gown,  or a  cap,  would  not  be  liable to any  such  misuse,  when  a knock 
at  the  door  suspended  every thing.  "A knock at the  door!  and  so late! It 
was  ten  o'clock. Could  it  be  Mr.  Elliot?  They knew  he  was  to  dine  in 
Lansdown  Crescent. It was possible that  he might stop in his way home, 
to  ask them  how  they  did.  They could  think  of no  one  else.  Mrs. Clay 
decidedly  thought  it  Mr.  Elliot's knock." Mrs.  Clay was right.  With all 
the state which  a butler and  foot-boy could give, Mr.  Elliot was  ushered 
into the  room. 
It was the  same,  the  very same  man,  with  no  difference  but  of dress. 
Anne drew a little back, while the others received his compliments,  and 
her  sister his apologies for  calling at so unusual  an  hour,  but  "he could 
not  be  so  near  without  wishing  to know  that  neither  she  nor  her  friend 
had  taken  cold the  day  before,  etc. etc." which was all as politely done, 
and  as  politely  taken  as  possible,  but  her  part  must  follow  then.  Sir 
Walter  talked of his youngest daughter;  "Mr.  Elliot  must give him  leave 
to  present  him  to  his  youngest  daughter"―(there  was  no  occasion for 
remembering  Mary) and  Anne,  smiling and  blushing,  very becomingly 
shewed  to  Mr.  Elliot  the  pretty  features  which  he  had  by  no  means 
forgotten,  and  instantly  saw,  with  amusement  at  his  little  start  of  sur02
prise,  that  he  had  not  been  at  all  aware  of  who  she  was.  He  looked 
completely  astonished,  but  not  more  astonished  than  pleased;  his eyes 
brightened,  and  with the  most perfect alacrity he welcomed the relation02
ship,  alluded  to  the  past,  and  entreated  to  be  received  as  an  acquain02
tance  already.  He  was  quite  as  good-looking  as  he  had  appeared  at 
Lyme,  his countenance improved  by speaking,  and  his manners were so 
exactly what they ought  to be, so polished,  so easy, so particularly agree02
able,  that  she  could  compare  them  in  excellence to  only  one  person's 
manners.  They  were  not  the  same,  but  they  were,  perhaps,  equally 
good. 
He sat down with  them,  and  improved  their conversation very  much. 
There could be no doubt of his being a sensible man.  Ten minutes were 
enough  to  certify  that.  His  tone,  his  expressions,  his  choice of subject, 
his  knowing  where  to  stop,―it  was  all  the  operation  of a  sensible, dis02
cerning  mind.  As soon  as  he  could,  he  began  to  talk  to  her  of Lyme, 
wanting  to  compare  opinions  respecting  the  place,  but  especially want02
ing  to  speak  of the  circumstance of their  happening  to be  guests  in  the 
same inn  at the same time, to give his own  route,  understand  something 
of  hers,  and  regret that  he  should  have  lost such  an  opportunity  of pay02
ing  his  respects to  her.  She gave him  a  short  account  of her  party,  and 
business  at  Lyme.  His  regret  increased as he  listened.  He  had  spent  his 
whole solitary evening  in  the  room  adjoining  theirs; had  heard voices― 
CHAPTER  X VI 
95 
mirth  continually;  thought  they  must  be  a  most  delightful  set  of  peo02
ple―longed  to  be  with  them;  but  certainly  without  the  smallest  suspi02
cion  of his  possessing  the  shadow  of a  right  to  introduce  himself.  If he 
had  but  asked  who  the  party  were! The  name  of Musgrove  would  have 
told  him  enough.  "Well,  it would  serve  to  cure  him  of an  absurd  prac02
tice  of never  asking  a question  at  an  inn,  which  he  had  adopted,  when 
quite  a  young  man,  on  the  principle  of its  being  very  ungenteel  to  be 
curious. 
"The  notions  of a young  man  of one  or two  and  twenty,"  said  he,  "as 
to what  is necessary  in  manners  to  make  him  quite  the  thing,  are  more 
absurd,  I believe, than those of any other set of beings in the world.  The 
folly  of the  means  they  often  employ  is only  to  be  equalled  by the  folly 
of what  they have  in  view. " 
But he  must  not  be addressing  his reflections to Anne  alone; he  knew 
it;  he  was  soon  diffused  again  among  the  others,  and  it  was  only  at 
intervals that  he  could  return  to Lyme. 
His  enquiries,  however,  produced  at  length  an  account  of the  scene 
she  had  been  engaged  in  there,  soon  after  his leaving the  place.  Having 
alluded  to "an  accident," he must  hear the whole.  When  he  questioned, 
Sir  Walter  and  Elizabeth  began  to  question  also; but  the  difference  in 
their  manner  of doing  it  could  not  be  unfelt.  She could  only  compare 
Mr.  Elliot  to  Lady  Russell,  in  the  wish  of really  comprehending  what 
had  passed,  and  in the degree of concern for what she must  have  suffered 
in witnessing  it. 
He  staid  an  hour  with  them.  The  elegant  little  clock  on  the  mantle-
piece had  struck  "eleven with  its silver sounds,"1  and  the watchman  was 
beginning  to  be  heard  at  a  distance  telling  the  same  tale,  before  Mr. 
Elliot  or any  of them  seemed  to feel  that  he  had  been  there  long. 
Anne  could  not  have  supposed  it  possible  that  her  first  evening  in 
Camden-place  could  have passed  so well! 
Chapter XVI 
There  was  one  point  which  Anne,  on  returning to her  family,  would 
have  been  more  thankful  to  ascertain,  even  than  Mr.  Elliot's  being  in 
love with  Elizabeth, which  was,  her father's  not being  in  love with  Mrs. 
Clay;  and  she  was  very  far  from  easy  about  it,  when  she  had  been  at 
home  a  few  hours.  On  going  down  to  breakfast  the  next  morning,  she 
found  there  had  just been  a decent  pretence  on  the  lady's  side  of mean02
ing to leave them.  She could  imagine Mrs. Clay to have said,  that  "now 
Miss  Anne  was  come,  she  could  not  suppose  herself  at  all  wanted;"  for 
1.  Perhaps an allusion to Alexander  Pope's The Rape  of the Lock  (1714)  1.18: "And the pressed 
watch returned a silver sound." 
96 
CHAPTER  XVI 
Elizabeth  was  replying,  in  a  sort  of  whisper,  "That  must  not  be  any 
reason,  indeed.  I assure  you  I feel  it none.  She is nothing  to me,  com02
pared  with  you;"  and  she  was  in  full  time  to  hear  her  father  say,  "My 
dear  Madam,  this  must  not  be.  As yet,  you  have  seen  nothing  of Bath. 
You  have  been  here  only to be useful.  You must  not  run  away from  us 
now.  You  must  stay  to  be  acquainted  with  Mrs.  Wallis,  the  beautiful 
Mrs.  Wallis.  To  your  fine  mind,  I  well  know  the  sight  of beauty  is a 
real  gratification." 
He spoke and  looked so much  in  earnest,  that Anne was not  surprised 
to see Mrs. Clay stealing a glance at  Elizabeth and  herself.  Her  counte02
nance,  perhaps,  might  express some  watchfulness;  but  the  praise  of the 
fine  mind  did  not  appear  to  excite  a  thought  in  her  sister.  The  lady 
could  not  but  yield to such  joint entreaties,  and  promise to stay. 
In  the  course of the  same  morning,  Anne  and  her  father  chancing to 
be  alone  together,  he  began  to  compliment  her  on  her  improved looks; 
he  thought  her  "less  thin  in  her  person,  in  her  cheeks; her  skin,  her 
complexion,  greatly  improved―clearer,  fresher.  Had  she  been  using 
any  thing  in  particular?" "No,  nothing."  "Merely Gowland,"2  he  sup02
posed.  "No,  nothing  at  all." "Ha!  he  was surprised  at that;"  and  added, 
"Certainly  you  cannot  do  better  than  continue  as  you  are; you  cannot 
be  better than  well; or  I should  recommend  Gowland,  the  constant  use 
of  Gowland,  during the  spring  months.  Mrs.  Clay  has  been  using  it at 
my  recommendation,  and  you  see  what  it  has  done  for  her.  You  see 
how  it has carried away her freckles." 
If  Elizabeth  could  but  have  heard  this!  Such  personal  praise  might 
have  struck  her,  especially as it did  not  appear  to Anne that  the freckles 
were  at  all  lessened.  But every  thing  must  take  its  chance.  The  evil of 
the  marriage  would  be  much  diminished,  if  Elizabeth  were  also  to 
marry.  As  for  herself,  she  might  always  command  a  home  with  Lady 
Russell. 
Lady  Russell's composed  mind  and  polite  manners  were put  to some 
trial  on  this  point,  in  her  intercourse  in  Camden-place.  The  sight of 
Mrs.  Clay  in  such  favour,  and  of Anne  so overlooked,  was  a  perpetual 
provocation  to her there; and  vexed her as much  when  she was away, as 
a  person  in  Bath  who  drinks  the  water,  gets  all  the  new  publications, 
and  has a very large acquaintance,  has time to be vexed. 
As  Mr.  Elliot  became  known  to  her,  she  grew  more  charitable,  or 
more  indifferent,  towards  the  others.  His  manners  were  an  immediate 
recommendation;  and  on  conversing  with  him  she  found  the  solid  so 
fully  supporting  the  superficial,  that  she  was  at  first,  as  she  told  Anne, 
almost  ready  to  exclaim, "Can  this  be  Mr.  Elliot?"  and  could  not seri02
ously picture  to herself a  more agreeable or estimable man.  Every thing 
united  in  him;  good  understanding,  correct opinions,  knowledge  of the 
2.  Gowland's lotion, intended for the face,  was supposed to remedy ailments of the skin. 
CHAPTER  XVI 
97 
world,  and  a  warm  heart.  He  had  strong  feelings  of  family-attachment 
and  family-honour,  without  pride or weakness; he lived with  the liberal02
ity  of a  man  of fortune,  without  display; he  judged  for  himself  in  every 
thing  essential,  without  defying  public  opinion  in  any  point  of worldly 
decorum.  He  was steady,  observant,  moderate,  candid;  never  run  away 
with  by spirits  or  by selfishness,  which  fancied  itself  strong  feeling;  and 
yet,  with  a  sensibility to  what  was  amiable  and  lovely,  and  a  value  for 
all the felicities  of domestic life,  which characters of fancied  enthusiasm 
and  violent agitation seldom  really possess. She was sure that  he had  not 
been  happy  in  marriage.  Colonel Wallis said  it,  and  Lady  Russell saw 
it;  but  it  had  been  no  unhappiness  to  sour  his  mind,  nor  (she  began 
pretty  soon  to  suspect) to  prevent  his  thinking  of a  second  choice.  Her 
satisfaction  in  Mr.  Elliot  outweighed  all the  plague  of Mrs.  Clay. 
It  was  now  some  years  since Anne  had  begun  to  learn  that  she  and 
her  excellent friend  could  sometimes  think  differently;  and  it  did  not 
surprise  her,  therefore,  that  Lady  Russell should  see nothing  suspicious 
or inconsistent,  nothing  to require  more  motives than  appeared,  in  Mr. 
Elliot's  great  desire  of a  reconciliation.  In  Lady  Russell's view,  it  was 
perfectly  natural  that  Mr.  Elliot,  at a mature  time of life,  should  feel  it a 
most desirable  object,  and  what  would  very generally recommend  him, 
among  all  sensible  people,  to  be  on  good  terms  with  the  head  of  his 
family;  the  simplest process in  the  world  of time  upon  a  head  naturally 
clear,  and only erring in the heyday of youth.  Anne presumed,  however, 
still  to  smile about  it; and  at  last to  mention  "Elizabeth." Lady Russell 
listened,  and  looked,  and  made  only  this  cautious  reply:  "Elizabeth! 
Very well. Time will explain." 
It was a reference to the future,  which Anne,  after a little observation, 
felt she must  submit to.  She could determine  nothing  at present.  In  that 
house  Elizabeth  must  be first; and  she  was  in  the  habit  of such  general 
observance  as  "Miss  Elliot,"  that  any  particularity  of attention  seemed 
almost  impossible.  Mr.  Elliot,  too,  it  must  be  remembered,  had  not 
been  a  widower  seven  months.  A  little delay  on  his  side  might  be  very 
excusable.  In fact, Anne could never see the crape3 round his hat,  with02
out  fearing  that  she was the  inexcusable one,  in  attributing  to him  such 
imaginations;  for  though  his  marriage  had  not  been  very  happy,  still  it 
had  existed so  many  years  that  she  could  not  comprehend  a  very  rapid 
recovery from  the awful4  impression  of its being dissolved. 
However  it might  end,  he  was without  any question  their  pleasantest 
acquaintance  in  Bath; she  saw  nobody  equal  to  him;  and  it was a  great 
indulgence  now  and  then  to talk to him  about  Lyme, which  he  seemed 
to have as lively a wish to see again,  and  to see more of,  as herself. They 
went  through  the  particulars  of their  first  meeting  a  great  many  times. 
He gave her to understand that  he  had  looked at her with  some  earnest-
3.  A sign of mourning. 
4.  Awe-inspiring. 
98 
CHAPTER  XVI 
ness.  She knew  it well; and  she remembered  another  person's  look also. 
They  did  not  always  think  alike.  His  value  for  rank  and  connexion 
she  perceived  to  be  greater  than  hers.  It was  not  merely  complaisance, 
it must  be a liking to the  cause,  which  made  him  enter  warmly  into  her 
father  and  sister's  solicitudes  on  a  subject which  she  thought  unworthy 
to  excite  them.  The  Bath  paper  one  morning  announced  the  arrival of 
the Dowager Viscountess Dalrymple,  and  her daughter,  the  Honourable 
Miss Carteret; and  all the  comfort of No.  ―,  Camden-place,  was  swept 
away for many  days; for the  Dalrymples (in Anne's opinion,  most  unfor02
tunately)  were  cousins  of the  Elliots;  and  the  agony  was,  how  to  intro02
duce  themselves  properly. 
Anne  had  never  seen  her  father  and  sister  before  in  contact  with 
nobility,  and  she  must  acknowledge  herself  disappointed.  She  had 
hoped  better  things  from  their  high  ideas  of their  own  situation  in  life, 
and  was  reduced  to  form  a wish  which  she  had  never  foreseen―a  wish 
that  they  had  more  pride;  for  "our  cousins  Lady  Dalrymple  and  Miss 
Carteret;"  "our  cousins,  the  Dalrymples,"  sounded  in  her  ears  all  day 
long. 
Sir  Walter  had  once  been  in  company  with  the  late  Viscount,  but 
had  never  seen  any  of the  rest  of the  family,  and  the  difficulties  of the 
case  arose  from  there  having  been  a  suspension  of all  intercourse  by 
letters  of  ceremony,  ever  since  the  death  of  that  said  late  Viscount, 
when,  in  consequence of a dangerous  illness of Sir Walter's at the  same 
time,  there  had  been  an  unlucky  omission  at  Kellynch.  No  letter  of 
condolence  had  been  sent  to  Ireland.  The  neglect  had  been  visited  on 
the  head  of the  sinner,  for when  poor  Lady Elliot died  herself,  no  letter 
of  condolence  was  received  at  Kellynch,  and,  consequently,  there  was 
but  too  much  reason  to  apprehend  that  the  Dalrymples  considered  the 
relationship  as  closed.  How  to  have  this  anxious  business  set  to  rights, 
and  be admitted  as cousins again,  was the question; and  it was a question 
which,  in  a  more  rational  manner,  neither  Lady  Russell nor  Mr.  Elliot 
thought  unimportant.  "Family  connexions  were  always  worth  preserv02
ing,  good  company  always  worth  seeking; Lady  Dalrymple  had  taken  a 
house,  for  three  months,  in  Laura-place,  and  would  be  living  in  style. 
She  had  been  at  Bath  the  year  before,  and  Lady  Russell had  heard  her 
spoken  of as a  charming  woman.  It was  very desirable  that  the connex02
ion  should  be  renewed,  if it could  be done,  without  any  compromise of 
propriety  on  the  side of the  Elliots." 
Sir  Walter,  however,  would  choose his own  means,  and  at last  wrote 
a  very  fine  letter  of ample  explanation,  regret  and  entreaty,  to  his  right 
honourable  cousin.  Neither  Lady  Russell  nor  Mr.  Elliot  could  admire 
the  letter; but  it did  all that  was wanted,  in bringing three  lines of scrawl 
from  the  Dowager  Viscountess.  "She  was  very  much  honoured,  and 
should  be  happy  in  their  acquaintance." The  toils of the  business  were 
over,  the  sweets began.  They visited  in  Laura-place,  they  had  the  cards 
CHAPTER  XVI 
99 
of  Dowager Viscountess Dalrymple,  and  the  Hon.  Miss Carteret,  to  be 
arranged  wherever  they  might  be  most  visible;  and  "Our  cousins  in 
Laura-place,"―"Our  cousins,  Lady  Dalrymple  and  Miss  Carteret," 
were talked  of to every body. 
Anne  was  ashamed.  Had  Lady  Dalrymple  and  her  daughter  even 
been  very agreeable, she would  still have  been  ashamed  of the  agitation 
they  created,  but  they  were  nothing.  There was  no  superiority  of  man02
ner,  accomplishment,  or understanding.  Lady Dalrymple  had  acquired 
the  name  of "a  charming  woman,"  because she  had  a  smile and  a  civil 
answer  for  every body.  Miss Carteret,  with  still less to  say,  was so  plain 
and  so awkward,  that  she would  never  have been  tolerated  in  Camden-
place but  for her  birth. 
Lady  Russell  confessed  that  she  had  expected  something  better;  but 
yet "it was an  acquaintance worth  having," and  when  Anne ventured  to 
speak her  opinion  of them  to  Mr.  Elliot,  he  agreed  to their being  noth02
ing  in  themselves,  but  still  maintained  that  as  a  family  connexion,  as 
good company,  as those who would  collect good company around  them, 
they had  their value.  Anne  smiled and  said, 
"My  idea  of good  company,  Mr.  Elliot,  is  the  company  of clever, 
well-informed  people,  who  have  a  great  deal  of  conversation;  that  is 
what  I call good  company." 
"You  are  mistaken,"  said  he  gently,  "that  is not  good  company,  that 
is the best.  Good company  requires only birth,  education  and  manners, 
and  with  regard  to  education  is not  very  nice.  Birth and  good  manners 
are  essential; but  a  little  learning  is by  no  means  a  dangerous  thing  in 
good company,  on  the  contrary,  it will do  very well.  My cousin,  Anne, 
shakes her  head.  She is not  satisfied.  She is fastidious.  My dear  cousin, 
(sitting down by her) you  have a better  right to be fastidious  than  almost 
any  other  woman  I know; but  will it answer?5  Will  it make  you  happy? 
Will  it not  be wiser to  accept the  society of these good  ladies  in  Laura-
place,  and  enjoy  all  the  advantages  of the  connexion  as far  as possible? 
You  may depend  upon  it, that  they will move in the first set in  Bath  this 
winter,  and  as rank  is rank,  your being known  to be related  to them  will 
have  its use  in  fixing  your  family  (our  family  let  me  say) in  that  degree 
of consideration  which  we must  all wish  for. " 
"Yes,"  sighed  Anne,  "we  shall,  indeed,  be  known  to  be  related  to 
them!"―then  recollecting herself,  and  not  wishing  to be answered,  she 
added,  "I  certainly  do  think  there  has  been  by  far  too  much  trouble 
taken to procure the acquaintance. I suppose (smiling) I have more pride 
than  any  of you;  but  I  confess  it  does  vex  me,  that  we  should  be  so 
solicitous to have the  relationship acknowledged,  which  we may be very 
sure  is a matter  of perfect indifference to  them." 
"Pardon  me,  my  dear  cousin,  you  are  unjust  to  your  own  claims.  In 
5.  Suffice,  serve the purpose. 
100 
CHAPTER  XVII 
London,  perhaps,  in  your  present  quiet  style  of living,  it  might  be  as 
you  say;  but  in  Bath,  Sir  Walter  Elliot  and  his  family  will  always  be 
worth  knowing,  always acceptable as acquaintance." 
"Well,"  said  Anne,  "I certainly am  proud,  too proud  to  enjoy  a wel02
come  which  depends so entirely upon place." 
"I  love your  indignation,"  said he; "it is very natural.  But here you are 
in  Bath,  and  the  object  is to be  established  here  with  all  the  credit  and 
dignity  which  ought  to  belong  to  Sir Walter  Elliot.  You  talk  of being 
proud,  I am  called proud  I know,  and  I shall  not wish  to believe myself 
otherwise,  for  our  pride,  if investigated,  would  have  the  same  object,  I 
have  no  doubt,  though  the  kind  may  seem  a  little  different.  In  one 
point,  I  am  sure,  my  dear  cousin,  (he  continued,  speaking  lower, 
though  there  was  no  one  else in  the  room) in  one  point,  I am  sure,  we 
must  feel  alike. We must  feel  that  every addition  to your father's society, 
among  his  equals  or  superiors,  may  be  of use  in  diverting  his  thoughts 
from  those who  are beneath  him." 
He  looked,  as he  spoke,  to the  seat which  Mrs.  Clay had  been  lately 
occupying,  a  sufficient  explanation  of what  he  particularly  meant;  and 
though  Anne  could  not  believe in  their  having  the  same  sort  of pride, 
she  was  pleased  with  him  for  not  liking  Mrs.  Clay; and  her conscience 
admitted  that  his  wishing  to promote  her  father's  getting  great  acquain02
tance,  was more than  excusable in the  view of defeating  her. 
Chapter  XVII 
While  Sir Walter and  Elizabeth were  assiduously  pushing their good 
fortune  in  Laura-place,  Anne  was  renewing  an  acquaintance  of a  very 
different  description. 
She  had  called  on  her  former  governess,  and  had  heard  from  her of 
there being an  old school-fellow in  Bath, who  had  the two strong claims 
on  her attention,  of past kindness and  present  suffering.  Miss Hamilton, 
now  Mrs.  Smith,  had  shewn  her kindness  in  one of those periods  of her 
life when  it had  been  most valuable.  Anne had  gone unhappy to school, 
grieving  for  the  loss  of a  mother  whom  she  had  dearly  loved,  feeling 
her  separation  from  home,  and  suffering  as a girl  of fourteen,  of strong 
sensibility  and  not  high  spirits,  must  suffer  at  such  a  time;  and  Miss 
Hamilton,  three  years older than  herself, but  still from  her want  of near 
relations  and  a  settled  home,  remaining  another  year  at  school,  had 
been  useful  and  good  to her  in  a way which  had  considerably lessened 
her  misery,  and  could  never  be  remembered  with  indifference. 
Miss  Hamilton  had  left school, had  married  not  long afterwards,  was 
said  to  have  married  a  man  of fortune,  and  this  was  all  that  Anne  had 
known  of her,  till  now  that  their  governess's account brought  her  situa02
tion  forward  in  a  more decided  but  very different  form. 
CHAPTER  X V II 
101 
She  was a widow,  and  poor.  Her  husband  had  been  extravagant;  and 
at  his  death,  about  two  years  before,  had  left  his  affairs  dreadfully 
involved.  She had  had  difficulties  of every sort  to  contend  with,  and  in 
addition  to  these  distresses,  had  been  afflicted  with  a  severe  rheumatic 
fever,  which  finally  settling  in  her  legs,  had  made  her  for  the  present  a 
cripple.  She had  come to Bath on that account,  and  was now in  lodgings 
near  the  hotbaths,  living  in  a  very  humble  way,  unable  even  to  afford 
herself  the  comfort  of a  servant,  and  of  course  almost  excluded  from 
society. 
Their  mutual  friend  answered  for  the  satisfaction  which  a  visit  from 
Miss  Elliot would  give Mrs.  Smith,  and  Anne  therefore  lost no  time  in 
going.  She  mentioned  nothing  of  what  she  had  heard,  or  what  she 
intended,  at  home.  It  would  excite  no  proper  interest  there.  She  only 
consulted  Lady  Russell,  who  entered  thoroughly  into  her  sentiments, 
and  was  most  happy  to  convey  her  as  near  to  Mrs.  Smith's lodgings  in 
Westgate-buildings,  as Anne  chose to be  taken. 
The  visit was paid,  their  acquaintance  re-established,  their  interest  in 
each other  more than  re-kindled.  The first ten  minutes  had  its  awkward02
ness and  its emotion.  Twelve years were gone since they had  parted,  and 
each  presented  a  somewhat  different  person  from  what  the  other  had 
imagined.  Twelve years  had  changed  Anne  from  the  blooming,  silent, 
unformed  girl of fifteen, to the elegant little woman  of seven and  twenty, 
with  every  beauty  excepting  bloom,  and  with  manners  as  consciously 
right  as  they  were  invariably  gentle;  and  twelve  years  had  transformed 
the  fine-looking,  well-grown  Miss  Hamilton,  in  all  the  glow  of  health 
and  confidence  of  superiority,  into  a  poor,  infirm,  helpless  widow, 
receiving  the  visit  of her  former  protegee  as  a  favour;  but  all  that  was 
uncomfortable  in  the  meeting  had  soon  passed  away,  and  left  only  the 
interesting  charm  of  remembering  former  partialities  and  talking  over 
old times. 
Anne  found  in  Mrs.  Smith  the  good  sense  and  agreeable  manners 
which  she  had  almost  ventured  to depend  on,  and  a disposition  to  con02
verse  and  be  cheerful  beyond  her  expectation.  Neither  the  dissipations 
of  the  past―and  she  had  lived  very  much  in  the  world,  nor  the  restric02
tions  of the  present;  neither  sickness nor  sorrow  seemed  to  have  closed 
her  heart  or ruined  her  spirits. 
In  the  course  of a  second  visit  she  talked  with  great  openness,  and 
Anne's  astonishment  increased.  She  could  scarcely  imagine  a  more 
cheerless situation  in  itself than Mrs.  Smith's. She had been very fond of 
her husband,―she  had  buried  him.  She had been used to affluence,―it 
was  gone.  She  had  no  child  to  connect  her  with  life  and  happiness 
again,  no  relations  to  assist  in  the  arrangement  of perplexed  affairs,  no 
health  to  make  all the  rest supportable.  Her  accommodations  were  lim02
ited to a noisy parlour,  and  a dark  bed-room  behind,  with  no  possibility 
of  moving  from  one  to  the  other  without  assistance,  which  there  was 
102 
CHAPTER  XVII 
only one servant in  the  house to afford,  and  she never quitted  the  house 
but  to be conveyed into the  warm  bath.6―Yet, in spite of all this,  Anne 
had  reason to believe that she had  moments  only of languor and  depres02
sion,  to  hours  of occupation  and  enjoyment.  How  could  it  be?―She 
watched―observed―reflected―and  finally  determined  that  this  was 
not a case of fortitude  or of resignation  only.―A submissive spirit  might 
be  patient,  a  strong  understanding  would  supply  resolution,  but  here 
was something more; here was that elasticity of mind,  that disposition  to 
be  comforted,  that  power  of turning  readily  from  evil  to  good,  and  of 
finding  employment  which  carried  her  out  of herself,  which  was  from 
Nature  alone.  It was the  choicest gift  of Heaven;  and  Anne  viewed  her 
friend  as one  of those  instances in  which,  by a merciful  appointment,  it 
seems designed  to counterbalance almost every other  want. 
There  had  been  a  time,  Mrs.  Smith  told  her,  when  her  spirits  had 
nearly failed.  She could  not  call  herself an  invalid now,  compared  with 
her  state  on  first  reaching  Bath.  Then,  she  had  indeed  been  a  pitiable 
object―for  she  had  caught  cold  on  the  journey,  and  had  hardly  taken 
possession  of her  lodgings,  before  she  was  again  confined  to  her  bed, 
and  suffering  under severe and  constant pain; and  all this among  strang02
ers―with  the  absolute  necessity of having  a regular  nurse,  and  finances 
at  that  moment  particularly  unfit  to  meet  any  extraordinary  expense. 
She  had  weathered  it however,  and  could  truly  say that  it had  done  her 
good.  It had  increased  her  comforts  by  making  her  feel  herself  to be  in 
good  hands.  She had  seen  too  much  of the  world,  to  expect sudden  or 
disinterested  attachment  any  where,  but  her  illness  had  proved  to  her 
that  her  landlady  had  a character to preserve,  and  would  not use her ill; 
and  she  had  been  particularly  fortunate  in  her  nurse,  as  a  sister of her 
landlady,  a  nurse  by  profession,  and  who  had  always  a  home  in  that 
house  when  unemployed,  chanced to be at liberty just in time to  attend 
her.―"And  she,"  said  Mrs.  Smith,  "besides  nursing  me  most  admira02
bly,  has  really proved  an  invaluable  acquaintance.―As soon  as I could 
use  my  hands,  she  taught  me  to  knit,  which  has  been  a  great  amuse02
ment;  and  she  put  me  in  the  way  of making  these  little  thread-cases, 
pin-cushions  and  card-racks,  which  you  always  find  me  so busy  about, 
and  which  supply  me  with  the  means  of doing  a  little good  to  one  or 
two  very poor  families in  this  neighbourhood.  She has a  large acquain02
tance,  of course professionally, among those who can afford  to buy,  and 
she  disposes  of  my  merchandize.  She  always  takes  the  right  time  for 
applying.  Every  body's  heart  is  open,  you  know,  when  they  have 
recently  escaped  from  severe  pain,  or  are  recovering  the  blessing  of 
health,  and  nurse  Rooke thoroughly  understands when  to speak.  She is 
a  shrewd,  intelligent,  sensible woman.  Hers  is a  line for  seeing human 
nature;  and  she  has  a  fund  of good  sense  and  observation  which,  as a 
6.  Of the supposedly medicinal  waters for which Bath was famous. 
CHAPTER  XVII 
103 
companion,  make her  infinitely superior to thousands  of those who  hav02
ing only received "the best education  in the world," know nothing  worth 
attending  to.  Call  it  gossip  if you  will; but  when  nurse  Rooke has  half 
an  hour's  leisure to bestow on  me, she is sure to have something to relate 
that is entertaining  and  profitable,  something that makes one know one's 
species  better.  One  likes to  hear  what  is going  on,  to  be  au  fait7  as  to 
the  newest  modes  of being  trifling  and  silly.  To  me,  who  live so  much 
alone,  her conversation  I assure you  is a treat. " 
Anne,  far from  wishing  to cavil at the  pleasure,  replied,  "I can easily 
believe it.  Women  of that  class have great  opportunities,  and  if they  are 
intelligent  may  be  well  worth  listening  to.  Such  varieties  of  human 
nature  as they  are  in  the  habit  of witnessing! And  it  is not  merely  in  its 
follies,  that  they  are  well  read;  for  they  see  it  occasionally under  every 
circumstance  that  can  be  most  interesting  or  affecting.  What  instances 
must pass before them  of ardent,  disinterested,  self-denying  attachment, 
of  heroism,  fortitude,  patience,  resignation―of all the  conflicts and  all 
the  sacrifices that  ennoble  us  most.  A  sick  chamber  may  often  furnish 
the worth  of volumes." 
"Yes," said  Mrs.  Smith  more  doubtingly,  "sometimes it may,  though 
I  fear  its  lessons  are  not  often  in  the  elevated  style  you  describe.  Here 
and  there,  human  nature  may  be  great  in  times  of trial,  but  generally 
speaking  it  is  its  weakness  and  not  its  strength  that  appears  in  a  sick 
chamber; it is selfishness and  impatience  rather  than  generosity and  for02
titude,  that  one hears of. There is so little real friendship  in the  world!― 
and  unfortunately"  (speaking  low  and  tremulously)  "there  are  so  many 
who forget to think  seriously till it is almost too  late. " 
Anne  saw  the  misery  of such  feelings.  The  husband  had  not  been 
what  he  ought,  and  the  wife  had  been  led  among  that  part of  mankind 
which  made  her  think  worse  of the  world,  than  she  hoped  it  deserved. 
It was but a passing emotion  however with  Mrs.  Smith, she shook it off, 
and  soon added  in  a different  tone, 
"I do  not suppose  the situation  my friend  Mrs.  Rooke is in  at  present, 
will  furnish  much  either  to  interest  or  edify  me.―She  is  only  nursing 
Mrs.  Wallis of Marlborough-buildings―a  mere  pretty,  silly,  expensive, 
fashionable woman,  I believe―and of course will have nothing to  report 
but  of lace and  finery.―I  mean  to make my profit  of Mrs.  Wallis,  how02
ever.  She has  plenty  of money,  and  I intend  she  shall buy  all the  high-
priced things  I have  in  hand  now. " 
Anne  had  called  several  times  on  her  friend,  before  the  existence of 
such a person  was known  in Camden-place.  At last,  it became necessary 
to  speak  of  her.―Sir  Walter,  Elizabeth  and  Mrs.  Clay  returned  one 
morning from  Laura-place, with a sudden invitation from  Lady Dalrym02
ple for the  same  evening,  and  Anne  was already  engaged,  to  spend  that 
7.  Aware. 
104 
CHAPTER  XVII 
evening  in  Westgate-buildings.  She was  not  sorry  for  the  excuse. They 
were  only  asked,  she  was  sure,  because  Lady  Dalrymple  being  kept  at 
home  by a bad  cold,  was glad to make use of the  relationship  which  had 
been  so  pressed  on  her,―and  she  declined  on  her  own  account  with 
great  alacrity―"She  was  engaged  to  spend  the  evening  with  an  old 
schoolfellow."  They  were  not  much  interested  in  any  thing  relative  to 
Anne,  but  still  there  were  questions  enough  asked,  to  make  it  under02
stood  what  this  old  schoolfellow was; and  Elizabeth was disdainful,  and 
Sir Walter severe. 
"Westgate-buildings!"  said  he;  "and  who  is  Miss  Anne  Elliot  to  be 
visiting 
in  Westgate-buildings?―A  Mrs.  Smith.  A  widow  Mrs. 
Smith,―and  who  was  her  husband?  One  of  the  five  thousand  Mr. 
Smiths  whose  names  are  to  be  met  with  every  where.  And  what  is  her 
attraction?  That  she  is  old  and  sickly.―Upon  my  word,  Miss  Anne 
Elliot,  you  have  the  most  extraordinary  taste!  Every  thing  that  revolts 
other  people,  low  company,  paltry  rooms,  foul  air,  disgusting  associa02
tions  are  inviting  to  you.  But  surely,  you  may  put  off this  old  lady  till 
to-morrow.  She  is  not  so  near  her  end,  I  presume,  but  that  she  may 
hope  to see another  day.  What  is her  age? Forty?" 
"No,  Sir, she is not one and  thirty; but  I do  not think  I can put  off my 
engagement,  because  it is the  only evening  for some time  which  will at 
once  suit  her  and  myself.―She  goes  into  the  warm  bath  to-morrow, 
and  for the  rest of the  week you  know we are  engaged." 
"But  what  does  Lady  Russell think  of this  acquaintance?" asked  Eliz02
abeth. 
"She  sees  nothing  to  blame  in  it,"  replied  Anne;  "on  the  contrary, 
she  approves  it;  and  has  generally  taken  me,  when  I  have  called  on 
Mrs.  Smith." 
"Westgate-buildings  must  have  been  rather  surprised  by  the  appear02
ance  of a carriage drawn  up  near  its pavement!"  observed  Sir Walter.― 
"Sir  Henry  Russell's widow,  indeed,  has  no  honours8  to distinguish  her 
arms;  but  still,  it  is a  handsome  equipage,  and  no  doubt  is well  known 
to  convey  a  Miss  Elliot.―A widow  Mrs.  Smith,  lodging  in  Westgate-
buildings!―A  poor  widow,  barely  able  to  live,  between  thirty  and 
forty―a  mere  Mrs.  Smith,  an  every  day  Mrs.  Smith,  of all people  and 
all  names  in  the world,  to be the chosen friend  of Miss Anne  Elliot,  and 
to be preferred  by her,  to her  own  family connections among  the  nobil02
ity of England  and  Ireland!  Mrs.  Smith,  such  a  name!" 
Mrs.  Clay,  who  had  been  present  while  all this  passed,  now  thought 
it advisable  to leave the  room,  and  Anne  could  have said  much  and  did 
long  to  say  a  little,  in  defence  of her friend's  not  very  dissimilar  claims 
to  theirs,  but  her  sense  of personal  respect  to  her  father  prevented  her. 
She  made  no  reply.  She  left  it to  himself  to  recollect, that  Mrs.  Smith 
8.  Emblems of special achievement added to a coat of arms. 
CHAPTER  XVII 
105 
was  not  the  only  widow  in  Bath  between  thirty  and  forty,  with  little  to 
live on,  and  no  sirname  of dignity. 
Anne  kept  her  appointment;  the  others  kept theirs,  and  of course  she 
heard  the  next  morning  that  they  had  had  a  delightful  evening.―She 
had  been  the  only  one  of the  set  absent;  for  Sir Walter  and  Elizabeth 
had  not  only  been  quite  at  her  ladyship's  service themselves,  but  had 
actually  been  happy  to  be  employed  by  her  in  collecting others,  and 
had  been  at  the  trouble  of inviting  both  Lady  Russell and  Mr.  Elliot; 
and  Mr.  Elliot  had  made  a  point  of leaving  Colonel Wallis early,  and 
Lady  Russell  had  fresh  arranged  all  her  evening  engagements  in  order 
to wait  on  her.  Anne  had  the  whole  history  of all that  such  an  evening 
could  supply,  from  Lady  Russell. To  her,  its greatest  interest  must  be, 
in  having  been  very  much  talked  of between  her  friend  and  Mr.  Elliot, 
in having been wished for,  regretted,  and  at the same time honoured  for 
staying  away  in  such  a  cause.―Her  kind,  compassionate  visits  to  this 
old  schoolfellow, sick and  reduced,  seemed to have quite delighted  Mr. 
Elliot.  He  thought  her  a  most extraordinary  young  woman;  in  her  tem02
per,  manners,  mind,  a model of female excellence.  He could  meet even 
Lady Russell in  a discussion  of her merits; and  Anne could  not  be given 
to  understand  so  much  by  her  friend,  could  not  know  herself  to  be  so 
highly  rated  by a sensible man,  without  many  of those  agreeable sensa02
tions which  her  friend  meant  to create. 
Lady  Russell was now perfectly decided  in  her opinion  of Mr.  Elliot. 
She was as much  convinced of his meaning  to gain  Anne  in  time,  as of 
his deserving  her; and  was beginning  to  calculate the  number  of weeks 
which  would  free  him  from  all the  remaining  restraints  of widowhood, 
and  leave him  at  liberty to  exert his  most  open  powers  of pleasing.  She 
would  not  speak to Anne  with  half  the  certainty she felt on  the subject, 
she would  venture  on  little more than  hints  of what  might be  hereafter, 
of a possible attachment  on  his side,  of the desirableness of the alliance, 
supposing  such  attachment  to  be  real,  and  returned.  Anne  heard  her, 
and  made  no violent exclamations.  She only smiled,  blushed,  and  gen02
tly shook her  head. 
"I  am  no  match-maker,  as you  well know," said Lady Russell, "being 
much  too well aware  of the uncertainty  of all human events and calcula02
tions.  I  only  mean  that  if Mr.  Elliot  should  some  time  hence  pay  his 
addresses  to  you,  and  if you  should  be  disposed  to  accept him,  I  think 
there  would  be  every  possibility of your  being  happy  together.  A  most 
suitable  connection  every  body  must  consider  it―but  I  think  it  might 
be a very happy one." 
"Mr.  Elliot  is an  exceedingly agreeable man,  and  in  many  respects I 
think  highly of him," said Anne; "but  we should  not  suit." 
Lady  Russell let  this  pass,  and  only  said  in  rejoinder,  "I own  that  to 
be able to regard  you as the future  mistress of Kellynch,  the  future  Lady 
Elliot―to look forward  and  see you occupying your dear mother's place, 
106 
CHAPTER  XVII 
succeeding  to  all  her  rights,  and  all  her  popularity,  as well as to  all  her 
virtues,  would  be the highest possible gratification to me.―You are your 
mother's  self  in  countenance  and  disposition;  and  if I might  be allowed 
to fancy you  such  as she was,  in situation,  and  name,  and  home,  presid02
ing  and  blessing  in  the  same  spot,  and  only  superior  to  her  in  being 
more  highly  valued!  My  dearest  Anne,  it  would  give  me  more  delight 
than  is often  felt at my time  of life!" 
Anne was obliged to turn away,  to rise, to walk to a distant table,  and, 
leaning  there  in  pretended  employment,  try  to  subdue  the  feelings  this 
picture  excited.  For a few moments  her  imagination  and  her heart  were 
bewitched.  The  idea  of becoming what  her  mother  had  been; of having 
the  precious  name  of  "Lady  Elliot"  first  revived  in  herself;  of  being 
restored  to  Kellynch, calling it her  home  again,  her  home  for ever,  was 
a  charm  which  she  could  not  immediately  resist.  Lady  Russell said  not 
another  word,  willing  to  leave  the  matter  to  its  own  operation;  and 
believing  that,  could  Mr.  Elliot  at  that  moment  with  propriety  have 
spoken  for himself!―She believed,  in  short,  what Anne did  not believe. 
The  same  image  of Mr.  Elliot  speaking  for  himself,  brought  Anne  to 
composure  again.  T he charm  of Kellynch and  of "Lady Elliot" all  faded 
away.  She never could  accept him.  And  it was not only that  her feelings 
were  still adverse  to any  man  save one; her  judgment,  on  a serious con02
sideration  of the  possibilities of such  a case,  was against  Mr.  Elliot. 
Though  they  had  now  been  acquainted  a  month,  she  could  not  be 
satisfied  that  she  really knew  his character.  That  he was a sensible  man, 
an  agreeable  man,―that  he  talked  well,  professed  good  opinions, 
seemed  to  judge  properly  and  as a  man  of principle,―this  was all clear 
enough.  He  certainly knew what  was right,  nor could she fix on any  one 
article of moral duty evidently  transgressed; but  yet she would  have  been 
afraid  to answer  for  his  conduct.  She distrusted  the  past,  if not the  pres02
ent.  T he  names  which  occasionally dropt of former  associates, the  allu02
sions 
to  former  practices  and  pursuits,  suggested  suspicions  not 
favourable  of what  he had  been.  She saw that there  had  been bad habits; 
that  Sunday-travelling9  had  been  a common  thing;  that  there  had  been 
a  period  of his  life  (and  probably  not  a short  one) when  he  had  been,  at 
least,  careless  on  all  serious  matters;  and,  though  he  might  now  think 
very  differently,  who  could  answer  for  the  true  sentiments  of a  clever, 
cautious  man,  grown  old  enough  to  appreciate  a  fair  character?1  How 
could  it ever be ascertained  that  his mind  was truly  cleansed? 
Mr.  Elliot  was  rational,  discreet,  polished,―but  he  was  not  open. 
There  was  never  any  burst  of  feeling,  any  warmth  of  indignation  or 
delight,  at  the  evil  or  good  of  others.  This,  to  Anne,  was  a  decided 
imperfection.  Her  early  impressions  were  incurable.  She  prized  the 
frank,  the  open-hearted,  the  eager character beyond  all others.  Warmth 
9.  Traveling on  Sunday was disapproved of by members of many Protestant denominations. 
1.  Reputation. 
CHAPTER  XVIII 
107 
and  enthusiasm  did  captivate  her  still.  She felt  that  she  could  so  much 
more  depend  upon  the  sincerity of those  who  sometimes  looked  or  said 
a  careless or a  hasty  thing,  than  of those  whose  presence  of mind  never 
varied,  whose tongue  never  slipped. 
Mr.  Elliot  was  too  generally  agreeable.  Various  as were  the  tempers 
in her father's  house,  he  pleased them  all.  He endured too  well,―stood 
too  well  with  everybody.  He  had  spoken  to  her  with  some  degree  of 
openness  of Mrs.  Clay; had  appeared  completely to  see what  Mrs.  Clay 
was  about,  and  to  hold  her  in  contempt;  and  yet  Mrs.  Clay found  him 
as agreeable as  anybody. 
Lady Russell saw either less or more than her young friend,  for she saw 
nothing  to  excite distrust.  She  could  not  imagine  a  man  more  exactly 
what  he  ought  to  be  than  Mr.  Elliot;  nor  did  she  ever  enjoy  a  sweeter 
feeling than the hope  of seeing him  receive the hand  of her beloved Anne 
in Kellynch church,  in the course of the following  autumn. 
Chapter  XVIII 
It was the  beginning  of February; and  Anne,  having  been  a month  in 
Bath,  was growing  very eager for news  from  Uppercross  and  Lyme.  She 
wanted  to  hear  much  more  than  Mary  communicated.  It  was  three 
weeks  since  she  had  heard  at  all.  She  only  knew  that  Henrietta  was  at 
home  again;  and  that  Louisa,  though  considered  to  be  recovering  fast, 
was  still  at  Lyme; and  she  was  thinking  of them  all  very  intently  one 
evening,  when  a  thicker  letter  than  usual  from  Mary  was  delivered  to 
her,  and,  to  quicken  the  pleasure  and  surprise,  with  Admiral  and  Mrs. 
Croft's  compliments. 
The  Crofts  must  be  in  Bath! A  circumstance  to  interest  her.  They 
were people  whom  her  heart  turned to very  naturally. 
"What  is  this?" cried  Sir  Walter.  "The  Crofts  arrived  in  Bath?  The 
Crofts  who  rent  Kellynch? What  have they brought  you?" 
"A letter from  Uppercross  Cottage, Sir." 
"Oh! those  letters are  convenient passports.  They secure an  introduc02
tion.  I should  have  visited  Admiral  Croft,  however,  at any  rate.  I  know 
what  is due  to  my tenant. " 
Anne  could  listen  no  longer;  she  could  not  even  have  told  how  the 
poor  Admiral's  complexion  escaped;  her  letter  engrossed  her.  It  had 
been  begun  several days back. 
MY  DEAR  ANNE, 
I  make  no  apology  for  my  silence,  because  I  know  how  little 
people  think  of letters  in  such  a place as Bath. You must  be a  great 
deal  too  happy  to  care  for  Uppercross,  which,  as  you  well  know, 
February  1st, 
. 
108 
CHAPTER  XVIII 
affords  little  to  write  about.  We  have  had  a  very  dull  Christmas; 
Mr.  and  Mrs. Musgrove have not had  one dinner-party  all the holi02
days.  I do  not  reckon the  Hayters as any body.  The holidays,  how02
ever, are over at last: I believe no children ever had  such long ones. 
I am  sure  I had  not.  The house was cleared yesterday,  except of the 
little  Harvilles;  but  you  will  be  surprised  to  hear  that  they  have 
never  gone  home.  Mrs.  Harville  must  be  an  odd  mother  to  part 
with  them  so long.  I do  not  understand  it.  They are  not at all nice 
children,  in  my  opinion;  but  Mrs.  Musgrove  seems  to  like  them 
quite as well, if not better,  than  her grand-children.  What  dreadful 
weather  we  have  had!  It  may  not  be  felt  in  Bath,  with  your  nice 
pavements;  but  in  the  country  it  is  of some  consequence.  I  have 
not  had  a  creature  call  on  me  since the  second  week  in  January, 
except  Charles  Hayter,  who  has  been  calling  much  oftener  than 
was  welcome.  Between  ourselves,  I think  it  a  great  pity  Henrietta 
did  not  remain  at  Lyme as long as Louisa; it would  have kept her a 
little  out  of his  way.  The  carriage  is gone  to-day,  to  bring  Louisa 
and  the  Harvilles to-morrow.  We are not  asked to dine  with  them, 
however,  till the  day  after,  Mrs.  Musgrove  is so afraid  of her  being 
fatigued  by  the  journey,  which  is  not  very  likely,  considering  the 
care  that  will  be  taken  of her; and  it would  be  much  more conve02
nient to me to dine  there to-morrow.  I am  glad you  find  Mr.  Elliot 
so  agreeable,  and  wish  I  could  be  acquainted  with  him  too; but  I 
have  my  usual  luck,  I  am  always  out  of the  way  when  any  thing 
desirable  is  going  on;  always  the  last  of my  family  to  be  noticed. 
What  an  immense time Mrs. Clay has been staying with Elizabeth! 
Does  she  never  mean  to go away? But perhaps if she were to leave 
the  room  vacant  we  might  not  be  invited.  Let me  know  what  you 
think  of this.  I do  not  expect my children  to be asked,  you know.  I 
can  leave  them  at  the  Great  House  very  well,  for  a  month  or six 
weeks.  I have  this  moment  heard  that  the  Crofts  are going to Bath 
almost  immediately; they think  the admiral  gouty.  Charles heard  it 
quite  by  chance:  they  have  not  had  the  civility  to  give  me  any 
notice,  or offer  to take any thing.  I do  not think they improve at all 
as  neighbours.  We  see  nothing  of  them,  and  this  is  really  an 
instance  of gross  inattention.  Charles  joins me  in  love,  and  every 
Yours affectionately, 
thing  proper. 
MARY  M 
. 
I  am  sorry to say that  I am  very far from  well; and  Jemima has just 
told  me  that  the  butcher  says there  is a bad  sore-throat  very  much 
about.  I  dare  say  I  shall  catch  it; and  my  sore-throats,  you  know, 
are always worse than  anybody's." 
So  ended  the  first  part,  which  had  been  afterwards  put  into  an 
envelop,  containing  nearly as much  more. 
CHAPTER  XVIII 
109 
"I kept my letter open,  that  I might send you word how Louisa bore 
her journey, and  now I am  extremely glad I did,  having a great deal 
to  add.  In  the  first  place,  I  had  a  note  from  Mrs.  Croft  yesterday, 
offering  to  convey  any  thing  to  you;  a  very  kind,  friendly  note 
indeed,  addressed  to  me,  just as  it  ought;  I shall  therefore  be  able 
to make my letter as long as I like.  The admiral  does not seem very 
ill,  and  I sincerely hope  Bath  will do  him  all  the  good  he  wants.  I 
shall  be  truly  glad  to  have  them  back  again.  Our  neighbourhood 
cannot  spare  such  a  pleasant  family.  But  now  for  Louisa.  I  have 
something  to  communicate that  will astonish  you  not  a  little.  She 
and  the  Harvilles came on  Tuesday very safely, and  in  the  evening 
we went to ask her how she did,  when  we were rather  surprised  not 
to  find  Captain  Benwick  of the  party,  for  he  had  been  invited  as 
well  as the  Harvilles; and  what  do  you  think  was the  reason?  Nei02
ther  more  nor  less  than  his  being  in  love  with  Louisa,  and  not 
choosing  to venture  to  Uppercross  till  he  had  had  an  answer  from 
Mr.  Musgrove;  for  it  was  all  settled  between  him  and  her  before 
she  came away,  and  he  had  written  to  her  father  by Captain  Har02
ville.  True,  upon  my  honour.  Are  not  you  astonished?  I  shall  be 
surprised  at  least  if you  ever  received  a  hint  of it,  for  I  never  did. 
Mrs.  Musgrove protests solemnly that she knew nothing of the  mat02
ter. We are all very well pleased,  however; for though  it is not equal 
to  her  marrying  Captain  Wentworth,  it  is  infinitely  better  than 
Charles  Hayter;  and  Mr.  Musgrove  has  written  his  consent,  and 
Captain  Benwick  is  expected  to-day.  Mrs.  Harville  says  her  hus02
band  feels  a  good  deal  on  his  poor  sister's account; but,  however, 
Louisa  is  a  great  favourite  with  both.  Indeed  Mrs.  Harville  and  I 
quite  agree  that  we  love  her  the  better  for  having  nursed  her. 
Charles  wonders  what  Captain  Wentworth  will  say;  but  if  you 
remember,  I never  thought  him  attached  to  Louisa; I  never  could 
see  any  thing  of it.  And  this  is the  end,  you  see,  of Captain  Ben-
wick's  being  supposed  to  be  an  admirer  of  yours.  How  Charles 
could  take such  a thing  into his head  was always incomprehensible 
to me.  I hope  he will be more agreeable now.  Certainly not a great 
match  for  Louisa  Musgrove; but  a  million  times  better  than  mar02
rying among  the  Hayters. " 
Mary  need  not  have  feared  her  sister's being  in  any  degree  prepared 
for  the  news.  She had  never  in  her  life  been  more  astonished.  Captain 
Benwick  and  Louisa  Musgrove!  It was  almost  too  wonderful  for  belief; 
and  it  was  with  the  greatest  effort  that  she  could  remain  in  the  room, 
preserve  an  air  of calmness,  and  answer  the  common  questions  of the 
moment.  Happily  for  her,  they  were  not  many.  Sir Walter  wanted  to 
know  whether  the  Crofts  travelled  with  four  horses,  and  whether  they 
were  likely  to  be  situated  in  such  a  part  of Bath  as  it  might  suit  Miss 
Elliot and  himself to visit in; but  had  little curiosity beyond. 
110 
CHAPTER  XVIII 
"How  is  Mary?" said  Elizabeth; and  without  waiting  for  an  answer, 
"And  pray what  brings the  Crofts to  Bath?" 
"They  come on  the  Admiral's account.  He  is thought  to be gouty." 
"Gout and  decrepitude!"  said  Sir Walter. "Poor old  gentleman." 
"Have  they any acquaintance here?" asked Elizabeth. 
"I do not know; but  I can hardly  suppose that,  at Admiral Croft's time 
of  life,  and  in  his profession,  he  should  not  have  many  acquaintance in 
such  a place as this." 
"I  suspect,"  said  Sir Walter  coolly,  "that  Admiral  Croft  will  be  best 
known  in  Bath  as  the  renter  of Kellynch-hall.  Elizabeth,  may  we  ven02
ture to present  him  and  his wife in Laura-place?" 
"Oh!  no,  I think  not.  Situated as we are with  Lady Dalrymple, cous02
ins,  we ought  to be very careful  not to embarrass her with  acquaintance 
she  might  not  approve.  If we were  not  related,  it would  not  signify; but 
as  cousins,  she  would  feel  scrupulous  as  to  any  proposal  of ours.  We 
had  better  leave  the  Crofts  to  find  their  own  level.  There  are  several 
odd-looking  men  walking  about  here,  who,  I am  told,  are  sailors.  The 
Crofts  will associate with  them!" 
This  was  Sir  Walter  and  Elizabeth's  share  of  interest  in  the  letter; 
when  Mrs.  Clay  had  paid  her  tribute  of more  decent  attention,  in  an 
enquiry  after  Mrs. Charles Musgrove, and  her fine little boys, Anne was 
at liberty. 
In  her  own  room  she  tried  to  comprehend  it.  Well  might  Charles 
wonder  how Captain  Wentworth  would  feel! Perhaps he had  quitted  the 
field,  had  given  Louisa  up,  had  ceased  to  love,  had  found  he  did  not 
love  her.  She  could  not  endure  the  idea  of treachery  or  levity,  or  any 
thing  akin  to  ill-usage  between  him  and  his  friend.  She  could  not 
endure that  such  a friendship  as theirs should  be severed  unfairly. 
Captain  Benwick and  Louisa  Musgrove!  The  high-spirited,  joyous, 
talking  Louisa  Musgrove,  and  the  dejected,  thinking,  feeling,  reading 
Captain  Benwick, seemed  each  of them  every thing  that  would  not  suit 
the  other.  Their  minds  most  dissimilar!  Where  could  have  been  the 
attraction?  The  answer  soon  presented  itself.  It  had  been  in  situation. 
They  had  been  thrown  together  several  weeks; they  had  been  living  in 
the  same  small  family  party;  since Henrietta's  coming away,  they  must 
have  been  depending  almost  entirely  on  each  other,  and  Louisa,  just 
recovering  from  illness,  had  been  in  an  interesting  state,  and  Captain 
Benwick  was  not  inconsolable. That  was  a  point  which  Anne  had  not 
been  able  to  avoid  suspecting  before; and  instead  of drawing  the  same 
conclusion  as Mary,  from  the  present course of events, they served only 
to confirm  the idea of his having felt some dawning of tenderness  toward 
herself.  She  did  not  mean,  however,  to  derive  much  more  from  it  to 
gratify  her  vanity,  than  Mary  might  have  allowed.  She  was  persuaded 
that  any  tolerably pleasing young  woman  who  had  listened and  seemed 
CHAPTER  X V I II 
111 
to  feel  for him,  would  have  received the  same  compliment.  He  had  an 
affectionate  heart.  He  must  love somebody. 
She  saw  no  reason  against  their  being  happy.  Louisa  had  fine  naval 
fervour  to begin with,  and  they would  soon  grow more alike.  He  would 
gain cheerfulness,  and  she would  learn  to be an  enthusiast for  Scott  and 
Lord  Byron; nay,  that  was  probably  learnt  already;  of course  they  had 
fallen  in  love  over  poetry.  The  idea  of Louisa  Musgrove  turned  into  a 
person  of literary taste, and  sentimental  reflection, was amusing,  but  she 
had  no doubt of its being so. The day  at Lyme, the  fall  from  the Cobb, 
might  influence  her  health,  her  nerves,  her  courage,  her  character  to 
the  end  of her  life,  as thoroughly  as  it appeared  to  have  influenced  her 
fate. 
The  conclusion  of the  whole  was,  that  if the  woman  who  had  been 
sensible  of  Captain  Wentworth's  merits  could  be  allowed  to  prefer 
another  man,  there  was  nothing  in  the  engagement  to  excite  lasting 
wonder; and  if Captain  Wentworth  lost no friend  by it, certainly  nothing 
to  be  regretted.  No,  it was  not  regret  which  made  Anne's  heart  beat  in 
spite  of  herself,  and  brought  the  colour  into  her  cheeks  when  she 
thought  of Captain  Wentworth  unshackled and  free.  She had  some  feel02
ings  which  she  was  ashamed  to  investigate.  They  were  too  much  like 
joy,  senseless joy! 
She longed to see the Crofts,  but  when  the  meeting took place, it was 
evident  that  no  rumour  of the  news  had  yet reached  them.  The  visit of 
ceremony was paid  and  returned,  and  Louisa Musgrove was  mentioned, 
and  Captain  Benwick too, without  even  half a smile. 
The  Crofts  had  placed  themselves in  lodgings in  Gay-street,  perfectly 
to  Sir Walter's  satisfaction.  He  was  not  at  all  ashamed  of the  acquain02
tance,  and  did,  in fact,  think and  talk a great deal more about the Admi02
ral,  than  the Admiral  ever thought  or talked about  him. 
The  Crofts  knew  quite  as  many  people  in  Bath  as  they  wished  for, 
and  considered  their  intercourse  with  the  Elliots  as  a  mere  matter  of 
form,  and  not  in  the  least  likely  to  afford  them  any  pleasure.  They 
brought  with  them  their  country  habit  of being almost always  together. 
He was ordered  to walk,  to keep off the  gout,  and  Mrs.  Croft  seemed  to 
go  shares  with  him  in  every  thing,  and  to  walk  for  her  life,  to  do  him 
good.  Anne  saw them  wherever  she went.  Lady Russell took her  out  in 
her  carriage  almost  every  morning,  and  she  never  failed  to  think  of 
them,  and  never  failed  to  see them.  Knowing  their  feelings as  she  did, 
it was a  most attractive picture  of happiness  to her.  She always  watched 
them  as long as she could; delighted  to fancy she  understood  what  they 
might  be  talking  of,  as  they  walked  along  in  happy  independence,  or 
equally delighted  to see the Admiral's hearty  shake of the  hand  when  he 
encountered  an  old  friend,  and  observe their  eagerness  of conversation 
when  occasionally forming  into  a  little  knot  of  the  navy,  Mrs.  Croft 
112 
CHAPTER  XVIII 
looking as intelligent and  keen as any  of the  officers around  her. 
Anne  was  too  much  engaged  with  Lady  Russell to  be  often  walking 
herself,  but  it so happened  that  one  morning,  about  a week or ten  days 
after  the  Crofts'  arrival,  it  suited  her  best  to  leave  her  friend,  or  her 
friend's  carriage,  in  the  lower  part  of  the  town,  and  return  alone  to 
Camden-place; and  in  walking  up  Milsom-street, she had  the  good  for02
tune  to  meet  with  the  Admiral.  He  was standing  by himself,  at a print-
shop  window,  with  his hands behind  him,  in  earnest  contemplation of 
some  print,  and  she  not  only  might  have  passed  him  unseen,  but  was 
obliged to touch  as well as address him  before she could catch his notice. 
When  he  did  perceive and  acknowledge her,  however,  it was done  with 
all  his  usual  frankness  and  good  humour.  "Ha!  is  it  you?  Thank  you, 
thank  you.  This is treating  me  like a friend.  Here  I am,  you  see,  staring 
at  a  picture.  I  can  never  get  by  this  shop  without  stopping.  But what  a 
thing  here  is, by way of a boat.  Do  look at it.  Did you  ever see the  like? 
What  queer  fellows  your  fine  painters  must  be,  to  think  that  any  body 
would  venture  their lives in such a shapeless old cockleshell as that.  And 
yet,  here  are  two  gentlemen  stuck  up  in  it  mightily  at  their  ease,  and 
looking  about  them  at  the  rocks and  mountains,  as  if they  were  not  to 
be  upset  the  next  moment,  which  they  certainly  must  be.  I  wonder 
where that boat was built!" (laughing heartily) "I would  not venture  over 
a  horsepond  in  it.  Well,"  (turning  away) "now,  where  are  you  bound? 
Can  I go any  where  for you,  or with  you? Can  I be of any use?" 
"None,  I  thank  you,  unless  you  will  give  me  the  pleasure  of  your 
company  the  little way our  road  lies together.  I am  going home." 
"That I will, with  all my heart,  and  farther  too. Yes, yes, we will have 
a  snug walk  together; and  I have  something  to  tell you  as we go along. 
There,  take  my  arm;  that's  right;  I do  not  feel  comfortable if I have  not 
a woman  there.  Lord! what  a boat it is!" taking a last look at the  picture, 
as they began  to be in  motion. 
"Did  you  say that  you  had  something to tell me,  sir?" 
"Yes,  I have.  Presently.  But here  comes a  friend,  Captain  Brigden; I 
shall only say, 'How d'ye do,' as we pass, however.  I shall not stop.  'How 
d'ye  do. '  Brigden stares to see anybody  with  me  but  my wife.  She, poor 
soul,  is tied  by the  leg.  She has a blister on  one of her  heels, as large as 
a  three  shilling piece.  If you  look across the street,  you will see Admiral 
Brand  coming  down  and  his  brother.  Shabby fellows,  both  of them!  I 
am  glad  they  are  not  on  this  side  of the  way.  Sophy cannot  bear  them. 
They  played  me  a  pitiful  trick once―got away  some of my best men.  I 
will  tell  you  the  whole  story  another  time.  There comes old  Sir Archi02
bald Drew and  his grandson.  Look, he sees us; he kisses his hand  to you; 
he  takes  you  for  my  wife.  Ah!  the  peace  has  come  too  soon  for  that 
younker.2  Poor old  Sir Archibald! How do you  like Bath, Miss Elliot? It 
2.  Youngster.  The grandson is presumably in the navy. 
CHAPTER  X V I II 
113 
suits us very well. We are always meeting with  some old friend  or  other; 
the  streets full  of them  every  morning;  sure  to  have  plenty  of chat;  and 
then  we  get  away  from  them  all,  and  shut  ourselves  into  our  lodgings, 
and draw in  our  chairs, and  are as snug as if we were at Kellynch, ay,  or 
as we used to be even at North  Yarmouth  and  Deal. We do  not  like our 
lodgings  here  the  worse,  I can  tell you,  for  putting  us  in  mind  of those 
we  first  had  at  North  Yarmouth.  The  wind  blows  through  one  of  the 
cupboards  just in the  same way." 
When  they  were got a  little farther,  Anne  ventured  to press again  for 
what  he  had  to  communicate.  She had  hoped,  when  clear of Milsom-
street, to have her curiosity gratified; but  she was still obliged to wait,  for 
the  Admiral  had  made  up  his  mind  not  to  begin,  till  they  had  gained 
the  greater  space and  quiet  of Belmont,  and  as she  was  not  really Mrs. 
Croft,  she  must  let him  have  his  own  way.  As soon  as they  were  fairly 
ascending Belmont, he  began, 
"Well,  now  you  shall hear  something  that  will surprise  you.  But first 
of  all,  you  must  tell me  the  name  of the  young  lady  I am  going  to  talk 
about.  That young  lady,  you  know,  that  we have all been  so concerned 
for.  The Miss Musgrove, that  all this has been  happening  to.  Her chris02
tian  name―I always forget her christian  name." 
Anne  had  been  ashamed  to  appear  to  comprehend  so  soon  as  she 
really did; but  now  she could safely suggest the  name  of "Louisa." 
"Ay, ay,  Miss Louisa Musgrove, that  is the  name.  I wish young  ladies 
had  not  such  a  number  of fine christian  names.  I should  never  be  out, 
if they were all  Sophys, or something  of that  sort.  Well,  this  Miss Lou02
isa,  we all thought,  you  know,  was to marry  Frederick.  He was  courting 
her  week after  week.  The  only wonder  was,  what  they  could  be  waiting 
for,  till  the  business  at  Lyme  came; then,  indeed,  it  was  clear  enough 
that  they  must  wait till her  brain  was  set to  right.  But even  then,  there 
was something odd  in their way of going on.  Instead of staying at Lyme, 
he  went  off to  Plymouth,  and  then  he  went  off to  see  Edward.  When 
we  came  back  from  Minehead,  he  was  gone  down  to  Edward's,  and 
there  he  has  been  ever  since.  We  have  seen  nothing  of  him  since 
November.  Even  Sophy  could  not  understand  it.  But  now,  the  matter 
has  taken  the  strangest  turn  of all; for  this  young  lady,  this  same  Miss 
Musgrove,  instead  of being to  marry  Frederick,  is to  marry  James  Ben02
wick.  You know James  Benwick." 
"A little.  I am  a little acquainted  with  Captain Benwick." 
"Well,  she is to marry him.  Nay,  most likely they are married  already, 
for  I do  not know what  they  should  wait for. " 
"I thought  Captain  Benwick a very pleasing young  man,"  said  Anne, 
"and  I understand that  he  bears an  excellent character." 
"Oh! yes,  yes,  there  is not  a  word  to  be  said  against James Benwick. 
He  is  only  a  commander,  it  is true,  made  last  summer,  and  these  are 
bad times for getting on,  but he has not another  fault  that  I know of.  An 
114 
CHAPTER  XVIII 
excellent,  good-hearted  fellow,  I assure  you,  a very active, zealous  offi02
cer  too,  which  is more  than  you  would  think  for,  perhaps,  for that  soft 
sort of manner  does not  do  him  justice." 
"Indeed  you  are  mistaken  there,  sir.  I  should  never  augur  want  of 
spirit  from  Captain  Benwick's  manners.  I  thought  them  particularly 
pleasing,  and  I will answer for it they would  generally please. " 
"Well,  well,  ladies  are  the  best  judges; but  James Benwick  is  rather 
too  piano3  for  me,  and  though  very  likely it is all  our  partiality,  Sophy 
and  I cannot  help  thinking  Frederick's manners  better  than  his.  There 
is something  about  Frederick more to our  taste. " 
Anne  was  caught.  She  had  only  meant  to  oppose  the  too-common 
idea  of spirit and  gentleness being  incompatible with  each other,  not  at 
all  to  represent  Captain  Benwick's  manners  as  the  very  best  that  could 
possibly be, and,  after a little hesitation,  she was beginning to say, "I was 
not  entering  into  any  comparison  of the  two  friends,"  but  the  Admiral 
interrupted  her  with, 
"And the thing is certainly true.  It is not a mere bit of gossip. We have 
it  from  Frederick himself.  His sister had  a letter  from  him  yesterday,  in 
which  he  tells us  of it,  and  he  had  just had  it in  a  letter  from  Harville, 
written  upon  the  spot,  from  Uppercross.  I  fancy  they  are  all  at 
Uppercross." 
This was an  opportunity  which Anne could  not resist; she said,  there02
fore,  "I  hope,  Admiral,  I  hope  there  is nothing  in  the  style of Captain 
Wentworth's  letter  to  make  you  and  Mrs.  Croft  particularly  uneasy.  It 
did  certainly seem,  last autumn,  as if there were an  attachment  between 
him  and  Louisa  Musgrove;  but  I  hope  it  may  be  understood  to  have 
worn  out  on  each  side  equally,  and  without  violence.  I hope  his  letter 
does  not breathe  the  spirit of an  ill-used  man." 
"Not  at  all,  not  at  all; there  is not  an  oath  or a murmur  from  begin02
ning to  end." 
Anne  looked down to hide  her smile. 
"No,  no;  Frederick is not  a  man  to  whine  and  complain; he  has  too 
much  spirit for that.  If the  girl likes another  man  better,  it is very fit she 
should  have  him." 
"Certainly.  But what  I mean  is, that  I hope  there  is nothing  in  Cap02
tain Wentworth's manner  of writing to make you suppose he thinks him02
self  ill-used  by  his  friend,  which  might  appear,  you  know,  without  its 
being absolutely said.  I should  be very sorry that such a  friendship  as has 
subsisted  between  him  and  Captain  Benwick  should  be  destroyed,  or 
even wounded,  by a circumstance of this sort. " 
"Yes,  yes,  I understand  you.  But there  is nothing  at all of that  nature 
in  the  letter.  He  does  not  give  the  least  fling  at  Benwick;  does  not  so 
much  as say,  'I  wonder  at  it,  I have  a  reason  of my  own  for  wondering 
3.  Quiet. 
CHAPTER  XIX 
115 
at  it.'  No,  you  would  not  guess,  from  his  way  of writing,  that  he  had 
ever thought  of this Miss (what's her  name?) for himself.  He very  hand02
somely  hopes  they  will  be  happy  together,  and  there  is  nothing  very 
unforgiving  in that,  I think. " 
Anne did  not receive the perfect conviction which the Admiral  meant 
to  convey,  but  it would  have  been  useless  to  press  the  enquiry  farther. 
She,  therefore,  satisfied  herself  with  common-place  remarks,  or  quiet 
attention,  and  the Admiral  had  it all his own  way. 
"Poor  Frederick!" said  he  at  last.  "Now  he  must  begin  all  over  again 
with  somebody else.  I think we must get him  to Bath. Sophy must  write, 
and  beg him  to  come to  Bath.  Here  are  pretty  girls enough,  I am  sure. 
It  would  be  of  no  use  to  go  to  Uppercross  again,  for  that  other  Miss 
Musgrove,  I  find,  is bespoke by  her  cousin,  the  young  parson.  Do  not 
you think,  Miss Elliot,  we had  better try to get him  to  Bath?" 
Chapter XIX 
While  Admiral  Croft  was taking  this walk with  Anne,  and  expressing 
his wish of getting Captain  Wentworth  to Bath, Captain Wentworth  was 
already  on  his  way  thither.  Before  Mrs.  Croft  had  written,  he  was 
arrived; and  the very next time Anne walked  out,  she saw  him. 
Mr.  Elliot was attending  his two cousins and  Mrs. Clay. They were in 
Milsom-street.  It began  to  rain,  not  much,  but  enough  to  make  shelter 
desirable  for  women,  and  quite  enough  to  make  it  very  desirable  for 
Miss Elliot to have the advantage  of being conveyed home  in  Lady Dal-
rymple's carriage, which  was seen waiting at a little distance; she,  Anne, 
and  Mrs.  Clay,  therefore,  turned  into  Molland's,4  while  Mr.  Elliot 
stepped  to  Lady  Dalrymple,  to  request  her  assistance.  He  soon  joined 
them  again,  successful, of course; Lady Dalrymple would  be most happy 
to take them  home,  and  would  call  for them  in  a few  minutes. 
Her  ladyship's  carriage was a barouche,5  and  did  not  hold  more  than 
four with any comfort.  Miss Carteret was with  her mother; consequently 
it  was  not  reasonable  to  expect accommodation  for  all  the  three  Cam02
den-place  ladies.  There  could  be  no  doubt  as  to  Miss Elliot.  Whoever 
suffered  inconvenience,  she  must  suffer  none,  but  it  occupied  a  little 
time to settle the  point  of civility between  the  other  two.  The  rain  was a 
mere  trifle,  and  Anne  was  most  sincere  in  preferring  a  walk  with  Mr. 
Elliot.  But the rain  was also a mere trifle to Mrs. Clay; she would  hardly 
allow  it even  to  drop  at  all,  and  her  boots  were  so thick! much  thicker 
than  Miss Anne's; and,  in  short,  her  civility rendered  her  quite  as anx02
ious  to  be  left  to  walk  with  Mr.  Elliot,  as  Anne  could  be,  and  it  was 
4.  A confectioner's. 
5.  A carriage with seats for two couples to sit facing each  other. 
116 
CHAPTER  X IX 
discussed  between  them  with  a  generosity  so polite  and  so  determined, 
that the  others were obliged to settle it for them; Miss Elliot  maintaining 
that  Mrs.  Clay  had  a  little  cold  already,  and  Mr.  Elliot  deciding  on 
appeal,  that  his cousin Anne's boots were rather  the thickest. 
It  was  fixed  accordingly that  Mrs.  Clay  should  be  of the  party  in  the 
carriage;  and  they  had  just  reached  this  point  when  Anne,  as  she  sat 
near  the  window,  descried,  most  decidedly  and  distinctly,  Captain 
Wentworth  walking down the  street. 
Her start was perceptible only to herself; but  she instantly felt that  she 
was  the  greatest  simpleton  in  the  world,  the  most  unaccountable  and 
absurd!  For a few  minutes  she  saw nothing  before her.  It was all  confu02
sion.  She was lost; and  when  she had  scolded back her senses, she  found 
the  others  still waiting  for  the  carriage,  and  Mr.  Elliot (always obliging) 
just setting off for  Union-street on  a commission of Mrs. Clay's. 
She  now felt a great inclination to go to the  outer door; she wanted  to 
see if it rained.  Why  was she to suspect herself of another  motive? Cap02
tain  Wentworth  must  be  out  of sight.  She  left  her  seat,  she  would  go, 
one  half  of her  should  not be always so much  wiser than  the  other  half, 
or always suspecting the  other of being worse than  it was.  She would see 
if  it  rained.  She was sent  back,  however,  in  a  moment  by the  entrance 
of Captain  Wentworth  himself,  among  a party  of gentlemen  and  ladies, 
evidently  his  acquaintance,  and  whom  he  must  have  joined  a  little 
below Milsom-street. He was more obviously struck and  confused  by the 
sight of her,  than  she had  ever observed before; he looked quite  red.  For 
the  first  time,  since  their  renewed  acquaintance,  she  felt  that  she  was 
betraying the  least sensibility of the two.  She had  the  advantage  of him, 
in the preparation  of the last few moments.  All the overpowering,  blind02
ing,  bewildering,  first  effects  of strong surprise  were over with  her.  Still, 
however,  she  had  enough  to  feel!  It  was  agitation,  pain,  pleasure,  a 
something between  delight and  misery. 
He  spoke to her,  and  then  turned  away.  The character of his  manner 
was embarrassment.  She could  not have called it either cold or  friendly, 
or any  thing  so certainly as embarrassed. 
After  a short  interval,  however,  he came towards  her and  spoke again. 
Mutual  enquiries  on  common  subjects passed;  neither  of them,  proba02
bly,  much  the  wiser  for  what  they  heard,  and  Anne  continuing  fully 
sensible  of his  being  less  at  ease  than  formerly.  They  had,  by  dint of 
being so very much  together,  got to speak to each other with  a consider02
able portion  of apparent indifference  and  calmness; but  he could not  do 
it now.  Time had  changed  him,  or Louisa had  changed him.  There was 
consciousness  of some  sort  or  other.  He  looked  very  well,  not  as  if he 
had  been  suffering  in  health  or  spirits,  and  he  talked  of Uppercross, of 
the  Musgroves,  nay,  even of Louisa,  and  had  even a momentary  look of 
his own  arch significance as he named  her; but yet it was Captain  Went02
worth  not  comfortable,  not  easy,  not  able to feign that  he was. 
CHAPTER  XIX 
117 
It  did  not  surprise,  but  it  grieved  Anne  to  observe  that  Elizabeth 
would  not  know  him.6  She  saw  that  he  saw  Elizabeth,  that  Elizabeth 
saw him,  that  there was complete internal  recognition on  each side; she 
was  convinced  that  he  was  ready  to  be  acknowledged  as  an  acquain02
tance,  expecting it,  and  she  had  the  pain  of seeing her  sister turn  away 
with  unalterable coldness. 
Lady  Dalrymple's  carriage,  for  which  Miss  Elliot  was  growing  very 
impatient,  now  drew  up;  the  servant  came  in  to  announce  it.  It  was 
beginning to rain  again,  and  altogether there  was a delay,  and  a bustle, 
and  a  talking,  which  must  make  all  the  little crowd  in  the  shop  under02
stand  that  Lady  Dalrymple  was  calling  to  convey  Miss  Elliot.  At  last 
Miss Elliot and  her friend,  unattended but  by the servant,  (for there  was 
no  cousin  returned)  were  walking  off; and  Captain  Wentworth,  watch02
ing  them,  turned  again  to  Anne,  and  by  manner,  rather  than  words, 
was offering  his services to  her. 
"I  am  much  obliged  to  you,"  was  her  answer,  "but  I  am  not  going 
with  them.  The  carriage  would  not  accommodate  so  many.  I  walk.  I 
prefer  walking. " 
"But it rains." 
"Oh! very little.  Nothing  that  I  regard." 
After  a  moment's  pause  he  said,  "Though  I  came  only  yesterday,  I 
have equipped  myself properly  for Bath already,  you  see," (pointing to a 
new  umbrella) "I wish  you  would  make  use  of it,  if you  are  determined 
to  walk;  though,  I  think,  it  would  be  more  prudent  to  let  me  get  you 
a chair." 
She  was very much  obliged to him,  but  declined  it all,  repeating  her 
conviction,  that the  rain  would  come to nothing  at present,  and  adding, 
"I  am  only  waiting  for  Mr.  Elliot.  He  will  be  here  in  a  moment,  I 
am  sure." 
She  had  hardly  spoken  the  words,  when  Mr.  Elliot  walked  in.  Cap02
tain  Wentworth  recollected  him  perfectly.  There  was  no  difference 
between  him  and  the  man  who  had  stood  on  the  steps at Lyme,  admir02
ing  Anne  as  she  passed,  except in  the  air  and  look and  manner  of  the 
privileged  relation  and  friend.  He  came  in  with  eagerness,  appeared  to 
see  and  think  only  of her,  apologised  for  his  stay,  was  grieved  to  have 
kept  her  waiting,  and  anxious  to  get  her  away  without  further  loss of 
time,  and before the rain  increased; and  in another  moment they walked 
off together,  her arm  under his, a gentle and  embarrassed  glance, and  a 
"good  morning  to  you,"  being  all  that  she  had  time  for,  as  she  passed 
away. 
As soon  as they  were  out  of sight,  the  ladies of Captain  Wentworth's 
party began  talking of them. 
"Mr.  Elliot does not dislike his cousin,  I  fancy?" 
6.  Would give no sign of recognition. 
118 
CHAPTER  XIX 
"Oh! no,  that  is clear enough.  One can guess what will happen there. 
He  is always with  them;  half  lives in  the  family,  I believe. What  a very 
good-looking  man!" 
"Yes,  and  Miss Atkinson,  who  dined  with  him  once at the Wallises, 
says he  is the  most agreeable man  she ever was in company  with." 
"She  is pretty,  I  think;  Anne  Elliot;  very  pretty,  when  one  comes to 
look  at  her.  It  is  not  the  fashion  to  say  so,  but  I  confess  I  admire  her 
more than  her sister." 
"Oh! so do I." 
"And  so  do  I.  No  comparison.  But  the  men  are  all  wild  after  Miss 
Elliot.  Anne  is too delicate for  them." 
Anne would  have been particularly obliged to her cousin, if he  would 
have  walked  by her  side all the  way to Camden-place,  without  saying a 
word.  She had  never found  it so difficult  to listen to him,  though  noth02
ing  could  exceed his  solicitude  and  care,  and  though  his subjects were 
principally  such  as  were  wont  to  be  always  interesting―praise,  warm, 
just,  and  discriminating,  of Lady Russell, and  insinuations  highly ratio02
nal  against  Mrs.  Clay.  But  just  now  she  could  think  only  of  Captain 
Wentworth.  She could  not  understand  his present  feelings, whether  he 
were  really  suffering  much  from  disappointment  or  not;  and  till  that 
point  were settled,  she could  not be quite  herself. 
She  hoped  to be wise and  reasonable in  time; but  alas! alas! she  must 
confess  to  herself that  she was not wise yet. 
Another  circumstance very  essential  for  her  to  know,  was  how  long 
he  meant  to  be  in  Bath;  he  had  not  mentioned  it,  or  she  could  not 
recollect it.  He might be only passing through.  But it was more probable 
that  he  should  be come to stay.  In that  case,  so liable as every body was 
to  meet  every  body  in  Bath,  Lady  Russell  would  in  all  likelihood  see 
him  somewhere.―Would  she  recollect him? How would  it all be? 
She  had  already  been  obliged  to  tell  Lady  Russell that  Louisa  Mus-
grove  was  to  marry  Captain  Benwick.  It  had  cost  her  something  to 
encounter  Lady  Russell's surprise;  and  now,  if she  were by any  chance 
to  be  thrown  into  company  with  Captain  Wentworth,  her  imperfect 
knowledge  of the  matter  might  add  another  shade  of prejudice  against 
him. 
The following morning Anne was out with her friend,  and  for the first 
hour,  in  an  incessant  and  fearful  sort  of watch  for  him  in  vain; but  at 
last,  in  returning  down  Pulteney-street,  she  distinguished  him  on  the 
right  hand  pavement  at  such  a  distance  as  to  have  him  in  view  the 
greater part of the  street.  There were many  other men  about him,  many 
groups  walking  the  same  way,  but  there  was  no  mistaking  him.  She 
looked  instinctively at  Lady  Russell; but  not  from  any  mad  idea  of her 
recognising him  so soon as she did herself.  No,  it was not to be  supposed 
that  Lady Russell would  perceive him  till they were nearly opposite. She 
looked  at  her  however,  from  time  to  time,  anxiously;  and  when  the 
CHAPTER  XIX 
119 
moment  approached  which  must  point  him  out,  though  not  daring  to 
look again (for her own  countenance she knew was unfit to be seen),  she 
was  yet perfectly  conscious of Lady  Russell's eyes being  turned  exactly 
in  the  direction  for  him,  of her  being  in  short  intently  observing  him. 
She  could  thoroughly  comprehend  the  sort of fascination  he  must  pos02
sess over  Lady  Russell's mind,  the  difficulty  it  must  be  for  her  to  with02
draw her  eyes, the  astonishment  she  must  be  feeling that  eight  or  nine 
years should  have  passed  over him,  and  in  foreign  climes and  in  active 
service too, without  robbing  him  of one personal grace! 
At  last,  Lady  Russell  drew  back  her  head.―"Now,  how  would  she 
speak of him?" 
"You  will  wonder,"  said  she,  "what  has  been  fixing  my  eye so  long; 
but  I was  looking  after  some  window-curtains,  which  Lady  Alicia  and 
Mrs.  Frankland  were telling me  of last night.  They described the  draw02
ing-room  window-curtains  of one  of the  houses  on  this  side of the  way, 
and  this part of the street,  as being the handsomest  and  best hung of any 
in  Bath,  but  could  not  recollect the  exact  number,  and  I  have  been 
trying  to  find  out  which  it could  be; but  I confess I can  see no  curtains 
hereabouts  that  answer their  description." 
Anne  sighed  and  blushed  and  smiled,  in  pity  and  disdain,  either  at 
her  friend  or  herself.―The part which  provoked  her  most,  was  that  in 
all  this  waste  of foresight  and  caution,  she  should  have  lost  the  right 
moment for seeing whether  he saw  them. 
A  day  or  two  passed  without  producing  any  thing.―The  theatre  or 
the rooms, where he was most likely to be, were not fashionable  enough 
for  the  Elliots,  whose  evening  amusements  were  solely  in  the  elegant 
stupidity  of private  parties,  in  which  they  were  getting  more  and  more 
engaged; and  Anne,  wearied  of such  a  state of stagnation,  sick of know02
ing nothing,  and  fancying  herself  stronger  because her  strength  was  not 
tried,  was  quite  impatient  for  the  concert evening.  It was  a  concert for 
the  benefit  of a  person  patronised  by  Lady  Dalrymple.  Of course  they 
must attend.  It was really expected to be a good one, and  Captain  Went02
worth  was  very  fond  of  music.  If she  could  only  have  a  few  minutes 
conversation with  him  again,  she fancied she should  be satisfied; and  as 
to the  power  of addressing  him  she felt all  over courage  if the  opportu02
nity occurred.  Elizabeth had  turned from  him,  Lady Russell overlooked 
him;  her  nerves  were  strengthened  by these circumstances; she  felt  that 
she owed  him  attention. 
She  had  once partly  promised  Mrs.  Smith to spend  the  evening  with 
her; but  in  a  short  hurried  call  she  excused  herself  and  put  it off,  with 
the  more  decided  promise  of a  longer visit on  the  morrow.  Mrs.  Smith 
gave a most good-humoured  acquiescence. 
"By  all  means,"  said  she;  "only  tell  me  all  about  it,  when  you  do 
come.  Who  is your party?" 
Anne  named  them  all.  Mrs.  Smith made  no  reply; but  when  she was 
120 
CHAPTER  XX 
leaving her,  said, and  with  an  expression  half  serious, half  arch,  "Well, 
I  heartily wish  your  concert may answer; and  do  not  fail  me  to-morrow 
if  you  can  come;  for  I  begin  to  have  a  foreboding  that  I  may  have 
many  more  visits  from  you." 
Anne  was  startled  and  confused,  but  after  standing  in  a  moment's 
suspense,  was obliged, and  not sorry to be obliged, to hurry away. 
Chapter XX 
Sir  Walter,  his two daughters,  and  Mrs.  Clay,  were the  earliest of all 
their  party,  at  the  rooms  in  the  evening;  and  as  Lady  Dalrymple  must 
be  waited  for,  they  took  their  station  by  one  of the  fires  in  the  octagon 
room.  But hardly  were they so settled, when  the door opened  again,  and 
Captain  Wentworth  walked  in  alone. Anne  was the  nearest to him,  and 
making  yet a  little advance,  she  instantly  spoke.  He  was preparing only 
to bow and  pass  on,  but  her  gentle "How  do  you  do?" brought  him  out 
of  the  straight  line  to  stand  near  her,  and  make  enquiries  in  return,  in 
spite of the  formidable  father  and  sister in  the  back ground.  Their being 
in  the  back  ground  was  a  support  to  Anne;  she  knew  nothing  of their 
looks,  and  felt  equal  to everything which  she believed right to be done. 
While they were speaking,  a whispering between her father and  Eliza02
beth  caught  her  ear.  She could  not  distinguish,  but  she  must  guess  the 
subject;  and  on  Captain  Wentworth's  making  a  distant  bow,  she  com02
prehended  that  her  father  had  judged  so well as to give him  that  simple 
acknowledgment  of acquaintance,  and  she  was  just  in  time  by  a  side 
glance  to  see  a  slight  curtsey  from  Elizabeth  herself.  This,  though  late 
and  reluctant and  ungracious,  was yet better than  nothing,  and  her spir02
its  improved. 
After  talking  however  of the  weather  and  Bath  and  the  concert,  their 
conversation  began  to  flag,  and  so  little  was  said  at  last,  that  she  was 
expecting  him  to  go  every  moment;  but  he  did  not;  he  seemed  in  no 
hurry to leave her; and  presently with  renewed  spirit,  with  a little smile, 
a  little glow,  he  said, 
"I  have  hardly  seen  you  since our  day  at Lyme.  I am  afraid  you  must 
have  suffered  from  the  shock,  and  the  more  from  its not  overpowering 
you  at the  time." 
She  assured  him  that  she  had  not. 
"It was a  frightful  hour,"  said  he,  "a  frightful  day!" and  he  passed  his 
hand  across his eyes, as if the  remembrance were still too painful;  but  in 
a  moment  half  smiling  again,  added,  "The  day  has  produced  some 
effects  however―has  had  some consequences which must be considered 
as the very reverse of frightful.―When  you  had  the presence of mind  to 
suggest  that  Benwick  would  be the  properest  person  to  fetch  a  surgeon, 
CHAPTER  XX 
121 
you  could  have  little  idea  of  his  being  eventually  one  of  those  most 
concerned  in  her recovery." 
"Certainly  I could  have  none.  But it appears―I  should  hope  it would 
be  a  very  happy  match.  There  are  on  both  sides  good  principles  and 
good temper. " 
"Yes,"  said  he,  looking  not  exactly forward―"but  there  I think  ends 
the  resemblance. With  all my soul  I wish  them  happy,  and  rejoice  over 
every circumstance in  favour  of it.  They have  no difficulties to  contend 
with  at  home,  no  opposition,  no  caprice,  no  delays.―The  Musgroves 
are behaving like themselves, most honourably  and  kindly,  only anxious 
with  true parental  hearts to promote  their daughter's  comfort.  All this is 
much,  very much  in  favour  of their happiness;  more than  perhaps―" 
He stopped.  A sudden  recollection seemed to occur,  and  to give  him 
some taste of that  emotion  which  was reddening  Anne's cheeks and  fix02
ing  her  eyes  on  the  ground.―After  clearing  his  throat,  however,  he 
proceeded  thus, 
"I confess that  I do think  there  is a disparity,  too great a disparity,  and 
in  a  point  no  less essential than  mind.―I  regard  Louisa  Musgrove  as a 
very  amiable,  sweet-tempered  girl,  and  not  deficient  in  understanding; 
but  Benwick  is something  more.  He  is a  clever man,  a  reading  man― 
and  I confess that  I do  consider his attaching  himself  to her,  with  some 
surprise.  Had  it been  the  effect  of gratitude,  had  he  learnt  to  love  her, 
because  he  believed  her  to  be  preferring  him,  it  would  have  been 
another  thing.  But  I  have  no  reason  to  suppose  it  so.  It  seems,  on  the 
contrary,  to  have been  a perfectly spontaneous,  untaught  feeling on  his 
side,  and  this  surprises  me.  A  man  like  him,  in  his  situation!  With  a 
heart pierced, wounded, almost broken! Fanny Harville was a very supe02
rior creature; and  his attachment  to her  was indeed  attachment.  A  man 
does not  recover from  such  a devotion  of the  heart  to such  a  woman!― 
He ought  not―he  does not. " 
Either  from  the  consciousness,  however,  that  his  friend  had  recov02
ered,  or from  some other  consciousness, he  went  no farther; and  Anne, 
who,  in  spite  of the  agitated  voice  in  which  the  latter  part  had  been 
uttered,  and  in  spite  of all  the  various  noises  of the  room,  the  almost 
ceaseless  slam  of  the  door,  and  ceaseless  buzz  of  persons  walking 
through,  had  distinguished  every word,  was struck,  gratified,  confused, 
and  beginning  to  breathe  very  quick,  and  feel  an  hundred  things  in  a 
moment.  It was  impossible for  her  to  enter  on  such  a  subject; and  yet, 
after  a pause,  feeling the necessity of speaking,  and  having not the small02
est wish for a total change,  she only deviated  so far as to say, 
"You  were a good while at Lyme, I think?" 
"About  a  fortnight.  I  could  not  leave  it  till  Louisa's doing  well  was 
quite  ascertained.  I  had  been  too  deeply  concerned  in  the  mischief  to 
be  soon  at  peace.  It  had  been  my  doing―solely  mine.  She would  not 
have been obstinate if I had  not been weak.  The country  round  Lyme is 
122 
CHAPTER  XX 
very  fine.  I walked  and  rode  a great deal; and  the  more  I saw,  the  more 
I  found  to  admire." 
"I  should  very much  like to see Lyme again," said Anne. 
"Indeed!  I should  not  have  supposed  that  you  could  have  found  any 
thing  in  Lyme  to  inspire  such  a  feeling.  The  horror  and  distress  you 
were  involved  in―the  stretch  of mind,  the  wear  of spirits!―I  should 
have  thought  your  last  impressions  of  Lyme  must  have  been  strong 
disgust. " 
"The  last few  hours  were  certainly  very  painful,"  replied  Anne:  "but 
when  pain  is  over,  the  remembrance  of  it  often  becomes  a  pleasure. 
One  does not  love a place the  less for having suffered  in  it,  unless it has 
been  all  suffering,  nothing  but  suffering―which  was  by  no  means  the 
case  at  Lyme.  We  were  only  in  anxiety and  distress during the  last two 
hours;  and,  previously,  there  had  been  a  great  deal  of enjoyment.  So 
much  novelty and  beauty! I have travelled so little, that every fresh  place 
would  be  interesting  to  me―but  there  is  real  beauty  at  Lyme: and  in 
short"  (with  a  faint  blush  at  some  recollections)  "altogether  my  impres02
sions of the  place are very agreeable." 
As  she  ceased,  the  entrance  door  opened  again,  and  the  very  party 
appeared  for whom  they were waiting.  "Lady Dalrymple,  Lady Dalrym02
ple," was the rejoicing sound; and with all the eagerness compatible with 
anxious elegance, Sir Walter and  his two ladies stepped  forward  to meet 
her.  Lady  Dalrymple  and  Miss  Carteret,  escorted  by  Mr.  Elliot  and 
Colonel  Wallis,  who  had  happened  to arrive nearly at the same  instant, 
advanced  into the  room.  T he others  joined them,  and  it was a group in 
which  Anne  found  herself  also  necessarily  included.  She  was  divided 
from  Captain  Wentworth.  Their interesting,  almost too interesting con02
versation  must be broken  up  for a time; but slight was the penance com02
pared  with  the  happiness  which  brought  it  on!  She  had  learnt,  in  the 
last  ten  minutes,  more  of his  feelings  towards  Louisa,  more  of all  his 
feelings,  than  she  dared  to  think  of!  and  she  gave  herself  up  to  the 
demands  of  the  party,  to  the  needful  civilities  of  the  moment,  with 
exquisite,  though  agitated sensations.  She was in good humour  with all. 
She  had  received ideas which  disposed  her  to be  courteous  and  kind  to 
all,  and  to pity every one,  as being less happy than herself. 
The  delightful  emotions  were  a  little  subdued,  when,  on  stepping 
back  from  the group,  to be joined again by Captain  Wentworth,  she saw 
that  he  was gone.  She was just in  time to see him  turn  into the concert 
room.  He  was  gone―he  had  disappeared:  she  felt  a  moment's  regret. 
But "they should  meet again.  He would  look for her―he  would  find  her 
out  long  before  the  evening  were  over―and  at  present,  perhaps,  it was 
as  well  to  be  asunder.  She  was  in  need  of  a  little  interval  for  recol02
lection." 
Upon  Lady Russell's appearance  soon afterwards,  the whole party was 
collected,  and  all  that  remained,  was  to  marshal  themselves,  and  pro-
CHAPTER  XX 
123 
ceed  into  the  concert  room;  and  be  of  all  the  consequence  in  their 
power,  draw as many eyes, excite as many whispers, and disturb as many 
people as they  could. 
Very,  very happy were both  Elizabeth and  Anne  Elliot as they walked 
in.  Elizabeth, arm  in  arm  with  Miss Carteret,  and  looking on  the  broad 
back  of the  dowager  Viscountess Dalrymple  before  her,  had  nothing  to 
wish  for  which  did  not  seem  within  her  reach;  and  Anne 
but  it 
would  be an  insult to the nature of Anne's felicity,  to draw any compari02
son between  it and  her  sister's; the  origin  of one all selfish vanity,  of the 
other all generous  attachment. 
Anne  saw  nothing,  thought  nothing  of the  brilliancy  of the  room. 
Her  happiness  was  from  within.  Her  eyes were  bright,  and  her  cheeks 
glowed,―but  she  knew  nothing  about  it.  She was  thinking  only  of the 
last  half  hour,  and  as they  passed  to  their  seats,  her  mind  took  a  hasty 
range  over it.  His  choice of subjects,  his expressions, and  still more  his 
manner  and  look,  had  been  such  as  she  could  see  in  only  one  light. 
His opinion  of Louisa Musgrove's  inferiority,  an  opinion  which  he  had 
seemed  solicitous to  give,  his  wonder  at  Captain  Benwick, his  feelings 
as to  a  first,  strong  attachment,―sentences  begun  which  he  could  not 
finish―his  half  averted  eyes,  and  more  than  half  expressive glance,― 
all,  all declared  that  he  had  a heart  returning to her  at least; that  anger, 
resentment,  avoidance,  were  no  more;  and  that  they  were  succeeded, 
not  merely  by friendship  and  regard,  but  by  the  tenderness  of the  past; 
yes, some share of the tenderness  of the past.  She could not  contemplate 
the change as implying  less.―He must  love her. 
These  were  thoughts,  with  their  attendant  visions,  which  occupied 
and  flurried  her  too  much  to  leave  her  any  power  of observation;  and 
she  passed  along  the  room  without  having  a  glimpse  of him,  without 
even trying to discern  him.  When  their places were determined  on,  and 
they  were  all  properly  arranged,  she  looked  round  to  see  if he  should 
happen to be in the same part of the room,  but he was not,  her eye could 
not reach him; and  the concert being just opening,  she must consent for 
a time to be happy in  an  humbler  way. 
The  party  was  divided,  and  disposed  of on  two  contiguous  benches: 
Anne was among those on the foremost, and  Mr.  Elliot had  manoeuvred 
so  well,  with  the  assistance  of his  friend  Colonel  Wallis,  as  to  have  a 
seat  by  her.  Miss  Elliot,  surrounded  by  her  cousins,  and  the  principal 
object  of Colonel  Wallis's gallantry,  was quite  contented. 
Anne's  mind  was  in  a  most  favourable  state  for  the  entertainment  of 
the  evening:  it  was  just  occupation  enough:  she  had  feelings  for  the 
tender,  spirits  for  the  gay,  attention  for  the  scientific,  and  patience  for 
the  wearisome; and  had  never  liked a  concert better,  at least during  the 
first act.  Towards  the  close of it,  in  the  interval7  succeeding  an  Italian 
7.  Intermission. 
124 
CHAPTER  XX 
song,  she  explained  the  words  of the  song  to  Mr.  Elliot.―They  had  a 
concert  bill8  between  them. 
"This,"  said  she,  "is  nearly  the  sense,  or  rather  the  meaning  of  the 
words,  for  certainly the  sense of an  Italian  love-song must  not be talked 
of,―but  it is as nearly the  meaning  as I can give; for  I do  not pretend  to 
understand  the  language.  I am  a very poor  Italian scholar." 
"Yes,  yes,  I  see you  are.  I  see you  know  nothing  of the  matter.  You 
have  only  knowledge  enough  of the  language,  to translate  at sight these 
inverted,  transposed,  curtailed  Italian  lines, into clear, comprehensible, 
elegant  English.  You need  not  say anything  more  of your  ignorance.― 
Here  is complete proof. " 
"I  will  not  oppose  such  kind  politeness; but  I  should  be  sorry  to  be 
examined  by a  real proficient. " 
"I  have  not  had  the  pleasure  of visiting  in  Camden-place  so  long," 
replied  he,  "without  knowing  something  of Miss Anne  Elliot; and  I  do 
regard her as one who  is too modest,  for the world in general to be aware 
of  half  her  accomplishments, and  too highly  accomplished for  modesty 
to be  natural  in  any  other  woman." 
"For shame! for shame!―this  is too much  of flattery. I forget what we 
are to have  next," turning to the  bill. 
"Perhaps,"  said  Mr.  Elliot,  speaking  low,  "I  have  had  a  longer 
acquaintance with  your  character than  you  are aware  of. " 
"Indeed!―How  so? You can  have been  acquainted  with  it only since 
I came to Bath,  excepting as you  might  hear  me previously spoken  of in 
my own  family. " 
"I  knew you  by report  long before you  came to Bath.  I had  heard  you 
described  by  those  who  knew  you  intimately.  I  have  been  acquainted 
with  you  by  character  many  years.  Your  person,  your  disposition, 
accomplishments,  manner―they  were all described,  they were all pres02
ent to  me." 
Mr.  Elliot  was  not  disappointed  in  the  interest he  hoped  to raise.  No 
one can withstand  the charm  of such a mystery. To have been described 
long  ago  to  a  recent  acquaintance,  by  nameless  people,  is irresistible; 
and  Anne  was  all  curiosity.  She  wondered,  and  questioned  him 
eagerly―but in vain.  He delighted  in being asked, but he would  not tell. 
"No,  no―some time  or other perhaps,  but  not  now.  He would  men02
tion  no  names  now;  but  such,  he  could  assure  her,  had  been  the  fact. 
He had  many  years ago received such a description  of Miss Anne  Elliot, 
as had  inspired  him  with  the  highest  idea  of her  merit,  and  excited the 
warmest  curiosity to know her. " 
Anne  could  think  of no  one  so  likely to  have  spoken  with  partiality 
of  her  many  years  ago,  as  the  Mr.  Wentworth,  of Monkford,  Captain 
8.  Program. 
CHAPTER  XX 
125 
Wentworth's brother.  He  might have been  in  Mr.  Elliot's company,  but 
she had  not courage to ask the  question. 
"The  name  of  Anne  Elliot,"  said  he,  "has  long  had  an  interesting 
sound  to me.  Very  long has  it possessed a charm  over my fancy; and,  if 
I dared,  I would  breathe my wishes that the  name  might  never change." 
Such  she believed were his words; but  scarcely had  she  received their 
sound,  than  her  attention  was  caught  by  other  sounds  immediately 
behind  her,  which  rendered  every thing else trivial.  Her father  and  Lady 
Dalrymple were  speaking. 
"A well-looking man,"  said  Sir Walter,  "a very well-looking  man." 
"A  very  fine  young  man  indeed!"  said  Lady  Dalrymple.  "More  air 
than  one often  sees in  Bath.―Irish, I dare say." 
"No,  I  just  know  his  name.  A  bowing  acquaintance.  Wentworth― 
Captain  Wentworth  of the navy.  His sister married  my tenant  in Somer02
setshire,―the Croft,  who  rents Kellynch." 
Before  Sir Walter had  reached this point,  Anne's eyes had  caught  the 
right direction,  and  distinguished  Captain  Wentworth,  standing  among 
a cluster of men  at a little distance.  As her  eyes fell  on  him,  his seemed 
to  be  withdrawn  from  her.  It  had  that  appearance.  It  seemed  as  if she 
had  been one moment  too late; and  as long as she dared  observe, he  did 
not  look again: but  the  performance  was  re-commencing,  and  she  was 
forced  to  seem  to  restore  her  attention  to  the  orchestra,  and  look 
straight  forward. 
When  she could give another  glance, he  had  moved  away.  He  could 
not  have  come  nearer  to  her  if he  would;  she  was  so  surrounded  and 
shut in: but  she would  rather  have caught  his eye. 
Mr.  Elliot's speech too distressed  her.  She had  no longer any inclina02
tion  to talk to him.  She wished  him  not so near  her. 
The  first  act  was  over.  Now  she  hoped  for  some  beneficial  change; 
and,  after  a  period  of nothing-saying  amongst  the  party,  some  of  them 
did decide on going in quest of tea. Anne was one of the few who did  not 
choose to move.  She remained  in  her seat,  and  so did  Lady Russell; but 
she had  the  pleasure  of getting  rid  of Mr.  Elliot; and  she did  not  mean, 
whatever  she might  feel  on  Lady Russell's account,  to shrink  from  con02
versation  with  Captain  Wentworth,  if he  gave her  the  opportunity.  She 
was persuaded  by Lady Russell's countenance that she had seen  him. 
He  did  not  come  however.  Anne  sometimes  fancied  she  discerned 
him  at a  distance,  but  he  never  came.  The  anxious  interval  wore  away 
unproductively.  The  others  returned,  the  room  filled  again,  benches 
were  reclaimed  and  re-possessed,  and  another  hour  of  pleasure  or  of 
penance  was to be set out,  another  hour  of music was to give delight  or 
the  gapes,9  as  real  or  affected  taste  for  it prevailed.  To  Anne,  it  chiefly 
9.  Yawns. 
126 
CHAPTER  XX 
wore the  prospect  of an  hour  of agitation.  She could  not  quit that  room 
in  peace  without  seeing  Captain  Wentworth  once  more,  without  the 
interchange  of one friendly  look. 
In  re-settling themselves,  there  were  now  many  changes,  the  result of 
which  was  favourable  for  her.  Colonel  Wallis  declined  sitting  down 
again,  and  Mr.  Elliot  was  invited  by  Elizabeth  and  Miss Carteret,  in  a 
manner  not  to  be  refused,  to  sit  between  them;  and  by  some  other 
removals,  and  a  little scheming  of her  own,  Anne  was enabled  to place 
herself  much  nearer  the  end  of the  bench  than  she  had  been  before, 
much  more  within  reach  of a  passer-by.  She  could  not  do  so,  without 
comparing  herself  with  Miss Larolles, the  inimitable  Miss Larolles,1― 
but  still  she  did  it,  and  not  with  much  happier  effect;  though  by  what 
seemed  prosperity  in  the  shape  of  an  early  abdication  in  her  next 
neighbours,  she  found  herself  at  the  very  end  of the  bench  before  the 
concert closed. 
Such  was  her  situation,  with  a  vacant  space  at  hand,  when  Captain 
Wentworth  was again  in  sight.  She saw him  not far off.  He saw her too; 
yet  he  looked  grave,  and  seemed  irresolute,  and  only  by  very  slow 
degrees came at last near enough  to speak to her.  She felt that  something 
must  be  the  matter.  T he  change  was  indubitable.  The  difference 
between  his  present  air  and  what  it  had  been  in  the  octagon  room  was 
strikingly great.―Why  was it? She thought  of her  father―of Lady Rus02
sell.  Could  there  have been  any  unpleasant  glances? He began by speak02
ing  of  the  concert,  gravely;  more  like  the  Captain  Wentworth  of 
Uppercross;  owned  himself  disappointed,  had  expected  better  singing; 
and,  in short,  must  confess that  he should  not be sorry when  it was over. 
Anne  replied,  and  spoke  in  defence  of the  performance  so well, and  yet 
in  allowance  for  his  feelings,  so  pleasantly,  that  his  countenance 
improved,  and  he  replied  again  with  almost  a  smile.  They  talked  for  a 
few minutes  more; the  improvement  held; he even  looked down  towards 
the bench,  as if he  saw a place on  it well worth  occupying; when,  at  that 
moment,  a  touch  on  her  shoulder  obliged  Anne  to  turn  round.―It 
came  from  Mr.  Elliot.  He  begged  her  pardon,  but  she  must  be  applied 
to,  to  explain  Italian  again.  Miss  Carteret  was  very  anxious  to  have  a 
general  idea  of what  was  next  to  be  sung.  Anne  could  not  refuse;  but 
never  had  she sacrificed to politeness with  a more  suffering  spirit. 
A few  minutes,  though  as few as possible,  were  inevitably  consumed; 
and  when  her  own  mistress  again,  when  able  to  turn  and  look  as  she 
had  done  before,  she  found  herself  accosted by Captain  Wentworth,  in 
a  reserved  yet  hurried  sort  of farewell.  "He  must  wish  her  good  night. 
He  was going―he  should  get home  as fast as he  could." 
"Is not  this song worth  staying  for?" said Anne,  suddenly  struck by an 
idea  which  made  her  yet more  anxious to be  encouraging. 
1.  A minor character in Frances Burney's Cecilia  (1782) who chooses her seat at public events so 
as to be in a good position for talking to chosen people. 
CHAPTER  XXI 
127 
"No!" he replied impressively, "there is nothing worth  my staying for;" 
and  he was gone directly. 
Jealousy  of  Mr.  Elliot!  It  was  the  only  intelligible motive.  Captain 
Wentworth  jealous of her  affection! Could  she  have  believed  it a  week 
ago―three hours  ago! For a moment the gratification was exquisite. But 
alas! there  were  very different  thoughts  to  succeed.  How  was such  jeal02
ousy  to  be  quieted?  How  was  the  truth  to  reach  him?  How,  in  all  the 
peculiar disadvantages  of their  respective situations,  would  he ever learn 
her  real  sentiments?  It was  misery to think  of Mr.  Elliot's  attentions.― 
Their  evil was incalculable. 
Chapter XXI 
Anne recollected with pleasure the next morning her promise of going 
to  Mrs.  Smith;  meaning  that  it  should  engage  her  from  home  at  the 
time  when  Mr.  Elliot  would  be  most  likely  to  call;  for  to  avoid  Mr. 
Elliot was almost a first object. 
She  felt a great deal  of good will towards  him.  In spite of the  mischief 
of  his  attentions,  she  owed  him  gratitude  and  regard,  perhaps  compas02
sion.  She  could  not  help  thinking  much  of the  extraordinary  circum02
stances  attending  their  acquaintance;  of the  right  which  he  seemed  to 
have to  interest her,  by every thing  in  situation,  by his own  sentiments, 
by  his  early  prepossession.  It  was  altogether  very  extraordinary.―Flat02
tering,  but painful.  There was much  to regret.  How she might have  felt, 
had  there  been  no  Captain  Wentworth  in  the  case,  was  not  worth 
enquiry;  for  there  was a  Captain  Wentworth:  and  be  the  conclusion of 
the  present  suspense  good  or  bad,  her  affection  would  be  his  for  ever. 
Their  union,  she believed,  could  not divide  her  more  from  other  men, 
than their  final  separation. 
Prettier  musings  of high-wrought  love  and  eternal  constancy,  could 
never have passed along the streets of Bath,  than Anne was sporting  with 
from  Camden-place  to  Westgate-buildings.  It  was  almost  enough  to 
spread  purification  and  perfume  all the  way. 
She  was  sure  of  a  pleasant  reception;  and  her  friend  seemed  this 
morning  particularly  obliged to  her  for  coming,  seemed  hardly  to  have 
expected  her,  though  it had  been  an  appointment. 
An  account of the  concert was immediately claimed; and  Anne's  rec02
ollections  of the  concert were  quite  happy  enough  to  animate  her  fea02
tures,  and  make  her  rejoice  to  talk  of  it.  All  that  she  could  tell,  she 
told  most  gladly; but  the  all was little for  one  who  had  been  there,  and 
unsatisfactory  for  such  an  enquirer  as  Mrs.  Smith,  who  had  already 
heard,  through  the  short  cut  of a laundress  and  a waiter,  rather  more of 
the general  success and  produce  of the  evening than  Anne  could  relate; 
and  who now asked in vain for several particulars of the company.  Every 
128 
CHAPTER  X XI 
body  of any  consequence or notoriety  in  Bath  was well known  by  name 
to Mrs.  Smith. 
"The  little  Durands  were  there,  I  conclude,"  said  she,  "with  their 
mouths  open  to  catch  the  music;  like  unfledged  sparrows  ready  to  be 
fed.  They never miss a concert." 
"Yes.  I did  not  see them  myself,  but  I heard  Mr.  Elliot  say they were 
in the  room." 
"The  Ibbotsons―were they there? and  the two new beauties, with  the 
tall  Irish  officer,  who  is talked of for one of them." 
"I  do  not know.―I  do  not think  they  were." 
"Old  Lady Mary Maclean? I need  not ask after her.  She never misses, 
I  know; and  you  must  have  seen  her.  She must  have  been  in  your  own 
circle,  for  as  you  went  with  Lady  Dalrymple,  you  were  in  the  seats of 
grandeur; round  the  orchestra,  of course." 
"No,  that  was what  I dreaded.  It would  have been  very unpleasant  to 
me  in  every  respect.  But happily  Lady  Dalrymple  always chooses to  be 
farther  off; and  we  were  exceedingly well  placed―that  is for  hearing;  I 
must  not  say for seeing, because I appear  to have seen very little." 
"Oh!  you  saw enough  for  your  own  amusement.―I  can  understand. 
There  is a sort of domestic enjoyment to be known  even in a crowd,  and 
this  you  had.  You  were  a  large  party  in  yourselves,  and  you  wanted 
nothing  beyond." 
"But  I  ought  to  have  looked  about  me  more,"  said  Anne,  conscious 
while  she  spoke,  that  there  had  in  fact  been  no  want  of looking  about; 
that  the  object  only had  been  deficient. 
"No,  no―you  were  better  employed.  You need  not  tell  me  that  you 
had  a pleasant evening.  I see it in your eye. I perfectly see how the  hours 
passed―that  you  had  always  something  agreeable  to  listen  to.  In  the 
intervals of the  concert,  it was conversation." 
Anne  half smiled and  said,  "Do you  see that  in  my  eye?" 
"Yes,  I do.  Your  countenance  perfectly  informs  me  that  you  were  in 
company last night with  the person,  whom  you think the most agreeable 
in  the  world,  the  person  who  interests  you  at  this  present  time,  more 
than  all the  rest of the  world  put  together. " 
A blush  overspread  Anne's cheeks. She could say  nothing. 
"And  such  being  the  case,"  continued  Mrs.  Smith,  after  a  short 
pause,  "I  hope  you  believe that  I do  know  how  to  value  your  kindness 
in  coming to me this morning.  It is really very good of you to come and 
sit  with  me,  when  you  must  have  so  many  pleasanter  demands  upon 
your  time." 
Anne  heard  nothing  of this.  She  was  still  in  the  astonishment  and 
confusion  excited  by  her  friend's  penetration,  unable  to  imagine  how 
any report  of Captain  Wentworth  could have reached her.  After  another 
short  silence― 
CHAPTER  XXI 
129 
"Pray,"  said  Mrs.  Smith,  "is  Mr.  Elliot  aware  of your  acquaintance 
with  me? Does he  know that  I am  in  Bath?" 
"Mr.  Elliot!"  repeated  Anne,  looking  up  surprised.  A  moment's 
reflection  shewed  her  the  mistake  she  had  been  under.  She  caught  it 
instantaneously; and,  recovering courage with  the feeling of safety, soon 
added,  more composedly,  "are you  acquainted  with  Mr.  Elliot?" 
"I  have  been  a good  deal  acquainted  with  him,"  replied  Mrs.  Smith, 
gravely,  "but  it seems worn  out  now.  It is a great while since we met. " 
"I  was not at all aware  of this.  You never  mentioned  it before.  Had  I 
known  it,  I would  have had  the  pleasure  of talking to him  about  you." 
"To  confess  the  truth,"  said  Mrs.  Smith,  assuming  her  usual  air of 
cheerfulness,  "that  is exactly the pleasure  I want you to have.  I want  you 
to  talk  about  me  to  Mr.  Elliot.  I  want  your  interest  with  him.  He  can 
be  of essential  service to  me; and  if you  would  have  the  goodness,  my 
dear  Miss Elliot,  to make  it an  object  to yourself,  of course  it is done." 
"I  should  be extremely happy―I  hope  you  cannot  doubt  my  willing02
ness to be of even  the  slightest use  to you," replied  Anne; "but  I suspect 
that  you  are  considering  me  as having  a  higher  claim on  Mr.  Elliot―a 
greater  right  to  influence  him,  than  is  really  the  case.  I  am  sure  you 
have,  somehow or other,  imbibed such a notion.  You must consider  me 
only  as Mr.  Elliot's  relation.  If in  that  light,  if there  is any  thing  which 
you  suppose  his  cousin  might  fairly  ask  of him,  I  beg  you  would  not 
hesitate to employ me. " 
Mrs.  Smith gave her  a penetrating  glance, and  then,  smiling,  said, 
"I have been a little premature,  I perceive.  I beg your pardon.  I  ought 
to  have  waited  for  official  information.  But  now,  my  dear  Miss  Elliot, 
as an  old friend,  do  give me  a hint  as to when  I may  speak.  Next week? 
To  be  sure  by  next  week  I  may  be  allowed  to  think  it  all  settled,  and 
build  my own  selfish schemes on  Mr.  Elliot's good  fortune. " 
"No," replied  Anne,  "nor  next week,  nor  next,  nor  next.  I assure  you 
that nothing  of the sort you are thinking of will be settled any week.  I am 
not going to marry  Mr.  Elliot.  I should  like to know why you  imagine I 
am." 
Mrs.  Smith  looked  at  her  again,  looked earnestly,  smiled,  shook  her 
head,  and exclaimed, 
"Now,  how  I do  wish  I understood  you!  How  I do  wish  I knew  what 
you were at! I have a great idea that  you do not design to be cruel,  when 
the right moment comes.  Till  it does come, you know, we women  never 
mean  to have any body.  It is a thing of course among us, that every  man 
is refused―till  he  offers.  But why should  you be cruel? Let me plead  for 
my―present friend  I cannot call him―but  for my former friend.  Where 
can  you  look  for  a  more  suitable  match?  Where  could  you  expect  a 
more  gentlemanlike,  agreeable  man?  Let  me  recommend  Mr.  Elliot. 
I  am  sure  you  hear  nothing  but  good  of  him  from  Colonel  Wallis; 
130 
CHAPTER  XXI 
and  who  can  know him  better than  Colonel Wallis?" 
"My  dear  Mrs.  Smith,  Mr.  Elliot's  wife  has  not  been  dead  much 
above half a year.  He ought  not to be supposed  to be paying his addresses 
to any  one. " 
"Oh!  if these  are  your  only  objections,"  cried  Mrs.  Smith,  archly, 
"Mr.  Elliot  is safe,  and  I shall give  myself  no  more  trouble  about  him. 
Do  not forget  me when  you  are married,  that's  all.  Let him  know me to 
be a friend  of yours,  and  then  he will think little of the trouble  required, 
which  it  is very  natural  for  him  now,  with  so many  affairs  and  engage02
ments  of his  own,  to  avoid  and  get  rid  of as he  can―very  natural,  per02
haps.  Ninety-nine  out  of a  hundred  would  do  the  same.  Of course,  he 
cannot be aware  of the  importance  to  me.  Well,  my dear  Miss Elliot,  I 
hope  and  trust  you  will  be  very  happy.  Mr.  Elliot  has  sense to  under02
stand  the  value  of such  a  woman.  Your  peace  will  not  be  shipwrecked 
as  mine  has  been.  You  are  safe  in  all  worldly  matters,  and  safe  in  his 
character.  He  will  not  be  led  astray,  he  will  not  be  misled  by others  to 
his  ruin." 
"No,"  said  Anne,  "I  can  readily  believe  all  that  of  my  cousin.  He 
seems  to  have  a  calm,  decided  temper,  not  at  all  open  to  dangerous 
impressions.  I  consider  him  with  great  respect.  I have  no  reason,  from 
any  thing  that  has  fallen  within  my  observation,  to do  otherwise.  But I 
have  not  known  him  long; and  he  is not  a  man,  I think,  to  be  known 
intimately soon.  Will  not  this  manner  of speaking of him,  Mrs. Smith, 
convince  you  that  he  is  nothing  to  me?  Surely,  this  must  be  calm 
enough.  And,  upon  my  word,  he  is  nothing  to  me.  Should  he  ever 
propose  to  me  (which  I  have  very  little  reason  to  imagine  he  has  any 
thought  of doing),  I  shall  not  accept  him.  I  assure  you  I  shall  not.  I 
assure you Mr.  Elliot had  not the share which you have been  supposing, 
in  whatever  pleasure  the  concert  of last  night  might  afford:―not  Mr. 
Elliot; it is not  Mr.  Elliot  that―" 
She  stopped,  regretting  with  a  deep  blush  that  she  had  implied  so 
much;  but  less  would  hardly  have  been  sufficient.  Mrs.  Smith  would 
hardly  have believed so soon in Mr.  Elliot's failure, but from the percep02
tion  of there  being a  somebody  else.  As it was,  she instantly  submitted, 
and  with  all  the  semblance of seeing  nothing  beyond; and  Anne,  eager 
to escape farther  notice, was impatient  to know why  Mrs.  Smith should 
have fancied she was to marry Mr.  Elliot,  where she could have received 
the  idea,  or  from  whom  she could  have heard  it. 
"Do  tell me  how  it first came into your  head." 
"It first came into  my  head,"  replied  Mrs.  Smith, "upon  finding  how 
much  you  were together,  and  feeling it to be the  most probable thing  in 
the  world  to be wished  for by everybody belonging to either of you; and 
you may depend  upon it that all your acquaintance have disposed of you 
in  the  same way.  But I never heard  it spoken  of till two days ago." 
CHAPTER  X XI 
131 
"And  has it indeed  been  spoken of?" 
"Did  you observe the  woman  who  opened  the door to you,  when  you 
called yesterday?" 
"No.  Was not it Mrs.  Speed, as usual,  or the  maid? I observed no  one 
in particular. " 
"It was my friend,  Mrs.  Rooke―Nurse Rooke,  who,  by the  by, had  a 
great  curiosity to see you,  and  was delighted  to be  in  the  way to let you 
in.  She  came  away  from  Marlborough-buildings  only  on  Sunday;  and 
she  it  was  who  told  me  you  were  to  marry  Mr.  Elliot.  She  had  had  it 
from  Mrs. Wallis herself,  which  did  not  seem bad  authority.  She sat an 
hour  with  me on  Monday  evening,  and  gave me the  whole  history." 
"The  whole  history!" repeated  Anne,  laughing.  "She could  not  make 
a  very  long  history,  I  think,  of  one  such  little  article  of  unfounded 
news." 
Mrs.  Smith said  nothing. 
"But,"  continued  Anne,  presently,  "though  there  is  no  truth  in  my 
having  this  claim  on  Mr.  Elliot,  I  should  be  extremely happy  to  be of 
use to you,  in  any  way that  I could.  Shall  I mention  to  him  your  being 
in  Bath?  Shall  I take any message?" 
"No,  I thank  you:  no,  certainly  not.  In  the  warmth  of the  moment, 
and  under  a  mistaken  impression,  I might,  perhaps,  have  endeavoured 
to  interest  you  in  some  circumstances. But not  now:  no,  I thank  you,  I 
have nothing  to trouble  you  with." 
"I think  you  spoke of having known  Mr.  Elliot  many years?" 
"I  did." 
"Not before he  married,  I suppose?" 
"Yes; he was not  married  when  I knew  him  first. " 
"And―were  you  much  acquainted?" 
"Intimately." 
"Indeed!  Then  do  tell  me  what  he  was  at  that  time  of life.  I  have  a 
great  curiosity to  know  what  Mr.  Elliot  was  as a  very  young  man.  Was 
he at all such as he appears  now?" 
"I  have  not  seen  Mr.  Elliot  these  three  years,"  was  Mrs.  Smith's 
answer,  given  so  gravely  that  it  was  impossible  to  pursue  the  subject 
farther;  and  Anne  felt  that  she  had  gained  nothing  but  an  increase of 
curiosity.  They were both  silent―Mrs.  Smith very thoughtful.  At last, 
"I  beg  your  pardon,  my  dear  Miss  Elliot,"  she  cried,  in  her  natural 
tone  of cordiality,  "I beg your  pardon  for  the  short  answers  I have  been 
giving you,  but  I have  been  uncertain  what  I ought  to  do.  I have  been 
doubting  and  considering  as  to  what  I  ought  to  tell  you.  There  were 
many  things  to be taken  into  the  account.  One  hates  to be  officious,  to 
be  giving  bad  impressions,  making  mischief.  Even  the  smooth  surface 
of  family-union  seems worth  preserving,  though  there  may  be  nothing 
durable beneath.  However,  I have determined;  I think  I am  right; I think 
132 
CHAPTER  X XI 
you  ought  to  be  made  acquainted  with  Mr.  Elliot's  real  character. 
Though  I fully  believe that,  at present,  you  have not the smallest inten02
tion  of accepting him,  there  is no saying what  may happen.  You might, 
some time or other,  be differently  affected  towards  him.  Hear the truth, 
therefore,  now,  while you are unprejudiced.  Mr.  Elliot is a man  without 
heart  or  conscience; a designing,  wary,  cold-blooded  being,  who  thinks 
only of himself; who,  for his own  interest or ease, would  be guilty of any 
cruelty,  or  any  treachery,  that  could  be  perpetrated  without  risk  of his 
general  character.  He  has  no  feeling  for  others.  Those  whom  he  has 
been  the  chief  cause  of  leading  into  ruin,  he  can  neglect  and  desert 
without  the  smallest compunction.  He is totally beyond the reach of any 
sentiment  of  justice  or  compassion.  Oh!  he  is  black  at  heart,  hollow 
and black!" 
Anne's  astonished  air,  and  exclamation of wonder,  made  her  pause, 
and  in  a calmer manner  she added, 
"My  expressions  startle  you.  You  must  allow  for  an  injured,  angry 
woman.  But I will try  to  command  myself.  I will  not  abuse  him.  I will 
only  tell  you  what  I  have  found  him.  Facts  shall  speak.  He  was  the 
intimate  friend  of my  dear  husband,  who  trusted  and  loved  him,  and 
thought  him  as good  as himself.  The  intimacy had  been  formed  before 
our  marriage.  I  found  them  most  intimate  friends;  and  I,  too,  became 
excessively pleased  with  Mr.  Elliot,  and  entertained  the highest  opinion 
of  him.  At  nineteen,  you  know,  one  does  not  think  very  seriously,  but 
Mr.  Elliot  appeared  to  me  quite  as  good  as  others,  and  much  more 
agreeable  than  most  others,  and  we  were  almost  always  together.  We 
were  principally  in  town,  living  in  very  good  style.  He  was  then  the 
inferior  in  circumstances,  he  was  then  the  poor  one; he  had  chambers 
in  the  Temple,2  and  it  was  as  much  as  he  could  do  to  support  the 
appearance  of a  gentleman.  He  had  always  a  home  with  us  whenever 
he  chose  it;  he  was  always  welcome;  he  was  like  a  brother.  My  poor 
Charles,  who  had  the  finest,  most  generous  spirit  in  the  world,  would 
have  divided  his  last  farthing  with  him;  and  I  know  that  his  purse  was 
open  to him;  I know that  he often  assisted  him." 
"This  must  have been  about  that  very period  of Mr.  Elliot's life," said 
Anne,  "which  has  always  excited my  particular  curiosity.  It must  have 
been about the same time that  he became known  to my father and sister. 
I  never  knew  him  myself,  I  only  heard  of him,  but  there  was  a  some02
thing  in  his conduct  then  with  regard  to my father  and  sister, and  after02
wards  in  the  circumstances of his  marriage,  which  I never  could  quite 
reconcile  with  present  times.  It  seemed  to  announce  a  different  sort 
of  man." 
"I  know  it all,  I know  it all," cried  Mrs.  Smith.  "He  had  been  intro02
duced  to  Sir Walter  and  your  sister before  I was  acquainted  with  him, 
2.  The Inns of Court,  in London,  where lawyers lived and studied. 
CHAPTER  X XI 
133 
but  I  heard  him  speak  of  them  for  ever.  I  know  he  was  invited  and 
encouraged,  and  I  know  he  did  not  choose  to  go.  I  can  satisfy  you, 
perhaps,  on points which you would  little expect; and  as to his marriage, 
I  knew all about  it at the  time.  I was privy  to all the  fors and  againsts,  I 
was the  friend  to whom  he  confided  his hopes  and  plans,  and  though  I 
did  not  know  his  wife  previously,  (her  inferior  situation  in  society, 
indeed,  rendered  that  impossible) yet  I knew  her  all  her  life  afterwards, 
or,  at least,  till within  the  last two years of her  life,  and  can  answer  any 
question  you  wish to  put." 
"Nay," said Anne,  "I have no particular  enquiry  to make about  her.  I 
have  always  understood  they  were  not  a  happy  couple.  But  I  should 
like  to  know  why,  at  that  time  of his  life,  he  should  slight  my  father's 
acquaintance  as  he  did.  My  father  was  certainly  disposed  to  take  very 
kind  and  proper  notice of him.  Why did  Mr.  Elliot draw back?" 
"Mr.  Elliot,"  replied  Mrs.  Smith,  "at that  period  of his  life,  had  one 
object  in  view―to  make  his  fortune,  and  by  a  rather  quicker  process 
than  the  law.  He  was determined  to make  it by marriage.  He was  deter02
mined,  at  least,  not  to  mar  it by an  imprudent  marriage; and  I know  it 
was  his  belief,  (whether  justly  or  not,  of course  I  cannot  decide)  that 
your  father  and  sister,  in  their  civilities and  invitations,  were  designing 
a match  between the  heir and  the young  lady; and  it was impossible that 
such  a  match  should  have  answered  his  ideas  of  wealth  and  indé02
pendance.  That  was  his motive for drawing back,  I can  assure  you.  He 
told me the  whole story.  He  had  no  concealments with  me.  It was curi02
ous,  that  having  just left  you  behind  me  in  Bath,  my first and  principal 
acquaintance  on  marrying,  should  be  your  cousin;  and  that,  through 
him,  I  should  be  continually  hearing  of  your  father  and  sister.  He 
described  one  Miss  Elliot,  and  I  thought  very  affectionately  of  the 
other." 
"Perhaps,"  cried  Anne,  struck  by  a  sudden  idea,  "you  sometimes 
spoke of me to  Mr.  Elliot?" 
"To  be sure  I did,  very often.  I used  to boast of my own  Anne  Elliot, 
and  vouch  for your being a very different  creature  from―" 
She  checked herself  just in  time. 
"This accounts for something  which  Mr.  Elliot said  last night, " cried 
Anne.  "This explains it.  I found  he had  been used to hear of me.  I could 
not  comprehend  how.  What  wild  imaginations  one  forms,  where  dear 
self  is  concerned!  How  sure  to  be  mistaken!  But  I  beg  your  pardon;  I 
have  interrupted  you.  Mr.  Elliot  married,  then,  completely for money? 
The  circumstance,  probably,  which  first  opened  your  eyes to  his  char02
acter. " 
Mrs.  Smith hesitated a little here.  "Oh! those things are too common. 
When  one  lives in  the  world,  a  man  or woman's  marrying  for money  is 
too common  to  strike one  as it ought.  I was very young,  and  associated 
only  with  the  young,  and  we  were  a  thoughtless,  gay  set,  without  any 
B4 
CHAPTER  X XI 
strict rules  of conduct.  We  lived for enjoyment.  I think  differently  now; 
time and  sickness, and  sorrow,  have given  me  other  notions; but,  at  that 
period,  I  must  own  I saw nothing  reprehensible  in  what  Mr.  Elliot  was 
doing.  To  do  the  best for himself,' passed  as a duty." 
"But was not  she a very low woman?" 
"Yes; which  I objected to,  but  he  would  not  regard.  Money,  money, 
was  all  that  he  wanted.  Her  father  was  a  grazier,3  her  grandfather  had 
been  a  butcher,  but  that  was  all  nothing.  She  was  a  fine  woman,  had 
had  a  decent  education,  was  brought  forward  by some cousins,  thrown 
by chance into  Mr.  Elliot's company,  and  fell  in love with  him; and  not 
a  difficulty  or  a  scruple  was there  on  his  side,  with  respect to  her  birth. 
All  his  caution  was  spent  in  being  secured4  of the  real  amount  of her 
fortune,  before  he  committed  himself.  Depend  upon  it,  whatever 
esteem Mr.  Elliot may have for his own  situation  in life now,  as a  young 
man  he  had  not  the  smallest  value  for  it.  His  chance  of the  Kellynch 
estate was something,  but  all the  honour  of the  family he  held  as  cheap 
as dirt.  I have often  heard  him  declare,  that  if baronetcies were saleable, 
any  body  should  have  his  for  fifty  pounds,  arms  and  motto,  name  and 
livery  included;  but  I will  not  pretend  to  repeat  half  that  I  used  to  hear 
him  say on  that  subject.  It would  not be fair.  And  yet you  ought  to have 
proof; for what  is all this but  assertion? and  you  shall have proof. " 
"Indeed,  my  dear  Mrs.  Smith,  I want  none," cried Anne.  "You have 
asserted  nothing  contradictory  to  what  Mr.  Elliot  appeared  to  be  some 
years  ago.  This  is  all  in  confirmation,  rather,  of what  we  used  to  hear 
and  believe.  I  am  more  curious  to  know  why  he  should  be  so  different 
now?" 
"But  for  my  satisfaction;  if  you  will  have  the  goodness  to  ring  for 
Mary―stay,  I am  sure  you  will  have  the  still greater  goodness  of going 
yourself into  my bed-room,  and  bringing  me the  small inlaid  box which 
you  will  find  on  the  upper shelf of the  closet. " 
Anne,  seeing  her  friend  to  be  earnestly  bent  on  it,  did  as  she  was 
desired.  The  box was  brought  and  placed  before  her,  and  Mrs.  Smith, 
sighing  over  it as she  unlocked  it,  said, 
"This  is  full  of  papers  belonging  to  him,  to  my  husband,  a  small 
portion  only of what  I had  to look over when  I lost him.  The letter I am 
looking for,  was  one  written  by  Mr.  Elliot  to  him  before  our  marriage, 
and  happened  to  be  saved;  why,  one  can  hardly  imagine.  But  he  was 
careless  and  immethodical,  like  other  men,  about  those  things;  and 
when  I  came  to  examine  his  papers,  I  found  it  with  others  still  more 
trivial  from  different  people  scattered  here and  there,  while  many  letters 
and  memorandums  of real  importance  had  been  destroyed.  Here  it is. I 
would  not burn  it,  because being even  then  very little satisfied with  Mr. 
Elliot,  I was determined  to preserve every document  of former  intimacy. 
3.  One who feeds cattle for market: a lower-class occupation. 
4.  Assured. 
CHAPTER  XXI 
135 
I  have  now another  motive for being glad  that  I can  produce  it." 
This  was  the  letter,  directed  to  "Charles  Smith,  Esq.  Tunbridge 
Wells," and  dated  from  London,  as far back as July, 1803. 
Dear  Smith, 
I  have  received  yours.  Your  kindness  almost  overpowers  me.  I 
wish  nature  had  made  such  hearts  as  yours  more  common,  but  I 
have lived three  and  twenty  years in  the world,  and  have seen  none 
like  it.  At  present,  believe  me,  I  have  no  need  of your  services, 
being  in  cash  again.  Give me  joy: I have  got  rid  of Sir Walter  and 
Miss.  They are gone  back to Kellynch, and  almost  made  me  swear 
to  visit  them  this  summer,  but  my  first  visit  to  Kellynch  will  be 
with  a  surveyor,  to  tell  me  how  to  bring  it  with  best  advantage  to 
the  hammer.5  The  baronet,  nevertheless,  is  not  unlikely  to  marry 
again; he  is quite  fool enough.  If he  does,  however,  they  will leave 
me  in  peace,  which  may  be a decent  equivalent  for the  reversion.6 
He  is worse than  last year. 
I  wish  I  had  any  name  but  Elliot.  I am  sick  of it.  The  name  of 
Walter  I  can  drop,  thank  God!  and  I  desire  you  will  never  insult 
me  with  my  second  W.  again,  meaning,  for  the  rest  of my  life,  to 
be only yours  truly, 
W M.  E L L I O T. 
Such  a  letter  could  not  be  read  without  putting Anne  in  a  glow;  and 
Mrs.  Smith,  observing the  high  colour  in  her  face,  said, 
"The  language,  I know,  is highly  disrespectful.  Though  I have  forgot 
the exact terms,  I have a perfect  impression  of the general  meaning.  But 
it  shews  you  the  man.  Mark  his  professions  to  my  poor  husband.  Can 
any thing  be stronger?" 
Anne  could  not  immediately  get over  the  shock and  mortification  of 
finding  such  words  applied  to  her  father.  She  was  obliged  to  recollect 
that  her  seeing  the  letter  was a  violation  of the  laws  of honour,  that  no 
one  ought  to  be  judged  or  to  be  known  by  such  testimonies,  that  no 
private  correspondence  could  bear  the  eye  of others,  before  she  could 
recover calmness enough  to  return  the  letter which  she had  been  medi02
tating  over,  and  say, 
"Thank  you.  This is full  proof undoubtedly,  proof of every thing  you 
were saying.  But why  be acquainted  with  us  now?" 
"I can  explain this too," cried  Mrs.  Smith,  smiling. 
"Can  you really?" 
"Yes.  I have  shewn  you  Mr.  Elliot,  as he  was a dozen  years ago,  and 
I will shew  him  as he  is now.  I cannot  produce  written  proof again,  but 
I  can  give  as  authentic  oral  testimony  as  you  can  desire,  of what  he  is 
now  wanting,  and  what  he  is  now  doing.  He  is  no  hypocrite  now.  He 
5.  To be auctioned. 
6.  The passing of the estate to Mr.  Elliot if Sir Walter dies without male heirs. 
136 
CHAPTER  XXI 
truly  wants  to  marry  you.  His present  attentions  to your  family are very 
sincere,  quite  from  the  heart.  I  will  give  you  my  authority;  his  friend 
Colonel  Wallis." 
"Colonel  Wallis! are you  acquainted  with  him?" 
"No.  It does not  come to me  in  quite so direct a line as that;  it takes a 
bend  or  two,  but  nothing  of consequence. The  stream  is as  good  as  at 
first; the  little  rubbish  it collects in  the  turnings,  is easily moved  away. 
Mr.  Elliot  talks  unreservedly  to  Colonel  Wallis of his  views  on  you― 
which said Colonel Wallis I imagine to be in himself a sensible, careful, 
discerning  sort  of character;  but  Colonel  Wallis has  a  very  pretty  silly 
wife,  to whom  he  tells things which  he  had  better not,  and  he  repeats it 
all  to  her.  She,  in  the  overflowing  spirits  of her  recovery,  repeats  it all 
to  her  nurse;  and  the  nurse,  knowing  my  acquaintance  with  you,  very 
naturally  brings  it all  to  me.  On  Monday  evening  my good  friend  Mrs. 
Rooke  let  me  thus  much  into  the  secrets  of  Marlborough-buildings. 
When  I  talked  of  a  whole  history  therefore,  you  see,  I  was  not 
romancing so much  as you  supposed." 
"My  dear  Mrs.  Smith,  your  authority  is deficient.  This  will  not  do. 
Mr.  Elliot's having any views on  me will not in the least account for the 
efforts  he  made  towards  a  reconciliation  with  my  father.  That  was  all 
prior  to  my  coming  to  Bath.  I  found  them  on  the  most  friendly  terms 
when  I  arrived." 
"I  know you  did;  I know  it all perfectly, but"― 
"Indeed,  Mrs.  Smith,  we  must  not  expect to  get  real  information  in 
such  a line.  Facts or opinions which  are to pass through the hands of so 
many,  to  be  misconceived by  folly  in  one,  and  ignorance  in  another, 
can  hardly  have  much  truth  left." 
"Only give me a hearing.  You will soon be able to judge of the general 
credit  due,  by  listening  to  some  particulars  which  you  can  yourself 
immediately  contradict or  confirm.  Nobody  supposes  that  you  were  his 
first inducement.  He  had  seen you  indeed,  before he came to Bath and 
admired  you,  but  without  knowing  it to be you.  So says my historian  at 
least.  Is this  true?  Did  he  see you  last summer  or autumn,  'somewhere 
down  in the west,' to use her own words,  without  knowing it to be you?" 
"He  certainly  did.  So far  it  is very  true.  At  Lyme; I  happened  to  be 
at Lyme." 
"Well,"  continued  Mrs.  Smith  triumphantly,  "grant  my  friend  the 
credit  due  to  the  establishment  of the  first  point  asserted.  He  saw  you 
then  at Lyme, and  liked you so well as to be exceedingly pleased to meet 
with  you  again  in  Camden-place,  as  Miss Anne  Elliot,  and  from  that 
moment,  I have  no  doubt,  had  a double  motive  in  his visits there.  But 
there  was  another,  and  an  earlier; which  I will  now  explain.  If there  is 
any thing  in  my  story which  you  know to be either false or improbable, 
stop  me.  My account states,  that  your  sister's friend,  the  lady  now stay02
ing with  you,  whom  I have heard  you  mention,  came to Bath with Miss 
CHAPTER  X XI 
137 
Elliot and  Sir Walter as long ago as September, (in short when  they first 
came  themselves) and  has  been  staying  there  ever  since; that  she  is  a 
clever,  insinuating,  handsome  woman,  poor  and  plausible,  and  alto02
gether  such  in  situation  and  manner,  as  to  give  a  general  idea  among 
Sir  Walter's  acquaintance,  of  her  meaning  to  be  Lady  Elliot,  and  as 
general  a  surprise  that  Miss  Elliot  should  be  apparently  blind  to  the 
danger." 
Here  Mrs.  Smith paused  a moment; but  Anne  had  not a word  to say, 
and  she  continued, 
"This  was the  light  in  which  it appeared  to those who  knew  the  fam02
ily,  long before your  return  to  it; and  Colonel Wallis had  his  eye  upon 
your  father  enough  to  be  sensible of it,  though  he  did  not  then  visit  in 
Camden-place;  but  his  regard  for  Mr.  Elliot  gave  him  an  interest  in 
watching all that  was going on there,  and  when  Mr.  Elliot came to Bath 
for a day or two,  as he happened  to do a little before Christmas, Colonel 
Wallis  made  him  acquainted  with  the  appearance  of  things,  and  the 
reports beginning to prevail.―Now  you are to understand that  time  had 
worked  a  very  material  change  in  Mr.  Elliot's opinions  as to  the  value 
of  a  baronetcy.  Upon  all  points  of blood  and  connexion,  he  is a  com02
pletely  altered  man.  Having  long  had  as  much  money  as  he  could 
spend,  nothing  to wish  for  on  the  side of avarice or  indulgence,  he  has 
been  gradually  learning  to  pin  his  happiness  upon  the  consequence  he 
is heir  to.  I thought  it coming on,  before  our  acquaintance  ceased,  but 
it  is now  a  confirmed  feeling.  He  cannot  bear  the  idea  of not  being Sir 
William.  You  may  guess  therefore  that  the  news  he  heard  from  his 
friend,  could  not  be  very  agreeable,7  and  you  may  guess  what  it  pro02
duced; the  resolution  of coming back to Bath as soon as possible, and of 
fixing  himself  here  for  a  time,  with  the  view  of  renewing  his  former 
acquaintance and  recovering such  a footing  in  the  family,  as might give 
him  the  means  of ascertaining the  degree  of his danger,  and  of circum02
venting  the  lady  if he  found  it material.  This was agreed  upon  between 
the two friends,  as the  only thing to be done; and  Colonel Wallis was to 
assist  in  every  way  that  he  could.  He  was  to  be  introduced,  and  Mrs. 
Wallis was to be  introduced,  and  every body was to be  introduced.  Mr. 
Elliot  came  back  accordingly; and  on  application  was  forgiven,  as  you 
know,  and  re-admitted  into  the  family;  and  there  it  was  his  constant 
object,  and  his  only  object  (till  your  arrival  added  another  motive)  to 
watch  Sir Walter  and  Mrs.  Clay.  He  omitted  no  opportunity  of being 
with  them,  threw  himself  in  their  way,  called  at  all  hours―but  I  need 
not  be particular  on  this  subject.  You can  imagine what  an  artful  man 
would  do;  and  with  this  guide,  perhaps,  may  recollect what  you  have 
seen him  do." 
"Yes,"  said  Anne,  "you  tell  me  nothing  which  does  not  accord  with 
7.  Because if Sir Walter marries again,  his wife may bear sons. 
138 
CHAPTER  XXI 
what  I have known,  or could  imagine. There is always something  offen02
sive in the details of cunning.  The manoeuvres of selfishness and  duplic02
ity  must  ever  be  revolting,  but  I  have  heard  nothing  which  really 
surprises  me.  I know those who would  be shocked by such a  representa02
tion  of Mr.  Elliot,  who  would  have difficulty  in  believing it; but  I have 
never  been  satisfied.  I  have  always  wanted  some  other  motive  for  his 
conduct  than  appeared.―I  should  like to  know  his  present  opinion,  as 
to the  probability of the  event he  has  been  in  dread  of; whether  he con02
siders the  danger  to be lessening or not. " 
"Lessening,  I understand," replied  Mrs.  Smith. "He thinks Mrs. Clay 
afraid  of him,  aware that  he sees through  her,  and  not daring to proceed 
as she  might do  in  his absence. But since he  must  be absent some time 
or  other,  I do  not  perceive how  he  can  ever be  secure,  while she  holds 
her  present  influence.  Mrs.  Wallis has  an  amusing  idea,  as  nurse  tells 
me,  that  it  is  to  be  put  into  the  marriage  articles  when  you  and  Mr. 
Elliot  marry,  that  your  father  is  not  to  marry  Mrs.  Clay.  A  scheme, 
worthy  of Mrs.  Wallis's understanding,  by all accounts; but  my sensible 
nurse  Rooke sees  the  absurdity  of it.―'Why,  to  be  sure,  ma'am,'  said 
she,  'it  would  not  prevent  his  marrying  any  body  else.'  And  indeed,  to 
own  the  truth,  I  do  not  think  nurse  in  her  heart  is  a  very  strenuous 
opposer  of Sir Walter's making a second match.  She must  be allowed to 
be a  favourer  of matrimony  you  know,  and  (since self will intrude)  who 
can  say that  she  may  not  have  some flying visions of attending  the  next 
Lady  Elliot,  through  Mrs.  Wallis's recommendation?" 
"I  am  very  glad  to  know  all  this,"  said  Anne,  after  a  little  thought-
fulness.  "It will  be  more  painful  to  me  in  some  respects to  be  in  com02
pany  with  him,  but  I shall  know better what  to do.  My line of conduct 
will  be  more  direct.  Mr.  Elliot  is  evidently  a  disingenuous,  artificial, 
worldly  man,  who  has  never  had  any  better  principle  to  guide  him 
than  selfishness. " 
But  Mr.  Elliot  was  not  yet done  with.  Mrs.  Smith  had  been  carried 
away from  her first direction,  and  Anne  had  forgotten,  in the  interest of 
her  own  family  concerns,  how  much  had  been  originally  implied 
against him; but her attention  was now called to the explanation of those 
first  hints,  and  she  listened  to  a  recital  which,  if  it  did  not  perfectly 
justify  the  unqualified  bitterness  of  Mrs.  Smith,  proved  him  to  have 
been  very  unfeeling  in  his  conduct  towards  her,  very  deficient  both  in 
justice and  compassion. 
She  learned  that  (the intimacy between  them  continuing  unimpaired 
by  Mr.  Elliot's marriage) they  had  been  as before  always together,  and 
Mr.  Elliot  had  led  his  friend  into  expenses  much  beyond  his  fortune. 
Mrs.  Smith  did  not  want  to take blame to  herself,  and  was most  tender 
of  throwing  any  on  her  husband;  but  Anne  could  collect  that  their 
income  had  never  been  equal  to  their  style of living,  and  that  from  the 
first, there  had been a great deal  of general and  joint extravagance.  From 
CHAPTER  XXI 
139 
his  wife's  account  of him,  she  could  discern  Mr.  Smith  to  have  been 
a  man  of warm  feelings,  easy  temper,  careless  habits,  and  not  strong 
understanding,  much  more  amiable  than  his  friend,  and  very  unlike 
him―led  by  him,  and  probably  despised  by  him.  Mr.  Elliot,  raised  by 
his  marriage  to  great  affluence,  and  disposed  to  every  gratification  of 
pleasure and  vanity which  could be commanded  without  involving  him02
self,  (for with  all his self-indulgence  he  had  become a prudent man)  and 
beginning  to  be  rich,  just  as  his  friend  ought  to  have  found  himself  to 
be poor,  seemed  to  have had  no concern  at all for that  friend's  probable 
finances,  but,  on  the  contrary,  had  been  prompting  and  encouraging 
expenses,  which  could  end  only  in  ruin.  And  the  Smiths  accordingly 
had  been  ruined. 
The  husband  had  died  just in  time to be spared  the  full  knowledge of 
it. They had  previously known  embarrassments  enough  to try the  friend02
ship  of their  friends,  and  to  prove  that  Mr.  Elliot's  had  better  not  be 
tried; but  it was not till his death that the wretched  state of his affairs  was 
fully  known.  With  a confidence  in  Mr.  Elliot's  regard,  more  creditable 
to  his  feelings  than  his  judgment,  Mr.  Smith  had  appointed  him  the 
executor  of his  will; but  Mr.  Elliot  would  not  act,  and  the  difficulties 
and  distresses  which  this  refusal  had  heaped  on  her,  in  addition  to  the 
inevitable  sufferings  of  her  situation,  had  been  such  as  could  not  be 
related  without  anguish  of spirit,  or  listened  to  without  corresponding 
indignation. 
Anne was shewn  some letters of his on the occasion, answers to  urgent 
applications from  Mrs.  Smith,  which  all breathed  the same stern  resolu02
tion  of not engaging  in  a fruitless  trouble,  and,  under a cold civility,  the 
same hard-hearted  indifference  to any  of the  evils it might  bring on  her. 
It  was  a  dreadful  picture  of ingratitude  and  inhumanity;  and  Anne  felt 
at some  moments,  that  no  flagrant  open  crime  could  have  been  worse. 
She had  a great deal  to listen to; all the  particulars  of past sad scenes, all 
the  minutiae  of distress upon distress,  which  in former  conversations  had 
been  merely  hinted  at,  were  dwelt  on  now  with  a  natural  indulgence. 
Anne  could  perfectly  comprehend  the  exquisite relief,  and  was only  the 
more  inclined  to  wonder  at  the  composure  of  her  friend's  usual  state 
of  mind. 
There was one circumstance in  the  history of her grievances of partic02
ular  irritation.  She had  good  reason  to believe that  some property  of her 
husband  in  the  West  Indies,  which  had  been  for  many  years  under  a 
sort  of sequestration  for  the  payment  of its  own  incumbrances,8  might 
be recoverable by proper  measures; and  this  property,  though  not  large, 
would  be enough  to make her comparatively rich.  But there was  nobody 
to  stir  in  it.  Mr.  Elliot  would  do  nothing,  and  she  could  do  nothing 
herself,  equally  disabled  from  personal  exertion  by  her  state  of  bodily 
8.  The income  of the estate  has been  assigned, presumably  by legal action,  to pay legal claims 
against the owner. 
140 
CHAPTER  X XI 
weakness,  and  from  employing  others  by  her  want  of money.  She  had 
no  natural  connexions  to  assist  her  even  with  their  counsel,  and  she 
could  not  afford  to  purchase  the  assistance of the  law.  This was a  cruel 
aggravation  of actually  streightened9  means.  To  feel  that  she  ought  to 
be  in  better  circumstances,  that  a  little trouble  in  the  right  place  might 
do  it,  and  to  fear  that  delay  might  be  even  weakening  her  claims,  was 
hard  to  bear! 
It was  on  this  point  that  she had  hoped  to engage Anne's good  offices 
with  Mr.  Elliot.  She  had  previously,  in  the  anticipation  of their  mar02
riage,  been  very  apprehensive  of losing  her  friend  by  it;  but  on  being 
assured  that  he  could  have  made  no attempt  of that  nature,  since he  did 
not  even  know  her  to  be  in  Bath,  it  immediately  occurred,  that  some02
thing  might  be  done  in  her  favour  by  the  influence  of the  woman  he 
loved,  and  she  had  been  hastily preparing to  interest Anne's feelings,  as 
far  as the  observances  due  to  Mr.  Elliot's  character  would  allow,  when 
Anne's refutation  of the  supposed  engagement  changed  the  face of every 
thing,  and  while  it took  from  her  the  new-formed  hope  of succeeding  in 
the  object  of her  first  anxiety,  left  her  at  least the  comfort  of telling  the 
whole  story her  own  way. 
After  listening  to  this  full  description  of Mr.  Elliot,  Anne  could  not 
but  express  some  surprise  at  Mrs.  Smith's  having  spoken  of  him  so 
favourably  in  the  beginning  of their  conversation.  "She had  seemed  to 
recommend  and  praise  him!" 
"My  dear,"  was  Mrs.  Smith's  reply,  "there  was  nothing  else  to  be 
done.  I considered  your  marrying  him  as certain,  though  he  might  not 
yet  have  made  the  offer,  and  I  could  no  more  speak  the  truth  of  him, 
than  if he  had  been  your  husband.  My heart  bled  for you,  as I talked of 
happiness.  And  yet,  he  is  sensible,  he  is  agreeable,  and  with  such  a 
woman  as  you,  it  was  not  absolutely  hopeless.  He  was  very  unkind  to 
his  first  wife.  They  were  wretched  together.  But  she  was  too  ignorant 
and  giddy  for  respect,  and  he  had  never loved her.  I was willing to  hope 
that  you  must  fare better. " 
Anne  could  just acknowledge  within  herself such  a possibility of hav02
ing been  induced  to  marry  him,  as made  her  shudder at the  idea  of the 
misery  which  must  have  followed.  It  was  just  possible  that  she  might 
have  been  persuaded  by  Lady  Russell! And  under  such  a  supposition, 
which  would  have  been  most  miserable,  when  time  had  disclosed  all, 
too late? 
It  was  very desirable  that  Lady  Russell should  be  no  longer deceived; 
and  one  of the  concluding  arrangements  of this  important  conference, 
which  carried  them  through  the  greater  part  of the  morning,  was,  that 
Anne  had  full  liberty  to  communicate  to  her  friend  every  thing  relative 
to  Mrs.  Smith,  in  which  his conduct  was  involved. 
9.  Straitened,  reduced. 
CHAPTER  XXII 
141 
Chapter  XXII 
Anne  went  home  to think  over  all that  she  had  heard.  In  one  point, 
her feelings were relieved by this knowledge of Mr.  Elliot.  There was  no 
longer  any  thing  of  tenderness  due  to  him.  He  stood,  as  opposed  to 
Captain  Wentworth,  in  all  his  own  unwelcome  obtrusiveness; and  the 
evil of his attentions last night,  the  irremediable mischief he might  have 
done,  was  considered  with  sensations  unqualified,  unperplexed.―Pity 
for  him  was all over.  But this was the  only point  of relief.  In every other 
respect,  in  looking around  her,  or penetrating  forward,  she saw more  to 
distrust  and  to  apprehend.  She  was  concerned  for  the  disappointment 
and  pain  Lady  Russell  would  be  feeling,  for  the  mortifications  which 
must  be  hanging  over  her  father  and  sister,  and  had  all  the  distress of 
foreseeing  many  evils,  without  knowing  how  to  avert  any  one  of 
them.―She  was most thankful  for her  own  knowledge  of him.  She had 
never  considered  herself  as  entitled  to  reward  for  not  slighting  an  old 
friend  like  Mrs.  Smith,  but  here  was  a  reward  indeed  springing  from 
it!―Mrs.  Smith  had  been  able to  tell  her  what  no  one  else could  have 
done.  Could  the  knowledge  have  been  extended  through  her  family!― 
But this was a vain  idea.  She must  talk to Lady Russell, tell her,  consult 
with  her,  and  having  done  her best,  wait the  event1  with  as much  com02
posure  as possible; and  after  all,  her  greatest want  of composure  would 
be  in  that  quarter  of the  mind  which  could  not be opened  to Lady Rus02
sell,  in  that flow of anxieties and  fears which  must  be all to herself. 
She found,  on  reaching home,  that  she had,  as she intended,  escaped 
seeing Mr.  Elliot; that  he had  called and  paid them  a long morning visit; 
but  hardly  had  she  congratulated  herself,  and  felt  safe  till  to-morrow, 
when  she heard  that  he was coming again  in the  evening. 
"I  had  not the  smallest intention  of asking him,"  said Elizabeth,  with 
affected  carelessness,  "but  he  gave  so  many  hints;  so  Mrs.  Clay  says, 
at least." 
"Indeed  I do  say it.  I never  saw any  body  in  my  life  spell2  harder  for 
an  invitation.  Poor  man!  I  was  really  in  pain  for  him;  for  your  hard02
hearted  sister,  Miss Anne,  seems bent on  cruelty." 
"Oh!" cried Elizabeth, "I have been rather too much  used to the game 
to  be  soon  overcome  by  a  gentleman's  hints.  However,  when  I  found 
how  excessively he  was  regretting  that  he  should  miss  my  father  this 
morning,  I  gave  way  immediately,  for  I  would  never  really  omit  an 
opportunity  of bringing him  and  Sir Walter together.  They appear  to so 
much  advantage  in  company  with  each  other!  Each  behaving  so pleas02
antly! Mr.  Elliot looking up  with  so much  respect!" 
"Quite delightful!"  cried  Mrs.  Clay,  not daring,  however,  to turn  her 
1.  Outcome. 
2.  Suggest a desire. 
142 
CHAPTER  XXII 
eyes towards  Anne.  "Exactly  like father  and  son! Dear Miss Elliot,  may 
I  not say father  and  son?" 
"Oh!  I  lay  no  embargo  on  any  body's  words.  If you  will  have  such 
ideas! But,  upon  my word,  I am  scarcely sensible of his attentions  being 
beyond  those of other  men." 
"My dear  Miss Elliot!" exclaimed Mrs. Clay, lifting up her hands and 
eyes,  and  sinking  all  the  rest  of  her  astonishment  in  a  convenient 
silence. 
"Well,  my  dear  Penelope,  you  need  not  be  so alarmed  about  him.  I 
did  invite him,  you  know.  I sent him  away  with  smiles. When  I  found 
he  was  really going to  his  friends  at Thornberry-park  for  the  whole day 
tomorrow,  I had  compassion  on  him." 
Anne  admired  the  good  acting  of the  friend,  in  being  able  to  shew 
such  pleasure  as she did,  in  the  expectation, and  in  the actual arrival of 
the very person whose presence must really be interfering with her  prime 
object.  It was  impossible but  that  Mrs.  Clay must  hate  the  sight of Mr. 
Elliot;  and  yet  she  could  assume  a  most  obliging,  placid  look,  and 
appear  quite  satisfied  with  the  curtailed  license of devoting  herself only 
half  as much  to  Sir Walter as she would  have done  otherwise. 
To  Anne  herself  it  was  most  distressing  to  see  Mr.  Elliot  enter  the 
room;  and  quite  painful  to  have  him  approach  and  speak  to  her.  She 
had  been  used  before  to  feel  that  he  could  not  be always quite sincere, 
but  now  she  saw  insincerity  in  every  thing.  His  attentive  deference  to 
her  father,  contrasted  with  his  former  language,  was  odious; and  when 
she  thought  of his cruel  conduct  towards  Mrs.  Smith,  she could  hardly 
bear  the  sight  of his  present  smiles  and  mildness,  or  the  sound  of his 
artificial  good  sentiments.  She  meant  to  avoid  any  such  alteration  of 
manners  as  might  provoke  a  remonstrance  on  his  side.  It  was  a  great 
object  with  her  to  escape all  enquiry  or  eclat;3 but  it was her  intention 
to  be  as  decidedly  cool  to  him  as  might  be  compatible with  their  rela02
tionship,  and  to retrace,  as quietly as she could,  the few steps of unnec02
essary  intimacy  she  had  been  gradually  led  along.  She was accordingly 
more guarded,  and  more  cool,  than  she had  been the  night before. 
He  wanted  to  animate  her  curiosity  again  as  to  how  and  where  he 
could  have heard  her formerly praised; wanted  very much  to be gratified 
by  more  solicitation; but  the  charm  was broken: he  found  that  the  heat 
and  animation  of a  public  room  were  necessary  to  kindle  his  modest 
cousin's  vanity;  he  found,  at  least,  that  it  was  not  to  be  done  now,  by 
any of those attempts  which  he  could hazard  among  the  too-command02
ing  claims of the  others.  He  little  surmised  that  it was  a  subject acting 
now exactly against his  interest,  bringing  immediately into her  thoughts 
all  those parts of his conduct which  were least excusable. 
She  had  some  satisfaction  in  finding  that  he  was  really  going  out of 
3.  Notoriety,  conspicuousness. 
CHAPTER  XXII 
143 
Bath  the  next  morning,  going  early,  and  that  he  would  be  gone  the 
greater part of two days.  He was invited  again  to Camden-place  the very 
evening  of  his  return;  but  from  Thursday  to  Saturday  evening  his 
absence  was  certain.  It  was  bad  enough  that  a  Mrs.  Clay  should  be 
always before  her; but  that  a  deeper  hypocrite  should  be  added  to  their 
party,  seemed  the  destruction  of every  thing  like peace  and  comfort.  It 
was so humiliating  to  reflect on  the  constant deception  practised  on  her 
father  and  Elizabeth;  to  consider  the  various  sources  of  mortification 
preparing  for them!  Mrs. Clay's selfishness was not  so complicate nor so 
revolting as his; and  Anne  would  have  compounded  for the  marriage  at 
once,  with  all  its evils, to be  clear of Mr.  Elliot's  subtleties,  in  endeav02
ouring  to prevent  it. 
On  Friday  morning  she  meant  to  go very  early  to  Lady  Russell,  and 
accomplish  the  necessary  communication;  and  she  would  have  gone 
directly  after  breakfast  but  that  Mrs.  Clay  was  also  going  out  on  some 
obliging  purpose  of saving  her  sister trouble,  which  determined  her  to 
wait till she  might  be safe from  such  a  companion.  She saw  Mrs.  Clay 
fairly  off, therefore,  before she began  to talk of spending  the  morning  in 
Rivers-street. 
"Very well," said Elizabeth, "I have nothing  to send but  my love.  Oh! 
you  may  as  well  take  back that  tiresome  book she  would  lend  me,  and 
pretend  I  have  read  it  through.  I  really  cannot  be  plaguing  myself  for 
ever with all the new poems and  states of the nation  that come out.  Lady 
Russell  quite  bores  one  with  her  new  publications.  You  need  not  tell 
her  so,  but  I thought  her  dress  hideous  the  other  night.  I  used  to  think 
she  had  some  taste  in  dress,  but  I  was  ashamed  of her  at  the  concert. 
Something  so  formal  and  arrangé* 
in  her  air!  and  she  sits  so  upright! 
My best love, of course." 
"And  mine," added  Sir Walter.  "Kindest  regards.  And  you  may  say, 
that  I  mean  to  call  upon  her  soon.  Make  a  civil  message.  But  I  shall 
only leave my card.5  Morning visits are never fair by women  at her  time 
of  life,  who  make themselves up  so little.  If she would  only wear  rouge, 
she would  not  be afraid  of being seen; but  last time  I called,  I observed 
the  blinds were let down  immediately. " 
While  her  father  spoke,  there  was a knock at the  door.  Who  could  it 
be?  Anne,  remembering  the  preconcerted  visits,  at  all  hours,  of  Mr. 
Elliot,  would  have  expected him,  but  for  his known  engagement  seven 
miles  off.  After  the  usual  period  of  suspense,  the  usual  sounds  of 
approach  were heard,  and  "Mr.  and  Mrs. Charles Musgrove" were  ush02
ered  into the  room. 
Surprise  was  the  strongest  emotion  raised  by  their  appearance;  but 
Anne  was  really glad  to  see them;  and  the  others  were  not  so sorry  but 
4.  Artificial. 
5.  Calling card: Sir Walter will leave his  card,  in  token of having called, but will  not ask to see 
Lady Russell. 
144 
CHAPTER  XXII 
that they could put  on a decent air of welcome; and  as soon as it became 
clear  that  these,  their  nearest  relations,  were not  arrived  with  any views 
of accommodation  in  that  house,  Sir Walter and  Elizabeth were able to 
rise  in  cordiality,  and  do  the  honours  of it very  well.  They were  come 
to Bath for a few days with  Mrs. Musgrove, and  were at the White  Hart. 
So  much  was  pretty  soon  understood;  but  till  Sir Walter and  Elizabeth 
were  walking  Mary  into  the  other  drawing-room,  and  regaling  them02
selves  with  her  admiration,  Anne  could  not  draw  upon  Charles's  brain 
for  a  regular history  of their  coming,  or an  explanation  of some smiling 
hints  of particular  business,  which  had  been  ostentatiously  dropped  by 
Mary,  as  well  as  of  some  apparent  confusion  as  to  whom  their  party 
consisted  of. 
She  then  found  that  it  consisted  of Mrs.  Musgrove,  Henrietta,  and 
Captain  Harville, beside their two selves.  He gave her a very plain,  intel02
ligible  account  of the  whole; a  narration  in  which  she  saw a great  deal 
of  most  characteristic  proceeding.  T he  scheme  had  received  its  first 
impulse  by Captain  Harville's wanting  to come to Bath on  business.  He 
had  begun  to  talk  of it  a  week ago; and  by way  of doing  something,  as 
shooting  was  over,  Charles  had  proposed  coming  with  him,  and  Mrs. 
Harville had  seemed to like the  idea  of it very much,  as an  advantage  to 
her  husband;  but  Mary  could  not  bear to be  left,  and  had  made  herself 
so  unhappy  about  it that,  for  a day  or two,  every thing  seemed  to be  in 
suspense,  or at an  end.  But then,  it had  been taken  up by his father  and 
mother.  His mother  had  some old friends  in  Bath, whom  she wanted  to 
see;  it  was  thought  a  good  opportunity  for  Henrietta  to  come  and  buy 
wedding-clothes  for  herself  and  her  sister;  and,  in  short,  it  ended  in 
being his mother's  party,  that every thing  might be comfortable and easy 
to  Captain  Harville; and  he  and  Mary  were  included  in  it,  by  way of 
general  convenience. They had  arrived  late the  night  before.  Mrs.  Har02
ville,  her children,  and  Captain  Benwick,  remained with  Mr.  Musgrove 
and  Louisa at  Uppercross. 
Anne's only surprise was, that affairs should be in forwardness  enough 
for  Henrietta's  wedding-clothes  to  be  talked  of: she  had  imagined  such 
difficulties  of fortune  to  exist there  as  must  prevent  the  marriage  from 
being  near  at  hand;  but  she  learned  from  Charles  that,  very  recently, 
(since  Mary's  last  letter  to  herself) Charles  Hayter  had  been  applied  to 
by  a  friend  to  hold  a  living for  a^youth who  could  not  possibly claim  it 
under  many  years;6  and  that,  on  the  strength  of this  present  income, 
with  almost  a  certainty  of something  more  permanent  long  before  the 
term  in  question,  the  two  families had  consented  to the  young  people's 
wishes,  and  that  their marriage was likely to take place in a few  months, 
quite as soon as Louisa's. "And a very good living it was," Charles added, 
6.  Charles,  as a young clergyman,  has been asked to serve as temporary pastor for a congregation 
that has been promised to someone still too young to be ordained.  Many pastoral positions in 
England at this time were assigned by large landowners as a matter of patronage. 
CHAPTER  XXII 
145 
"only  five-and-twenty  miles from  Uppercross,  and  in  a  very  fine  coun02
try―fine part of Dorsetshire.  In the centre of some of the best preserves7 
in the  kingdom,  surrounded  by three  great proprietors,  each more care02
ful  and  jealous than  the  other; and  to two of the  three,  at least,  Charles 
Hayter  might get a special recommendation.  Not that  he will value  it as 
he  ought,"  he  observed,  "Charles  is too  cool  about  sporting.  That's  the 
worst of him." 
"I am  extremely glad,  indeed," cried Anne, "particularly glad that  this 
should  happen:  and  that  of two  sisters,  who  both  deserve  equally  well, 
and  who  have  always been  such  good  friends,  the  pleasant  prospects of 
one  should  not  be dimming  those  of the  other―that  they  should  be  so 
equal  in their prosperity and  comfort.  I hope  your father and  mother  are 
quite happy with  regard  to  both." 
"Oh! yes.  My  father  would  be  as well  pleased  if the  gentlemen  were 
richer,  but  he  has  no  other  fault  to  find.  Money,  you  know,  coming 
down  with  money 8―two  daughters  at once―it cannot  be a very agree02
able operation,  and  it streightens  him  as to many  things.  However,  I  do 
not mean  to say they have not a right to it.  It is very fit they should  have 
daughters'  shares; and  I am  sure  he  has  always been  a very kind,  liberal 
father  to  me.  Mary  does  not  above  half  like  Henrietta's  match.  She 
never did,  you know.  But she does not do him  justice,  nor think  enough 
about  Winthrop.  I cannot  make her attend  to the  value of the  property. 
It  is a  very  fair  match,  as times  go; and  I have  liked Charles  Hayter  all 
my  life,  and  I shall not  leave off now." 
"Such  excellent  parents  as  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Musgrove,"  exclaimed 
Anne,  "should  be  happy  in  their  children's  marriages.  They  do  every 
thing  to  confer  happiness,  I am  sure.  What  a blessing to  young  people 
to  be  in  such  hands!  Your  father  and  mother  seem  so totally  free  from 
all those ambitious feelings which  have led to so much  misconduct  and 
misery,  both  in young  and  old! I hope  you think  Louisa perfectly recov02
ered now?" 
He  answered  rather  hesitatingly,  "Yes,  I  believe  I  do―very  much 
recovered; but  she  is altered: there  is no  running  or  jumping  about,  no 
laughing or dancing; it is quite different.  If one happens  only to shut  the 
door  a  little hard,  she  starts  and  wriggles  like a  young  dab  chick  in  the 
water;  and  Benwick  sits  at  her  elbow,  reading  verses,  or  whispering  to 
her,  all day  long." 
Anne  could  not  help  laughing.  "That cannot  be  much  to your  taste, 
I know," said she; "but  I do believe him  to be an  excellent young  man." 
"To  be  sure  he  is.  Nobody  doubts  it; and  I  hope  you  do  not  think  I 
am  so illiberal as to want  every man  to have  the  same objects  and  plea02
sures as myself.  I have a great value for Benwick; and  when  one can  but 
get  him  to  talk,  he  has  plenty  to  say.  His  reading  has  done  him  no 
7.  Game preserves,  where animals were nurtured for the purpose of hunting them. 
8.  For dowries. 
146 
CHAPTER  XXII 
harm,  for he  has fought  as well as read.  He  is a brave fellow.  I got more 
acquainted  with  him  last  Monday  than  ever  I  did  before.  We  had  a 
famous  set-to at  rat-hunting all the  morning,  in  my father's  great barns; 
and  he  played  his  part  so  well,  that  I  have  liked  him  the  better  ever 
since." 
Here  they  were  interrupted  by the  absolute  necessity of Charles's  fol02
lowing  the  others  to  admire  mirrors  and  china;  but  Anne  had  heard 
enough  to  understand  the  present  state of Uppercross,  and  rejoice  in  its 
happiness;  and  though  she  sighed  as she  rejoiced,  her  sigh  had  none of 
the ill-will of envy in  it.  She would  certainly have risen to their blessings 
if  she could,  but  she did  not want  to lessen theirs. 
The  visit  passed  off altogether  in  high  good  humour.  Mary  was  in 
excellent spirits, enjoying the gaiety and  the change; and so well satisfied 
with  the  journey  in  her  mother-in-law's  carriage with  four  horses,  and 
with  her  own  complete  independence  of Camden-place,  that  she  was 
exactly  in  a  temper  to  admire  every thing  as she  ought,  and  enter  most 
readily  into  all  the  superiorities  of the  house,  as  they  were  detailed  to 
her.  She had  no  demands  on  her  father  or  sister,  and  her consequence 
was just enough  increased by their handsome  drawing-rooms. 
Elizabeth  was,  for  a  short  time,  suffering  a  good  deal.  She  felt  that 
Mrs.  Musgrove  and  all  her  party  ought  to  be  asked  to  dine  with  them, 
but  she  could  not  bear  to  have  the  difference  of style,  the  reduction  of 
servants,  which  a dinner  must  betray,  witnessed by those who had  been 
always  so  inferior  to  the  Elliots  of Kellynch.  It  was  a  struggle  between 
propriety  and  vanity;  but  vanity  got the  better,  and  then  Elizabeth was 
happy  again.  These  were  her  internal  persuasions.―"Old  fashioned 
notions―country  hospitality―we  do  not  profess  to  give  dinners-^few 
people  in  Bath  do―Lady  Alicia  never  does;  did  not  even  ask her  own 
sister's family,  though  they  were  here  a  month:  and  I dare say it  would 
be  very  inconvenient to  Mrs.  Musgrove―put  her  quite  out  of her way. 
I  am  sure  she  would  rather  not  come―she cannot  feel  easy with  us.  I 
will  ask them  all  for  an  evening; that  will be  much  better―that  will be 
a  novelty  and  a  treat.  They  have  not  seen  two  such  drawing  rooms 
before.  They will be delighted  to come to-morrow  evening.  It shall be a 
regular  party―small,  but  most  elegant."  And  this  satisfied  Elizabeth: 
and  when  the  invitation  was given  to the  two present,  and  promised  for 
the  absent,  Mary was as completely satisfied.  She was particularly asked 
to  meet  Mr.  Elliot,  and  be  introduced  to  Lady  Dalrymple  and  Miss 
Carteret,  who  were fortunately  already  engaged  to come; and  she could 
not  have  received  a  more  gratifying  attention.  Miss  Elliot  was  to  have 
the  honour  of calling on  Mrs.  Musgrove  in  the  course of the  morning, 
and  Anne  walked  off with  Charles  and  Mary,  to  go  and  see  her  and 
Henrietta  directly. 
Her  plan  of sitting  with  Lady  Russell must  give way  for  the  present. 
They  all  three  called  in  Rivers-street for a couple  of minutes; but  Anne 
CHAPTER  XXII 
147 
convinced  herself  that  a  day's  delay  of  the  intended  communication 
could  be  of no  consequence, and  hastened  forward  to  the  White  Hart, 
to  see  again  the  friends  and  companions  of the  last  autumn,  with  an 
eagerness of good will which  many  associations contributed  to  form. 
They  found  Mrs.  Musgrove  and  her  daughter  within,  and  by  them02
selves,  and  Anne  had  the  kindest  welcome  from  each.  Henrietta  was 
exactly  in  that  state  of recently-improved  views,  of  fresh-formed  happi02
ness,  which  made  her  full  of regard  and  interest for  every body  she  had 
ever liked before at all; and  Mrs. Musgrove's real affection had been  won 
by her  usefulness  when  they  were  in  distress.  It was a  heartiness,  and  a 
warmth,  and  a  sincerity  which  Anne  delighted  in  the  more,  from  the 
sad  want  of such  blessings at  home.  She was  intreated  to  give  them  as 
much  of her  time  as possible,  invited  for  every day  and  all day  long,  or 
rather  claimed  as  a  part  of the  family; and  in  return,  she  naturally  fell 
into  all  her  wonted  ways  of attention  and  assistance,  and  on  Charles's 
leaving them  together,  was listening to Mrs.  Musgrove's history of Lou02
isa,  and  to  Henrietta's  of herself,  giving opinions  on  business,  and  rec02
ommendations  to  shops;  with  intervals  of  every  help  which  Mary 
required,  from  altering her  ribbon to settling her accounts,  from  finding 
her  keys,  and  assorting  her  trinkets,  to  trying  to  convince her  that  she 
was not  ill used  by any body; which  Mary, well amused  as she generally 
was  in  her  station  at  a  window  overlooking the  entrance  to  the  pump-
room,9  could  not but  have her  moments  of imagining. 
A morning  of thorough  confusion  was to be expected. A large party  in 
an  hotel  ensured  a  quick-changing,  unsettled  scene.  One  five  minutes 
brought  a  note,  the  next a parcel,  and  Anne  had  not been  there  half  an 
hour,  when  their  dining-room,  spacious  as  it  was,  seemed  more  than 
half  filled:  a  party  of steady  old  friends  were  seated  round  Mrs.  Mus02
grove,  and  Charles  came back with  Captains  Harville  and  Wentworth. 
The  appearance  of the  latter  could  not  be  more than  the  surprise  of the 
moment.  It  was  impossible  for  her  to  have  forgotten  to  feel,  that  this 
arrival  of their  common  friends  must  be  soon  bringing  them  together 
again.  Their last meeting  had  been  most  important  in  opening  his  feel02
ings; she had  derived  from  it a delightful  conviction; but she feared  from 
his  looks,  that  the  same  unfortunate  persuasion,  which  had  hastened 
him  away  from  the  concert  room,  still  governed.  He  did  not  seem  to 
want  to be near  enough  for conversation. 
She  tried  to  be  calm,  and  leave things  to  take their  course; and  tried 
to  dwell  much  on  this  argument  of  rational  dépendance―"Surely,  if 
there  be constant attachment  on  each  side,  our  hearts  must  understand 
each  other  ere long.  We  are  not  boy and  girl,  to be captiously  irritable, 
misled  by every moment's  inadvertence,  and  wantonly  playing with  our 
own  happiness."  And  yet,  a  few  minutes  afterwards,  she  felt  as  if their 
9.  A  central  room  in  the  public  baths,  where  people  assembled for social  as well  as  medical 
reasons. 
148 
CHAPTER  XXII 
being  in  company  with  each  other,  under  their  present circumstances, 
could  only  be  exposing them  to  inadvertencies  and  misconstructions of 
the  most mischievous kind. 
"Anne,"  cried  Mary,  still  at  her  window,  "there  is  Mrs.  Clay,  I  am 
sure,  standing  under  the  colonnade,  and  a  gentleman  with  her.  I saw 
them  turn the corner from  Bath-street just now.  They seem deep in talk. 
Who  is it?―Come, and  tell  me.  Good  heavens! I recollect.―It is Mr. 
Elliot  himself." 
"No," cried Anne  quickly, "it cannot be  Mr.  Elliot,  I assure you.  He 
was  to  leave  Bath  at  nine  this  morning,  and  does  not  come  back  till 
to-morrow. " 
As she spoke, she felt that  Captain  Wentworth  was looking at her; the 
consciousness of which  vexed and  embarrassed  her,  and  made her regret 
that  she had  said  so much,  simple as it was. 
Mary,  resenting  that  she  should  be  supposed  not  to  know  her  own 
cousin,  began  talking  very  warmly  about  the  family  features,  and  pro02
testing  still  more  positively  that  it  was  Mr.  Elliot,  calling  again  upon 
Anne  to  come  and  look  herself;  but  Anne  did  not  mean  to  stir,  and 
tried  to  be  cool  and  unconcerned.  Her  distress  returned,  however,  on 
perceiving  smiles  and  intelligent  glances  pass  between  two  or  three  of 
the  lady visitors, as if they believed themselves quite  in the secret. It was 
evident  that  the  report  concerning  her  had  spread;  and  a  short  pause 
succeeded,  which  seemed to ensure  that  it would  now spread  farther. 
"Do  come, Anne," cried Mary, "come and  look yourself.  You will be 
too  late,  if you  do  not  make  haste.  They  are  parting,  they  are  shaking 
hands.  He  is turning  away.  Not  know  Mr.  Elliot,  indeed!―You  seem 
to have forgot all about  Lyme. " 
To  pacify  Mary,  and  perhaps  screen  her  own  embarrassment,  Anne 
did  move  quietly  to  the  window.  She was  just in  time  to  ascertain  that 
it really was Mr.  Elliot  (which she had  never believed),  before he  disap02
peared  on  one  side,  as  Mrs.  Clay  walked  quickly off on  the  other;  and 
checking  the  surprise  which  she  could  not  but  feel  at  such  an  appear02
ance of friendly conference between two persons of totally opposite inter02
ests,  she  calmly  said,  "Yes, it  is  Mr.  Elliot  certainly.  He  has  changed 
his  hour  of going,  I suppose,  that  is all―or I may  be mistaken; I might 
not  attend;"  and  walked  back  to  her  chair,  recomposed,  and  with  the 
comfortable  hope  of having  acquitted  herself well. 
The  visitors  took  their  leave; and  Charles,  having  civilly seen  them 
off,  and  then  made  a face  at them,  and  abused  them  for coming,  began 
with― 
"Well,  mother,  I  have  done  something  for  you  that  you  will  like.  I 
have  been  to the  theatre,  and  secured a box for to-morrow  night.  A'n't I 
a good boy? I know you  love a play; and  there  is room for us all. It holds 
nine.  I have engaged Captain  Wentworth.  Anne will not be sorry to join 
us,  I am  sure.  We  all like a play.  Have not  I done  well, mother?" 
CHAPTER  XXII 
149 
Mrs.  Musgrove  was  good  humouredly  beginning  to  express  her  per02
fect  readiness  for  the  play,  if Henrietta  and  all the  others  liked  it,  when 
Mary eagerly interrupted  her by exclaiming, 
"Good  heavens,  Charles! how  can  you  think  of such  a thing? Take a 
box for to-morrow  night!  Have  you  forgot  that  we are engaged  to  Cam-
den-place to-morrow  night? and  that we were most particularly asked on 
purpose to meet Lady Dalrymple and  her daughter,  and  Mr.  Elliot―all 
the principal  family connexions―on purpose to be introduced  to them? 
How can you be so forgetful?" 
"Phoo! phoo!" replied Charles, "what's an evening party? Never  worth 
remembering.  Your  father  might  have asked us to dinner,  I think,  if he 
had wanted  to see us.  You may do as you like,  but  I shall go to the play." 
"Oh! Charles, I declare it will be too abominable if you do! when  you 
promised  to go. " 
"No,  I did  not promise.  I only smirked  and  bowed,  and  said the  word 
'happy. ' There was no promise. " 
"But  you  must  go,  Charles.  It  would  be  unpardonable  to  fail.  We 
were asked on  purpose to be  introduced.  There was always such  a  great 
connexion  between  the  Dalrymples  and  ourselves.  Nothing  ever  hap02
pened on  either side that was not announced  immediately. We are  quite 
near relations, you know: and  Mr.  Elliot too, whom  you ought so partic02
ularly to be acquainted  with! Every attention  is due  to Mr.  Elliot.  Con02
sider,  my father's  heir―the  future  representative  of the  family. " 
"Don't  talk  to  me  about  heirs  and  representatives,"  cried  Charles.  "I 
am  not one of those who  neglect the  reigning power to bow to the  rising 
sun.  If  I  would  not  go  for  the  sake  of  your  father,  I  should  think  it 
scandalous to go for the  sake of his heir.  What is Mr.  Elliot to me?" 
The careless expression was life to Anne, who saw that Captain  Went02
worth  was all  attention,  looking and  listening with  his  whole  soul;  and 
that the  last words brought  his enquiring  eyes from Charles to herself. 
Charles  and  Mary  still  talked  on  in  the  same  style; he,  half  serious 
and  half  jesting,  maintaining  the  scheme for  the  play; and  she,  invari02
ably  serious,  most  warmly  opposing  it,  and  not  omitting  to  make  it 
known,  that  however  determined  to  go  to  Camden-place  herself,  she 
should  not think  herself very well used,  if they went to the  play  without 
her.  Mrs.  Musgrove  interposed. 
"We  had  better put  it off.  Charles, you  had  much  better go back,  and 
change  the  box  for  Tuesday.  It  would  be  a  pity  to  be  divided,  and  we 
should  be  losing Miss Anne  too,  if there  is a  party  at  her  father's; and  I 
am  sure  neither  Henrietta  nor  I  should  care  at  all  for  the  play,  if Miss 
Anne could  not be with  us." 
Anne  felt  truly  obliged  to  her  for  such  kindness; and  quite  as  much 
so,  moreover,  for the  opportunity  it gave her  of decidedly  saying― 
"If  it  depended  only  on  my  inclination,  ma'am,  the  party  at  home 
(excepting on  Mary's account) would  not be the  smallest impediment.  I 
150 
CHAPTER  XXII 
have  no  pleasure  in  the  sort  of meeting,  and  should  be  too  happy  to 
change  it for  a play,  and  with  you.  But,  it had  better  not be  attempted, 
perhaps. " 
She  had  spoken  it;  but  she  trembled  when  it  was  done,  conscious 
that  her  words  were  listened  to,  and  daring  not  even  to  try  to  observe 
their  effect. 
It was soon generally agreed  that  Tuesday should  be the day,  Charles 
only  reserving  the  advantage  of still  teasing  his  wife,  by  persisting  that 
he would  go to the  play to-morrow,  if nobody  else would. 
Captain  Wentworth  left  his  seat,  and  walked to the  fire-place;  proba02
bly  for  the  sake  of walking  away  from  it  soon  afterwards,  and  taking  a 
station,  with  less barefaced design,  by Anne. 
"You  have  not  been  long  enough  in  Bath," said  he,  "to  enjoy  the 
evening parties  of the place." 
"Oh!  no.  T he  usual  character  of them  has  nothing  for  me.  I am  no 
card-player." 
"You  were  not  formerly,  I  know.  You did  not  use  to  like cards;  but 
time  makes many  changes. " 
"I  am  not  yet  so  much  changed,"  cried  Anne,  and  stopped,  fearing 
she hardly  knew what  misconstruction.  After waiting a few moments  he 
said―and  as  if it were  the  result  of immediate  feeling―"It is a  period, 
indeed!  Eight years and  a  half  is a  period!" 
Whether he would  have proceeded farther  was left to Anne's imagina02
tion  to  ponder  over  in  a  calmer hour;  for while  still hearing  the  sounds 
he  had  uttered,  she  was startled  to  other  subjects by Henrietta,  eager to 
make  use  of the  present  leisure for getting  out,  and  calling on  her  com02
panions  to lose no  time,  lest somebody else should  come in. 
They were obliged to move.  Anne talked of being perfectly ready,  and 
tried  to  look it; but  she  felt that  could  Henrietta  have  known  the  regret 
and  reluctance  of her  heart  in  quitting  that  chair,  in  preparing  to  quit 
the  room,  she  would  have  found,  in  all  her  own  sensations  for  her 
cousin,  in  the  very security of his affection,  wherewith  to pity  her. 
Their  preparations,  however,  were  stopped  short.  Alarming  sounds 
were heard; other visitors approached,  and  the door was thrown open for 
Sir  Walter  and  Miss  Elliot,  whose  entrance  seemed  to  give  a  general 
chill.  Anne  felt  an  instant  oppression,  and,  wherever  she  looked,  saw 
symptoms  of  the  same.  The  comfort,  the  freedom,  the  gaiety  of  the 
room  was  over,  hushed  into  cold  composure,  determined  silence,  or 
insipid  talk,  to meet the  heartless elegance of her father  and  sister.  How 
mortifying  to feel  that  it was so! 
Her  jealous eye  was  satisfied  in  one  particular.  Captain  Wentworth 
was  acknowledged  again  by  each,  by  Elizabeth  more  graciously  than 
before.  She  even  addressed  him  once,  and  looked  at  him  more  than 
once.  Elizabeth  was,  in  fact,  revolving  a  great  measure.  The  sequel 
explained  it.  After the  waste of a few minutes  in saying the  proper  noth-
CHAPTER  X X II 
151 
ings,  she  began  to  give  the  invitation  which  was  to  comprise  all  the 
remaining  dues of the  Musgroves.  "To-morrow  evening,  to  meet  a  few 
friends,  no  formal  party. "  It was  all  said  very  gracefully,  and  the  cards 
with  which  she  had  provided  herself,  the  "Miss  Elliot  at  home,"  were 
laid on the table, with  a courteous,  comprehensive smile to all; and  one 
smile  and  one  card  more  decidedly  for  Captain  Wentworth.  The  truth 
was,  that  Elizabeth  had  been  long  enough  in  Bath,  to  understand  the 
importance  of a man  of such an  air and  appearance  as his. The past was 
nothing.  The  present  was  that  Captain  Wentworth  would  move  about 
well in her drawing-room.  The card was pointedly given, and  Sir Walter 
and  Elizabeth arose and  disappeared. 
The  interruption  had  been  short,  though  severe; and  ease and  anima02
tion returned  to  most  of those  they  left,  as the  door  shut  them  out,  but 
not  to  Anne.  She could  think  only  of the  invitation  she  had  with  such 
astonishment  witnessed;  and  of  the  manner  in  which  it  had  been 
received,  a  manner  of doubtful  meaning,  of surprise  rather  than  gratifi02
cation,  of  polite  acknowledgment  rather  than  acceptance.  She  knew 
him;  she  saw  disdain  in  his  eye,  and  could  not  venture  to  believe  that 
he  had  determined  to  accept such  an  offering,  as atonement  for  all  the 
insolence of the past.  Her spirits sank.  He held the card in his hand  after 
they were gone,  as if deeply considering it. 
"Only  think  of  Elizabeth's  including  every  body!"  whispered  Mary 
very  audibly.  "I  do  not  wonder  Captain  Wentworth  is delighted!  You 
see he  cannot put  the  card  out  of his  hand." 
Anne  caught  his eye,  saw his cheeks glow,  and  his  mouth  form  itself 
into  a  momentary  expression  of contempt,  and  turned  away,  that  she 
might  neither see nor  hear more to vex her. 
The  party  separated.  The  gentlemen  had  their  own  pursuits,  the 
ladies  proceeded  on  their  own  business,  and  they  met  no  more  while 
Anne  belonged  to  them.  She was  earnestly  begged  to  return  and  dine, 
and  give  them  all  the  rest  of the  day;  but  her  spirits  had  been  so  long 
exerted,  that  at present  she felt  unequal  to  more,  and fit only for  home, 
where  she might be sure  of being as silent as she chose. 
Promising to be with them the whole of the following morning,  there02
fore,  she closed the  fatigues  of the  present,  by a toilsome walk to  Cam02
den-place,  there  to  spend  the  evening  chiefly  in  listening  to  the  busy 
arrangements  of  Elizabeth  and  Mrs.  Clay  for  the  morrow's  party,  the 
frequent  enumeration  of  the  persons  invited,  and  the  continually 
improving  detail  of all  the  embellishments  which  were  to  make  it  the 
most  completely  elegant  of its kind  in  Bath,  while  harassing  herself  in 
secret  with  the  never-ending  question,  of whether  Captain  Wentworth 
would  come or not? They were reckoning him  as certain,  but,  with  her, 
it  was  a  gnawing  solicitude  never  appeased  for  five  minutes  together. 
She  generally  thought  he  would  come,  because  she  generally  thought 
he ought; but it was a case which she could not so shape into any positive 
152 
CHAPTER  XXIII 
act  of duty  or  discretion,  as  inevitably  to  defy  the  suggestions  of very 
opposite feelings. 
She  only  roused  herself  from  the  broodings  of this  restless agitation, 
to  let  Mrs.  Clay  know  that  she  had  been  seen  with  Mr.  Elliot  three 
hours  after  his  being supposed  to be  out  of Bath; for  having  watched  in 
vain  for  some  intimation  of  the  interview  from  the  lady  herself,  she 
determined  to  mention  it; and  it  seemed  to  her  that  there  was  guilt  in 
Mrs.  Clay's  face  as  she  listened.  It  was  transient,  cleared  away  in  an 
instant,  but  Anne  could  imagine  she  read  there  the  consciousness of 
having,  by  some  complication  of  mutual  trick,  or  some  overbearing 
authority  of his,  been  obliged to attend  (perhaps  for  half an  hour) to his 
lectures  and  restrictions  on  her  designs  on  Sir Walter.  She exclaimed, 
however,  with  a very tolerable imitation  of nature, 
"Oh  dear!  very  true.  Only  think,  Miss  Elliot,  to  my  great  surprise  I 
met  with  Mr.  Elliot  in  Bath-street!  I  was  never  more  astonished.  He 
turned  back and  walked  with  me  to  the  Pump-yard.  He  had  been  pre02
vented  setting  off for Thornberry,  but  I really forget by what―for  I was 
in  a  hurry,  and  could  not  much  attend,  and  I  can  only  answer  for  his 
being  determined  not  to  be  delayed  in  his  return.  He  wanted  to  know 
how  early he  might  be admitted  to-morrow.  He was full  of 'to-morrow;' 
and  it  is very  evident  that  I have  been  full  of it too  ever since I entered 
the  house,  and  learnt  the  extension  of your  plan,  and  all that  had  hap02
pened,  or  my  seeing  him  could  never  have  gone  so entirely  out  of my 
head." 
Chapter  XXIII 
One  day only had  passed since Anne's conversation with  Mrs. Smith; 
but  a  keener  interest  had  succeeded,  and  she  was  now  so little touched 
by  Mr.  Elliot's  conduct,  except  by  its  effects  in  one  quarter,  that  it 
became  a  matter  of course the  next morning,  still to defer  her  explana02
tory  visit  in  Rivers-street.  She  had  promised  to  be  with  the  Musgroves 
from  breakfast  to dinner.  Her  faith  was plighted,  and  Mr.  Elliot's char02
acter,  like the  Sultaness Scheherazade's head,1  must  live another  day. 
She  could  not  keep  her  appointment  punctually,  however;  the 
weather  was  unfavourable,  and  she  had  grieved  over  the  rain  on  her 
friends'  account,  and  felt it very much  on  her  own,  before she was able 
to  attempt  the  walk.  When  she  reached  the  White  Hart,  and  made  her 
way to the  proper  apartment,  she found  herself  neither arriving quite  in 
time,  nor  the first to  arrive.  The  party  before her  were  Mrs. Musgrove, 
talking to Mrs. Croft,  and  Captain  Harville to Captain  Wentworth,  and 
1.  Scheherazade,  in  the  Arabian  Nights'  Entertainment,  saved herself  from  beheading, night 
after night, by the enthralling stories that she told the sultan. 
CHAPTER  X X I II 
153 
she  immediately  heard  that  Mary and  Henrietta,  too  impatient  to  wait, 
had  gone out the  moment  it had  cleared, but would  be back again  soon, 
and  that  the  strictest injunctions  had  been  left  with  Mrs.  Musgrove,  to 
keep her  there  till  they  returned.  She had  only to  submit,  sit down,  be 
outwardly  composed,  and  feel  herself  plunged  at  once  in  all  the  agita02
tions  which  she  had  merely  laid  her  account  of2  tasting  a  little  before 
the  morning  closed.  There  was  no  delay,  no  waste  of time.  She  was 
deep  in  the  happiness  of such  misery,  or the  misery of such  happiness, 
instantly.  Two  minutes  after  her  entering  the  room,  Captain  Went02
worth  said, 
"We will write the letter we were talking of,  Harville,  now,  if you will 
give me  materials. " 
Materials  were  all  at  hand,  on  a  separate  table;  he  went  to  it,  and 
nearly turning his back on  them  all, was engrossed by  writing. 
Mrs.  Musgrove was giving Mrs. Croft the  history of her eldest daugh02
ter's engagement,  and  just in that  inconvenient tone  of voice which  was 
perfectly  audible  while  it pretended  to  be  a  whisper.  Anne  felt  that  she 
did  not belong to the conversation, and  yet,  as Captain  Harville seemed 
thoughtful  and  not  disposed  to  talk,  she  could  not  avoid  hearing  many 
undesirable  particulars,  such  as  "how  Mr.  Musgrove  and  my  brother 
Hayter  had  met again  and  again  to talk  it over; what  my brother  Hayter 
had  said  one  day,  and  what  Mr.  Musgrove  had  proposed  the  next,  and 
what  had  occurred  to my sister Hayter,  and  what  the  young  people  had 
wished,  and  what  I said  at first I never  could  consent to,  but  was  after02
wards  persuaded  to  think  might  do  very  well," and  a  great  deal  in  the 
same  style  of  open-hearted  communication―Minutiae  which,  even 
with  every  advantage  of taste  and  delicacy which  good  Mrs.  Musgrove 
could not give, could be properly  interesting only to the principals. Mrs. 
Croft  was  attending  with  great  good  humour,  and  whenever  she  spoke 
at  all,  it  was  very  sensibly.  Anne  hoped  the  gentlemen  might  each  be 
too much  self-occupied to  hear. 
"And  so, ma'am,  all these things considered," said Mrs.  Musgrove  in 
her  powerful  whisper,  "though  we  could  have  wished  it  different,  yet 
altogether  we  did  not  think  it  fair  to  stand  out  any  longer; for  Charles 
Hayter was quite wild about  it, and  Henrietta  was pretty  near as bad; and 
so we thought  they  had  better marry  at once,  and  make the  best of it,  as 
many  others have done  before them.  At any rate,  said  I,  it will be better 
than a long  engagement." 
"That  is precisely what  I was  going  to  observe," cried  Mrs.  Croft.  "I 
would  rather  have  young  people  setde  on  a  small  income at  once,  and 
have  to  struggle  with  a  few  difficulties  together,  than  be  involved  in  a 
long engagement.  I always think  that  no  mutual―" 
"Oh! dear  Mrs. Croft," cried Mrs.  Musgrove,  unable  to let her  finish 
2.  Reckoned on, anticipated. 
154 
CHAPTER  XXIII 
her  speech,  "there  is nothing  I so abominate for young  people as a long 
engagement.  It  is what  I always  protested  against  for  my  children.  It is 
all  very well,  I used  to say, for young  people to be engaged,  if there  is a 
certainty  of their  being able to  marry  in  six months,  or  even  in  twelve, 
but  a long  engagement!" 
"Yes,  dear ma'am," said Mrs. Croft,  "or an  uncertain  engagement; an 
engagement which  may be long.  To begin without  knowing that at such 
a  time there  will be the  means  of marrying,  I hold  to be very unsafe  and 
unwise,  and  what,  I think,  all parents  should  prevent as far as they can." 
Anne  found  an  unexpected  interest  here.  She  felt  its  application  to 
herself,  felt  it  in  a  nervous  thrill  all over her,  and  at the  same  moment 
that  her  eyes  instinctively  glanced  towards  the  distant  table,  Captain 
Wentworth's  pen  ceased  to  move,  his  head  was  raised,  pausing,  lis02
tening,  and  he turned  round the  next instant to give a look―one quick, 
conscious look at  her. 
The  two ladies continued  to talk, to re-urge the same admitted  truths, 
and  enforce them  with  such examples of the  ill effect  of a contrary prac02
tice,  as  had  fallen  within  their  observation,  but  Anne  heard  nothing 
distinctly; it was only a  buzz  of words  in  her  ear,  her  mind  was in  con02
fusion. 
Captain  Harville,  who  had  in truth  been  hearing  none  of it,  now  left 
his  seat,  and  moved  to  a  window;  and  Anne  seeming  to  watch  him, 
though  it was  from  thorough  absence of mind,  became gradually  sensi02
ble  that  he  was  inviting  her  to  join  him  where  he  stood.  He  looked  at 
her  with  a  smile,  and  a  little  motion  of  the  head,  which  expressed, 
"Come  to  me,  I have  something  to say;" and  the  unaffected,  easy kind02
ness  of  manner  which  denoted  the  feelings  of an  older  acquaintance 
than  he  really was,  strongly  enforced  the  invitation.  She roused  herself 
and  went  to  him.  T he window  at which  he  stood,  was at the  other  end 
of the room  from  where the two ladies were sitting, and though  nearer to 
Captain  Wentworth's  table,  not  very  near.  As she  joined him,  Captain 
Harville's  countenance  reassumed  the  serious,  thoughtful  expression 
which  seemed  its natural  character. 
"Look  here," said  he,  unfolding  a  parcel  in  his  hand,  and  displaying 
a  small miniature  painting,  "do you know who that is?" 
"Certainly,  Captain  Benwick." 
"Yes,  and  you  may guess who  it is for.  But (in a deep tone) it was not 
done  for  her.  Miss  Elliot,  do  you  remember  our  walking  together  at 
Lyme,  and  grieving for him? I little thought  then―but  no  matter.  This 
was  drawn  at  the  Cape.  He  met  with  a  clever young  German  artist  at 
the  Cape,  and  in  compliance  with  a  promise  to  my  poor  sister,  sat  to 
him,  and  was  bringing  it  home  for  her.  And  I  have  now  the  charge of 
getting  it properly  set for another!  It was a  commission to  me! But who 
else  was  there  to  employ?  I  hope  I  can  allow  for  him.  I  am  not  sorry, 
indeed,  to  make  it over to  another.  He  undertakes  it―(looking towards 
CHAPTER  XXIII 
155 
Captain  Wentworth)  he  is writing  about  it now. " And  with  a  quivering 
lip he wound  up the whole by adding,  "Poor Fanny! she would  not  have 
forgotten  him  so soon!" 
"No,"  replied  Anne,  in  a  low  feeling  voice.  "That,  I  can  easily 
believe." 
"It was not  in  her  nature.  She doated  on  him." 
"It would  not be the  nature  of any woman  who  truly  loved." 
Captain  Harville  smiled,  as  much  as  to  say,  "Do  you  claim  that  for 
your  sex?" and  she  answered  the  question,  smiling  also,  "Yes. We  cer02
tainly do not forget you,  so soon as you forget us.  It is, perhaps,  our  fate 
rather  than  our  merit.  We  cannot  help  ourselves.  We  live  at  home, 
quiet,  confined,  and  our  feelings prey upon  us.  You are forced on exer02
tion.  You  have  always  a  profession,  pursuits,  business  of some  sort  or 
other,  to take you back into the world  immediately,  and  continual  occu02
pation  and  change soon weaken  impressions." 
"Granting  your assertion  that  the  world  does all this so soon  for  men, 
(which,  however,  I do  not  think  I shall  grant)  it does  not  apply  to  Ben02
wick.  He has not been forced upon  any exertion. The peace turned  him 
on  shore  at  the  very  moment,  and  he  has  been  living  with  us,  in  our 
little family-circle,  ever since. " 
"True,"  said  Anne,  "very  true;  I did  not  recollect; but  what  shall  we 
say now,  Captain  Harville? If the  change be  not  from  outward  circum02
stances,  it must be  from  within; it must  be nature,  man's  nature,  which 
has done the  business for Captain  Benwick." 
"No,  no,  it  is not  man's  nature.  I will  not  allow  it to  be  more  man's 
nature  than  woman's  to be  inconstant  and  forget those  they  do  love,  or 
have loved.  I believe the reverse. I believe in a true  analogy between  our 
bodily  frames  and  our  mental; and  that  as  our  bodies  are  the  strongest, 
so are our  feelings; capable of bearing  most rough  usage,  and  riding  out 
the  heaviest weather. " 
"Your  feelings  may  be  the  strongest,"  replied  Anne,  "but  the  same 
spirit of analogy will authorise me to assert that ours are the most  tender. 
Man  is  more  robust  than  woman,  but  he  is  not  longer-lived;  which 
exactly  explains  my  view  of  the  nature  of  their  attachments.  Nay,  it 
would  be too hard  upon  you,  if it were otherwise.  You have difficulties, 
and  privations,  and  dangers  enough  to  struggle  with.  You  are  always 
labouring  and  toiling,  exposed to  every  risk and  hardship.  Your  home, 
country,  friends,  all  quitted.  Neither  time,  nor  health,  nor  life,  to  be 
called your own.  It would  be too hard  indeed" (with a faltering voice)  "if 
woman's  feelings were to be added  to all this." 
"We  shall  never  agree  upon  this  question"―Captain  Harville  was 
beginning  to  say,  when  a  slight  noise  called  their  attention  to  Captain 
Wentworth's  hitherto  perfectly  quiet  division  of the  room.  It was  noth02
ing  more  than  that  his  pen  had  fallen  down,  but  Anne  was  startled  at 
finding  him  nearer  than  she  had  supposed,  and  half  inclined to  suspect 
156 
CHAPTER  XXIII 
that  the  pen  had  only  fallen,  because  he  had  been  occupied  by  them, 
striving  to  catch  sounds,  which  yet  she  did  not  think  he  could  have 
caught. 
"Have  you  finished  your  letter?" said Captain  Harville. 
"Not  quite,  a few lines more.  I shall  have done  in five minutes. " 
"There  is no  hurry  on  my side.  I am  only ready  whenever  you  are.― 
I  am  in  very  good  anchorage  here,"  (smiling  at  Anne)  "well  supplied, 
and  want  for  nothing.―No  hurry  for  a  signal  at  all.―Well,  Miss 
Elliot,"  (lowering  his  voice)  "as  I  was  saying,  we  shall  never  agree  I 
suppose  upon  this  point.  No  man  and  woman  would,  probably.  But let 
me  observe that  all histories are against you,  all stories, prose and  verse. 
If  I  had  such  a  memory  as  Benwick,  I  could  bring  you  fifty  quotations 
in a moment  on  my side the argument,  and  I do not think  I ever  opened 
a  book in  my life  which  had  not something  to say upon woman's  incon02
stancy.  Songs and  proverbs,  all  talk  of woman's  fickleness.  But perhaps 
you  will say,  these were all written  by  men." 
"Perhaps  I  shall.―Yes,  yes,  if you  please,  no  reference  to  examples 
in books. Men  have  had  every advantage  of us in telling their own  story. 
Education  has been  theirs  in so much  higher a degree; the pen  has  been 
in  their  hands.  I will not allow books to prove  any  thing." 
"But  how  shall we prove  any  thing?" 
"We  never  shall.  We  never  can  expect to prove  any  thing  upon  such 
a  point.  It is a difference  of opinion  which  does not admit  of proof.  We 
each  begin  probably  with  a  little  bias  towards  our  own  sex,  and  upon 
that  bias  build  every  circumstance  in  favour  of  it  which  has  occurred 
within  our  own  circle; many  of which  circumstances (perhaps  those very 
cases  which  strike  us  the  most)  may  be  precisely  such  as  cannot  be 
brought  forward  without  betraying  a confidence,  or in  some respect say02
ing what  should  not  be  said." 
"Ah!"  cried  Captain  Harville,  in  a  tone  of strong  feeling,  "if I  could 
but  make you  comprehend  what  a man  suffers  when  he takes a last look 
at his wife and  children,  and  watches  the  boat that  he  has  sent them off 
in,  as  long  as  it  is  in  sight,  and  then  turns  away  and  says,  'God  knows 
whether  we  ever  meet  again!'  And  then,  if I  could  convey  to  you  the 
glow of his soul  when  he  does see them  again; when,  coming back after 
a  twelvemonth's  absence perhaps,  and  obliged  to put  into another  port, 
he  calculates  how  soon  it  be  possible  to  get  them  there,  pretending  to 
deceive  himself,  and  saying,  'They  cannot  be  here  till  such  a day,'  but 
all  the  while  hoping  for  them  twelve  hours  sooner,  and  seeing  them 
arrive at last,  as if Heaven  had  given them  wings,  by many  hours  sooner 
still!  If I  could  explain  to  you  all  this,  and  all  that  a  man  can  bear  and 
do,  and  glories  to  do  for  the  sake  of these  treasures  of his  existence! I 
speak,  you  know,  only  of such  men  as  have  hearts!"  pressing  his  own 
with  emotion. 
"Oh!" cried Anne  eagerly,  "I hope  I do  justice to all that  is felt by you, 
CHAPTER  X X I II 
157 
and by those who resemble you.  God forbid that I should undervalue  the 
warm  and  faithful  feelings  of  any  of  my  fellow-creatures.  I  should 
deserve  utter  contempt  if I  dared  to  suppose  that  true  attachment  and 
constancy  were  known  only  by  woman.  No,  I  believe  you  capable of 
every thing  great and  good  in  your  married  lives.  I believe you  equal  to 
every  important  exertion,  and  to  every  domestic  forbearance,  so  long 
as―if  I may be allowed  the  expression,  so long as you  have an  object.  I 
mean,  while the  woman  you  love lives,  and  lives for you.  All the  privi02
lege I claim for  my  own  sex (it is not  a very enviable one,  you  need  not 
covet it) is that  of loving longest, when  existence or when  hope  is gone." 
She  could  not  immediately  have  uttered  another  sentence; her  heart 
was too full,  her  breath  too much  oppressed. 
"You  are  a  good  soul,"  cried  Captain  Harville,  putting  his  hand  on 
her  arm  quite  affectionately.  "There  is  no  quarrelling  with  you.―And 
when  I think  of Benwick,  my tongue  is tied. " 
Their  attention  was  called  towards  the  others.―Mrs.  Croft  was  tak02
ing leave. 
"Here,  Frederick, you and  I part company,  I believe," said she.  "I am 
going home,  and  you  have an  engagement with  your  friend.―To-night 
we may  have  the  pleasure  of all  meeting again,  at your  party,"  (turning 
to Anne.) "We had  your sister's card yesterday,  and  I understood  Freder02
ick  had  a  card  too,  though  I  did  not  see  it―and  you  are  disengaged, 
Frederick,  are you  not,  as well as ourselves?" 
Captain  Wentworth  was folding  up  a letter  in  great  haste,  and  either 
could  not or would  not answer  fully. 
"Yes,"  said  he,  "very  true;  here  we separate,  but  Harville and  I shall 
soon  be  after  you,  that  is,  Harville,  if you  are  ready,  I  am  in  half  a 
minute.  I know you  will not be sorry to be off.  I shall be at your service 
in  half a  minute." 
Mrs.  Croft  left  them,  and  Captain  Wentworth,  having  sealed his let02
ter  with  great  rapidity,  was  indeed  ready,  and  had  even  a  hurried,  agi02
tated  air,  which  shewed  impatience to be gone.  Anne  knew  not  how  to 
understand  it.  She  had  the  kindest  "Good  morning,  God  bless  you," 
from  Captain  Harville,  but  from  him  not  a  word,  nor  a  look.  He  had 
passed out  of the  room  without  a look! 
She  had  only  time,  however,  to  move  closer  to  the  table  where  he 
had been writing,  when  footsteps were heard  returning; the door  opened; 
it  was himself.  He begged their pardon,  but  he  had  forgotten  his gloves, 
and  instantly  crossing the  room  to  the  writing  table,  and  standing  with 
his  back towards  Mrs.  Musgrove,  he  drew  out  a  letter  from  under  the 
scattered paper,  placed it before Anne with eyes of glowing entreaty  fixed 
on  her for a  moment,  and  hastily collecting his gloves, was again  out of 
the  room,  almost before  Mrs.  Musgrove  was aware  of his being  in  it― 
the work of an  instant! 
The  revolution  which  one  instant  had  made  in  Anne,  was  almost 
158 
CHAPTER  XXIII 
beyond  expression.  The  letter,  with  a  direction  hardly  legible,  to "Miss 
A.  E . ― ."  was  evidently  the  one  which  he  had  been  folding  so hastily. 
While  supposed  to  be  writing  only  to  Captain  Benwick,  he  had  been 
also  addressing  her!  On  the  contents  of that  letter  depended  all  which 
this world  could do  for her! Any thing  was possible, any thing  might be 
defied  rather  than  suspense.  Mrs.  Musgrove  had  little arrangements of 
her  own  at her  own  table; to their protection she must trust, and  sinking 
into the chair which he had  occupied, succeeding to the very spot where 
he  had  leaned and  written,  her eyes devoured  the following words: 
I can listen no longer in silence.  I must speak to you by such  means 
as are within  my  reach.  You pierce my soul.  I am  half agony,  half 
hope.  Tell  me  not  that  I  am  too  late,  that  such  precious  feelings 
are  gone  for  ever.  I  offer  myself  to  you  again  with  a  heart  even 
more  your  own,  than  when  you  almost  broke  it eight  years  and  a 
half  ago.  Dare  not  say  that  man  forgets  sooner than  woman,  that 
his  love has  an  earlier death.  I have  loved  none  but  you.  Unjust  I 
may  have  been,  weak  and  resentful  I have  been,  but  never  incon02
stant.  You alone  have  brought  me  to  Bath.  For you  alone  I  think 
and  plan.―Have  you  not  seen  this?  Can  you  fail  to  have  under02
stood  my  wishes?―I had  not  waited  even  these  ten  days,  could  I 
have  read  your feelings, as I think you  must  have penetrated  mine. 
I  can  hardly  write.  I  am  every  instant  hearing  something  which 
overpowers  me.  You  sink  your  voice,  but  I  can  distinguish  the 
tones of that voice,  when  they would  be lost on others.―Too good, 
too  excellent creature!  You  do  us  justice indeed.  You  do  believe 
that  there  is true attachment  and  constancy among  men.  Believe it 
to be most fervent,  most undeviating  in 
F.  W. 
I  must  go,  uncertain  of my fate; but  I shall return  hither,  or follow 
your  party,  as  soon  as  possible.  A word,  a  look will  be  enough  to 
decide whether  I enter  your father's  house this evening,  or never. 
Such  a  letter was  not  to be soon  recovered from.  Half  an  hour's  soli02
tude  and  reflection  might  have  tranquillized  her;  but  the  ten  minutes 
only,  which  now  passed  before  she  was  interrupted,  with  all  the 
restraints  of her  situation,  could  do  nothing  towards  tranquillity.  Every 
moment  rather  brought  fresh  agitation.  It  was  an  overpowering  happi02
ness. And before she was beyond the first stage of full sensation, Charles, 
Mary,  and  Henrietta  all came  in. 
The  absolute  necessity  of  seeming  like  herself  produced  then  an 
immediate  struggle; but  after  a while  she could  do  no  more.  She began 
not  to  understand  a  word  they  said,  and  was obliged to plead  indisposi02
tion  and  excuse herself.  They  could  then  see that  she  looked very  ill― 
were  shocked  and  concerned―and  would  not  stir  without  her  for  the 
world.  This was dreadful!  Would they only have gone away, and  left  her 
in  the  quiet  possession  of that  room,  it would  have  been  her  cure;  but 
CHAPTER  XXIII 
159 
to have them  all standing  or waiting around  her was distracting,  and,  in 
desperation,  she said she would  go home. 
"By  all  means,  my  dear,"  cried  Mrs.  Musgrove,  "go  home  directly 
and  take  care  of yourself,  that  you  may  be  fit  for  the  evening.  I  wish 
Sarah  was here to doctor  you,  but  I am  no  doctor myself.  Charles,  ring 
and  order  a chair.  She must  not walk. " 
But  the  chair would  never  do.  Worse than  all! To lose the possibility 
of speaking two words  to Captain  Wentworth  in  the course of her  quiet, 
solitary progress up the town  (and she felt almost certain of meeting him) 
could  not be borne.  The chair was earnestly protested  against; and  Mrs. 
Musgrove,  who  thought  only  of one  sort of illness,  having  assured  her02
self,  with  some  anxiety,  that  there  had  been  no  fall  in  the  case;  that 
Anne  had  not,  at any  time  lately,  slipped  down,  and  got a blow on  her 
head; that  she was perfectly convinced of having  had  no  fall,  could  part 
with  her  cheerfully,  and  depend  on  finding  her  better at  night. 
Anxious to omit no  possible precaution,  Anne  struggled,  and  said, 
"I  am  afraid,  ma'am,  that  it  is  not  perfectly  understood.  Pray  be  so 
good  as  to  mention  to  the  other  gentlemen  that  we  hope  to  see  your 
whole party  this evening.  I am  afraid  there  has been  some mistake; and 
I  wish  you  particularly  to  assure  Captain  Harville,  and  Captain  Went02
worth,  that  we hope  to see them  both." 
"Oh!  my  dear,  it  is  quite  understood,  I  give  you  my  word.  Captain 
Harville has no thought  but  of going. " 
"Do you think  so? But I am  afraid;  and  I should  be so very sorry! Will 
you  promise  me  to  mention  it,  when  you  see them  again? You will see 
them  both  again  this  morning,  I dare say.  Do promise  me." 
"To be sure  I will, if you wish  it.  Charles, if you  see Captain  Harville 
any  where,  remember  to  give  Miss  Anne's  message.  But  indeed,  my 
dear,  you  need  not  be  uneasy.  Captain  Harville  holds  himself  quite 
engaged,  I'll  answer  for  it;  and  Captain  Wentworth  the  same,  I  dare 
say." 
Anne  could  do  no  more; but  her  heart  prophesied  some mischance, 
to damp the  perfection  of her  felicity.  It could  not  be very lasting,  how02
ever.  Even  if he  did  not  come to Camden-place  himself,  it would  be  in 
her power to send  an  intelligible sentence by Captain  Harville. 
Another  momentary  vexation  occurred.  Charles,  in  his  real  concern 
and  good-nature,  would  go  home  with  her;  there  was  no  preventing 
him.  This  was  almost  cruel!  But  she  could  not  be  long  ungrateful;  he 
was  sacrificing an  engagement  at  a  gunsmith's  to  be  of use  to  her;  and 
she set off with  him,  with  no feeling but gratitude  apparent. 
They  were in  Union-street,  when  a quicker step behind,  a  something 
of  familiar  sound,  gave  her  two  moments  preparation  for  the  sight  of 
Captain  Wentworth.  He  joined  them;  but,  as  if irresolute  whether  to 
join  or  to  pass  on,  said  nothing―only  looked.  Anne  could  command 
herself  enough  to  receive  that  look,  and  not  repulsively.  The  cheeks 
160 
CHAPTER  XXIII 
which  had  been  pale  now  glowed,  and  the  movements which  had  hesi02
tated were decided.  He walked by her side. Presently, struck by a sudden 
thought,  Charles said, 
"Captain  Wentworth,  which  way  are  you  going? only  to  Gay-street, 
or farther  up  the  town?" 
"I  hardly  know," replied  Captain  Wentworth,  surprised. 
"Are  you  going  as  high  as  Belmont?  Are  you  going  near  Camden-
place?  Because  if you  are,  I shall  have  no  scruple  in  asking you  to take 
my  place,  and  give  Anne  your  arm  to  her  father's  door.  She  is  rather 
done for this morning,  and  must  not go so far without  help. And I ought 
to be at that  fellow's in the  market-place.  He promised  me the sight of a 
capital  gun  he  is just going  to  send  off; said  he  would  keep  it  unpacked 
to the  last possible moment,  that  I might see it; and  if I do  not turn back 
now,  I have  no  chance. By his description,  a good deal  like the second-
sized  double-barrel  of mine,  which  you  shot with  one day,  round Win02
throp. " 
There  could  not  be  an  objection. There could be only a most  proper 
alacrity,  a  most  obliging compliance for  public  view; and  smiles reined 
in  and  spirits dancing  in  private  rapture.  In  half  a  minute,  Charles was 
at  the  bottom  of  Union-street  again,  and  the  other  two  proceeding 
together;  and  soon  words  enough  had  passed  between  them  to  decide 
their  direction  towards  the  comparatively  quiet  and  retired  gravel-walk, 
where the power of conversation would  make the present hour  a blessing 
indeed;  and  prepare  for  it all the  immortality  which  the  happiest  recol02
lections  of their  own  future  lives could  bestow.  There  they  exchanged 
again  those feelings and  those  promises  which  had  once before seemed 
to secure  every thing,  but  which  had  been  followed  by so many,  many 
years  of division  and  estrangement.  There  they  returned  again  into  the 
past,  more  exquisitely happy,  perhaps,  in  their  re-union,  than  when  it 
had been first projected; more tender,  more tried,  more fixed in a knowl02
edge of each other's character, truth, and  attachment; more equal to act, 
more  justified  in  acting.  And  there,  as  they  slowly  paced  the  gradual 
ascent,  heedless of every group around  them,  seeing neither  sauntering 
politicians,  bustling  house-keepers,  flirting girls, nor  nursery-maids  and 
children,  they  could  indulge  in  those  retrospections  and  acknowledg02
ments,  and  especially  in  those  explanations  of what  had  directly  pre02
ceded  the  present  moment,  which  were  so poignant  and  so ceaseless in 
interest.  All the  little variations of the  last week were gone through;  and 
of yesterday and  to-day  there  could  scarcely be an  end. 
She  had  not  mistaken  him.  Jealousy  of  Mr.  Elliot  had  been  the 
retarding  weight,  the  doubt,  the  torment.  That  had  begun  to operate  in 
the  very  hour  of  first  meeting  her  in  Bath;  that  had  returned,  after  a 
short  suspension,  to  ruin  the  concert; and  that  had  influenced  him  in 
every  thing  he  had  said  and  done,  or  omitted  to say and  do,  in  the  last 
four-and-twenty  hours.  It had been gradually  yielding to the better hopes 
CHAPTER  XXIII 
161 
which  her  looks,  or  words,  or  actions  occasionally encouraged;  it  had 
been  vanquished  at last by those sentiments  and  those  tones  which  had 
reached him  while she talked with  Captain  Harville; and  under the  irre02
sistible governance of which  he  had  seized a sheet of paper,  and  poured 
out  his feelings. 
Of what  he had  then  written,  nothing was to be retracted or qualified. 
He  persisted  in  having  loved  none  but  her.  She  had  never  been  sup02
planted.  He  never  even  believed  himself  to  see  her  equal.  Thus  much 
indeed  he  was  obliged  to  acknowledge―that  he  had  been  constant 
unconsciously,  nay  unintentionally;  that  he  had  meant  to  forget  her, 
and  believed it to be done.  He  had  imagined  himself  indifferent,  when 
he  had  only been  angry; and  he  had  been  unjust  to her  merits,  because 
he  had  been  a  sufferer  from  them.  Her  character was  now  fixed  on  his 
mind  as perfection  itself,  maintaining  the  loveliest medium  of  fortitude 
and  gentleness;  but  he  was  obliged  to  acknowledge  that  only  at 
Uppercross  had  he  learnt  to  do  her  justice, and  only  at  Lyme  had  he 
begun  to understand himself. 
At Lyme, he  had  received lessons of more than  one sort.  The  passing 
admiration  of Mr.  Elliot  had  at least roused  him,  and  the  scenes on  the 
Cobb,  and  at Captain  Harville's, had fixed her  superiority. 
In  his  preceding  attempts  to  attach  himself  to  Louisa  Musgrove  (the 
attempts  of angry  pride),  he  protested  that  he  had  for  ever  felt  it  to  be 
impossible; that he had  not cared, could not care for Louisa; though,  till 
that  day,  till  the  leisure  for  reflection  which  followed  it,  he  had  not 
understood  the perfect excellence  of the mind with which Louisa's could 
so ill bear a comparison; or the  perfect,  unrivalled  hold  it possessed over 
his  own.  There,  he  had  learnt  to  distinguish  between  the  steadiness of 
principle  and  the  obstinacy  of self-will,  between  the  darings  of  heed02
lessness  and  the  resolution  of  a  collected  mind.  There,  he  had  seen 
every thing  to exalt in  his estimation  the  woman  he  had  lost,  and  there 
begun  to deplore the  pride,  the folly,  the madness  of resentment,  which 
had  kept him  from  trying to regain  her when  thrown  in  his way. 
From  that  period  his penance  had  become severe.  He  had  no  sooner 
been  free  from  the  horror  and  remorse  attending  the  first  few  days  of 
Louisa's  accident,  no  sooner begun  to  feel  himself  alive again,  than  he 
had  begun  to feel  himself,  though  alive, not  at liberty. 
"I  found,"  said  he,  "that  I  was  considered  by  Harville  an  engaged 
man!  That  neither  Harville  nor  his  wife  entertained  a  doubt  of  our 
mutual  attachment.  I  was  startled  and  shocked.  To  a  degree,  I  could 
contradict  this  instantly; but,  when  I began  to  reflect that  others  might 
have  felt  the  same―her  own  family,  nay,  perhaps  herself,  I  was  no 
longer at  my  own  disposal.  I was hers  in  honour  if she wished  it.  I  had 
been  unguarded.  I  had  not  thought  seriously  on  this  subject  before.  I 
had  not  considered  that  my  excessive intimacy  must  have  its danger  of 
ill  consequence  in  many  ways:  and  that  I  had  no  right  to  be  trying 
162 
CHAPTER  XXIII 
whether  I could  attach  myself  to either  of the  girls, at the  risk of raising 
even  an  unpleasant  report,  were  there  no  other  ill  effects.  I  had  been 
grossly wrong,  and  must  abide  the consequences." 
He  found  too  late,  in  short,  that  he  had  entangled  himself; and  that 
precisely  as he  became fully  satisfied  of his not  caring for  Louisa at all, 
he  must  regard  himself  as bound  to  her,  if her  sentiments  for him  were 
what  the  Harvilles  supposed.  It  determined  him  to  leave  Lyme,  and 
await her complete recovery elsewhere.  He would  gladly weaken,  by any 
fair  means,  whatever  feelings  or  speculations  concerning  him  might 
exist; and  he  went,  therefore,  to  his  brother's,  meaning  after  a  while  to 
return  to  Kellynch, and  act as circumstances might  require. 
"I  was six weeks with  Edward,"  said  he,  "and  saw him  happy.  I could 
have  no  other  pleasure.  I  deserved  none.  He  enquired  after  you  very 
particularly;  asked  even  if you  were  personally  altered,  little  suspecting 
that  to  my eye you  could  never  alter." 
Anne  smiled,  and  let  it  pass.  It  was  too  pleasing  a  blunder  for  a 
reproach.  It  is something  for  a  woman  to  be  assured,  in  her  eight-and-
twentieth  year,  that  she  has  not  lost one  charm  of earlier youth:  but  the 
value  of such  homage  was  inexpressibly increased  to Anne,  by  compar02
ing it with  former  words,  and  feeling  it to be the  result,  not the  cause of 
a  revival of his warm  attachment. 
He  had  remained  in  Shropshire,  lamenting  the  blindness  of his  own 
pride,  and  the  blunders  of  his  own  calculations,  till  at  once  released 
from  Louisa by the astonishing and  felicitous intelligence of her engage02
ment  with  Benwick. 
"Here," said  he,  "ended  the  worst of my state; for now  I could at least 
put  myself  in  the  way  of  happiness,  I  could  exert  myself,  I  could  do 
something.  But to  be  waiting  so  long  in  inaction,  and  waiting  only  for 
evil,  had  been  dreadful.  Within  the first five minutes  I said,  'I will be at 
Bath  on  Wednesday,'  and  I was.  Was  it unpardonable  to think  it  worth 
my  while  to  come?  and  to  arrive  with  some  degree  of hope?  You  were 
single.  It was possible that  you  might  retain  the  feelings of the  past,  as I 
did; and  one  encouragement  happened  to be mine.  I could  never doubt 
that  you  would  be loved  and  sought  by others,  but  I knew to a  certainty 
that  you  had  refused  one  man  at least,  of better pretensions than myself: 
and  I could  not  help  often  saying,  Was this for me?" 
Their first meeting  in  Milsom-street afforded  much  to be said, but  the 
concert  still  more.  That  evening  seemed  to  be  made  up  of  exquisite 
moments.  T he  moment  of her  stepping  forward  in  the  octagon-room  to 
speak  to  him,  the  moment  of  Mr.  Elliot's  appearing  and  tearing  her 
away,  and  one  or two  subsequent  moments,  marked  by  returning  hope 
or increasing despondence,  were dwelt  on  with  energy. 
"To  see you,"  cried  he,  "in  the  midst  of those  who  could  not  be  my 
well-wishers,  to  see  your  cousin  close  by  you,  conversing  and  smiling, 
and  feel  all  the  horrible  eligibilities and  proprieties  of the  match!  To 
CHAPTER  XXIII 
163 
consider  it as the  certain  wish  of every being  who  could  hope  to  influ02
ence  you!  Even,  if your  own  feelings  were  reluctant  or  indifferent,  to 
consider  what  powerful  supports  would  be  his!  Was  it  not  enough  to 
make  the  fool  of me  which  I  appeared?  How  could  I  look  on  without 
agony? Was not the  very sight of the friend  who  sat behind  you,  was  not 
the  recollection of what  had  been,  the  knowledge  of her  influence,  the 
indelible,  immoveable impression  of what  persuasion  had  once  done― 
was it not all against me?" 
"You  should  have  distinguished,"  replied  Anne.  "You  should  not 
have  suspected  me  now;  the  case so different,  and  my  age  so  different. 
If  I was  wrong  in  yielding  to  persuasion  once,  remember  that  it was  to 
persuasion  exerted  on  the  side  of safety,  not  of risk.  When  I  yielded,  I 
thought  it was to duty; but  no  duty could  be called in  aid  here.  In  mar02
rying  a  man  indifferent  to  me,  all  risk would  have  been  incurred,  and 
all duty violated." 
"Perhaps  I ought  to have reasoned thus," he  replied,  "but  I could  not. 
I could not derive benefit from  the late knowledge I had acquired of your 
character.  I could not bring it into play: it was overwhelmed,  buried,  lost 
in those earlier feelings which  I had  been smarting under year after year. 
I  could  think  of you  only  as  one  who  had  yielded,  who  had  given  me 
up,  who  had  been  influenced  by any  one  rather  than  by me.  I saw you 
with  the  very  person  who  had  guided  you  in  that  year  of misery.  I  had 
no  reason  to believe her  of less authority  now.―The  force  of habit  was 
to be added." 
"I  should  have  thought,"  said  Anne,  "that  my  manner  to  yourself 
might have spared  you  much  or all of this." 
"No,  no!  your  manner  might  be  only  the  ease  which  your  engage02
ment to another  man  would  give. I left  you in this belief; and  yet―I was 
determined  to see you  again.  My spirits  rallied with  the  morning,  and  I 
felt that  I had  still a motive for  remaining  here." 
At  last  Anne  was  at  home  again,  and  happier  than  any  one  in  that 
house  could  have  conceived.  All  the  surprise  and  suspense,  and  every 
other painful  part of the morning dissipated  by this conversation, she re02
entered  the  house  so  happy  as  to  be  obliged  to  find  an  alloy  in  some 
momentary  apprehensions  of its being  impossible to last.  An  interval of 
meditation,  serious  and  grateful,  was  the  best  corrective of every  thing 
dangerous  in  such  high-wrought  felicity; and  she went to her  room,  and 
grew steadfast and  fearless in the  thankfulness  of her  enjoyment. 
The  evening came, the drawing-rooms  were lighted  up,  the  company 
assembled.  It  was  but  a  card-party,  it  was  but  a  mixture  of those  who 
had  never  met  before,  and  those  who  met  too  often―a  common-place 
business,  too  numerous  for  intimacy,  too  small  for  variety;  but  Anne 
had  never  found  an  evening  shorter.  Glowing  and  lovely in  sensibility 
and  happiness,  and  more  generally admired  than  she  thought  about  or 
cared  for,  she  had  cheerful  or  forbearing  feelings  for  every  creature 
164 
CHAPTER  X X I II 
around  her.  Mr.  Elliot  was there; she  avoided,  but  she could  pity  him. 
The  Wallises;  she  had  amusement  in  understanding  them.  Lady  Dal02
rymple and  Miss Carteret; they would  soon be innoxious cousins to her. 
She  cared  not for Mrs. Clay, and  had  nothing  to blush  for in the  public 
manners  of  her  father  and  sister.  With  the  Musgroves,  there  was  the 
happy  chat of perfect ease; with Captain  Harville, the kind-hearted  inter02
course of brother and  sister; with  Lady Russell, attempts at conversation, 
which  a delicious consciousness cut short; with Admiral and  Mrs. Croft, 
every  thing  of peculiar  cordiality  and  fervent  interest,  which  the  same 
consciousness  sought  to  conceal;―and with  Captain  Wentworth,  some 
moments  of  communication  continually  occurring,  and  always  the 
hope  of more,  and  always the  knowledge  of his being there! 
It  was  in  one  of these  short  meetings,  each  apparently  occupied  in 
admiring  a  fine  display  of green-house  plants,  that  she said― 
"I  have been  thinking  over the  past,  and  trying  impartially to judge of 
the  right  and  wrong,  I  mean  with  regard  to  myself; and  I  must  believe 
that  I was  right,  much  as  I suffered  from  it,  that  I was perfectly right  in 
being guided  by the  friend  whom  you  will love better than  you do  now. 
To  me,  she was  in  the  place of a parent.  Do  not  mistake me,  however. 
I  am  not  saying that  she  did  not  err  in  her  advice.  It was,  perhaps,  one 
of  those  cases in  which  advice is good  or bad  only as the  event decides; 
and  for  myself,  I certainly never  should,  in  any  circumstance of tolera02
ble similarity,  give such  advice.  But I mean,  that  I was right  in  submit02
ting  to  her,  and  that  if  I  had  done  otherwise,  I  should  have  suffered 
more  in  continuing  the  engagement  than  I  did  even  in  giving  it  up, 
because  I should  have  suffered  in  my  conscience.  I have  now,  as far as 
such  a  sentiment  is  allowable  in  human  nature,  nothing  to  reproach 
myself with; and  if I mistake not,  a strong sense of duty is no bad part of 
a  woman's  portion." 
He  looked  at  her,  looked  at  Lady  Russell, and  looking again  at  her, 
replied,  as if in  cool  deliberation, 
"Not  yet.  But there  are  hopes  of her  being forgiven  in  time.  I trust  to 
being  in  charity  with  her  soon.  But  I  too  have  been  thinking  over  the 
past,  and  a  question  has  suggested  itself,  whether  there  may  not  have 
been  one  person  more  my  enemy  even  than  that  lady?  My  own  self. 
Tell  me  if,  when  I  returned  to  England  in  the  year  eight,  with  a  few 
thousand  pounds,  and  was posted  into the  Laconia, if I had  then  written 
to  you,  would  you  have  answered  my  letter? would  you,  in  short,  have 
renewed  the  engagement then?" 
"Would  I!" was all her answer; but  the  accent was decisive enough. 
"Good  God!" he cried,  "you  would!  It is not that  I did  not think of it, 
or  desire  it,  as what  could  alone  crown  all  my  other  success.  But I was 
proud,  too proud to ask again.  I did  not understand  you.  I shut  my eyes, 
and  would  not  understand  you,  or do  you  justice.  This is a recollection 
which ought  to make me forgive every one sooner than  myself. Six years 
CHAPTER  X X IV 
165 
of  separation  and  suffering  might  have  been  spared.  It  is a  sort of pain, 
too,  which  is  new  to  me.  I  have  been  used  to  the  gratification  of 
believing  myself  to  earn  every  blessing  that  I  enjoyed.  I  have  valued 
myself on  honourable toils and  just rewards.  Like other great men  under 
reverses," he added  with  a smile, "I must  endeavour  to subdue  my  mind 
to my fortune.  I must  learn  to brook being happier  than  I deserve." 
Chapter  XXIV 
Who  can be in  doubt  of what  followed? When  any two young  people 
take it into their  heads  to marry,  they  are pretty  sure  by perseverance  to 
carry their  point,  be they  ever so poor,  or ever so imprudent,  or  ever so 
little  likely to  be  necessary to  each  other's  ultimate  comfort.  This  may 
be bad  morality to conclude with,  but  I believe it to be truth; and  if such 
parties succeed,  how  should  a Captain  Wentworth  and  an  Anne  Elliot, 
with  the advantage  of maturity  of mind,  consciousness of right,  and  one 
independent  fortune  between  them,  fail  of bearing  down  every  opposi02
tion? They  might  in  fact  have  borne  down  a great deal  more  than  they 
met  with,  for  there  was  little  to  distress  them  beyond  the  want  of gra-
ciousness  and  warmth.―Sir  Walter  made  no  objection, and  Elizabeth 
did  nothing  worse  than  look  cold  and  unconcerned.  Captain  Went02
worth,  with  five-and-twenty  thousand  pounds,  and  as high  in his profes02
sion  as  merit  and  activity could  place  him,  was  no  longer  nobody.  He 
was  now  esteemed  quite  worthy  to  address  the  daughter  of  a  foolish, 
spendthrift  baronet,  who  had  not  had  principle  or  sense  enough  to 
maintain  himself  in the  situation  in  which  Providence had  placed  him, 
and  who  could give his daughter  at present but  a small part of the  share 
of ten  thousand  pounds which  must be hers  hereafter. 
Sir  Walter  indeed,  though  he  had  no  affection  for  Anne,  and  no 
vanity  flattered,  to make him  really happy  on  the  occasion, was very far 
from  thinking  it  a  bad  match  for  her.  On  the  contrary,  when  he  saw 
more  of Captain  Wentworth,  saw  him  repeatedly  by daylight  and  eyed 
him  well,  he was very much  struck by his personal  claims, and  felt  that 
his superiority  of appearance  might be not  unfairly  balanced against  her 
superiority  of  rank;  and  all  this,  assisted  by  his  well-sounding  name, 
enabled  Sir Walter at  last to  prepare  his pen  with  a  very good  grace for 
the  insertion  of the  marriage  in  the  volume  of honour. 
The  only  one  among  them,  whose  opposition  of feeling could  excite 
any  serious  anxiety,  was  Lady  Russell.  Anne  knew  that  Lady  Russell 
must  be  suffering  some  pain  in  understanding  and  relinquishing  Mr. 
Elliot,  and  be  making  some  struggles to become truly  acquainted  with, 
and  do  justice  to  Captain  Wentworth.  This  however  was  what  Lady 
Russell  had  now  to  do.  She  must  learn  to  feel  that  she  had  been  mis02
taken  with  regard  to  both;  that  she  had  been  unfairly  influenced  by 
166 
CHAPTER  XXIV 
appearances  in  each;  that  because  Captain  Wentworth's  manners  had 
not  suited  her  own  ideas,  she  had  been  too quick  in  suspecting  them  to 
indicate  a  character  of  dangerous  impetuosity;  and  that  because  Mr. 
Elliot's manners  had  precisely pleased her  in their propriety  and correct02
ness,  their  general  politeness  and  suavity,  she  had  been  too  quick  in 
receiving  them  as  the  certain  result  of the  most  correct  opinions  and 
well  regulated  mind.  There  was  nothing  less  for  Lady  Russell  to  do, 
than  to admit  that  she had  been  pretty  completely wrong,  and  to take  up 
a  new  set of opinions  and  of hopes. 
There  is  a  quickness  of perception  in  some,  a  nicety  in  the  discern02
ment  of character,  a natural  penetration,  in  short,  which  no experience 
in  others  can  equal,  and  Lady Russell had  been  less gifted  in this part of 
understanding than  her  young  friend.  But she was a very good  woman, 
and  if her  second  object  was  to  be  sensible  and  well-judging,  her  first 
was  to  see Anne  happy.  She loved  Anne  better than  she  loved  her  own 
abilities;  and  when  the  awkwardness  of the  beginning  was  over,  found 
little  hardship  in  attaching  herself  as  a  mother  to  the  man  who  was 
securing the  happiness  of her  other  child. 
Of  all the  family,  Mary was probably  the one most immediately  grati02
fied by the  circumstance.  It was creditable to  have  a sister married,  and 
she  might  flatter  herself  with  having  been  greatly  instrumental  to  the 
connexion,  by  keeping  Anne  with  her  in  the  autumn;  and  as  her  own 
sister must  be better than  her husband's  sisters, it was very agreeable  that 
Captain  Wentworth  should  be  a  richer  man  than  either  Captain  Ben02
wick  or  Charles  Hayter.―She  had  something  to  suffer  perhaps  when 
they  came  into  contact  again,  in  seeing  Anne  restored  to  the  rights of 
seniority,  and  the  mistress  of a  very  pretty  landaulette;3  but  she  had  a 
future 
to  look  forward  to,  of  powerful  consolation.  Anne  had  no 
Uppercross-hall  before  her,  no  landed  estate,  no  headship  of a  family; 
and  if they  could  but  keep Captain  Wentworth  from  being  made  a bar02
onet,  she would  not  change situations  with  Anne. 
It would  be  well  for  the  eldest  sister  if she were  equally  satisfied  with 
her  situation,  for a change  is not  very probable  there.  She had  soon  the 
mortification  of seeing Mr.  Elliot withdraw;  and  no one of proper  condi02
tion  has  since  presented  himself  to  raise  even  the  unfounded  hopes 
which  sunk  with  him. 
The  news  of his  cousin  Anne's  engagement  burst  on  Mr.  Elliot  most 
unexpectedly.  It deranged  his  best plan  of domestic  happiness,  his best 
hope  of keeping  Sir Walter  single  by  the  watchfulness  which  a  son-in-
law's  rights  would  have  given.  But,  though  discomfited  and  disap02
pointed,  he  could  still  do  something  for  his  own  interest  and  his  own 
enjoyment.  He soon quitted  Bath; and  on Mrs. Clay's quitting  it likewise 
soon afterwards,  and  being next heard  of as established under his protec-
3.  A small  carriage. 
CHAPTER  XXIV 
167 
tion  in  London,  it was evident how double  a game he had  been  playing, 
and  how  determined  he  was  to  save  himself  from  being  cut  out  by  one 
artful  woman,  at least. 
Mrs.  Clay's affections had  overpowered  her  interest,  and  she had  sac02
rificed,  for  the  young  man's  sake,  the  possibility of scheming  longer  for 
Sir  Walter.  She  has  abilities,  however,  as  well  as  affections;  and  it  is 
now  a  doubtful  point  whether  his  cunning,  or  hers,  may  finally  carry 
the day; whether,  after  preventing  her from  being the wife of Sir Walter, 
he  may  not be wheedled  and  caressed at last into  making  her  the  wife of 
Sir William. 
It cannot be doubted  that  Sir Walter and  Elizabeth were shocked  and 
mortified  by  the  loss  of  their  companion,  and  the  discovery  of  their 
deception  in  her.  They  had  their  great  cousins,  to  be  sure,  to  resort  to 
for  comfort;  but  they  must  long  feel  that  to  flatter  and  follow  others, 
without  being  flattered  and  followed  in  turn,  is  but  a  state  of  half 
enjoyment. 
Anne,  satisfied at a very early period  of Lady Russell's meaning to love 
Captain  Wentworth  as she ought,  had  no other alloy to the happiness of 
her  prospects than what  arose from  the  consciousness of having  no  rela02
tions  to  bestow  on  him  which  a  man  of sense  could  value.  There  she 
felt  her  own  inferiority  keenly.  The  disproportion  in  their  fortune  was 
nothing;  it did  not  give her  a  moment's  regret; but  to  have  no  family  to 
receive  and  estimate  him  properly;  nothing  of  respectability,  of  har02
mony,  of good-will to offer  in return for all the worth  and  all the prompt 
welcome  which  met  her  in  his  brothers  and  sisters,  was  a  source  of as 
lively  pain  as  her  mind  could  well  be  sensible of,  under  circumstances 
of  otherwise  strong  felicity.  She had  but  two  friends  in  the  world  to  add 
to  his  list,  Lady  Russell  and  Mrs.  Smith.  To  those,  however,  he  was 
very  well  disposed  to  attach  himself.  Lady  Russell,  in  spite  of  all  her 
former  transgressions,  he could  now value  from  his heart.  While he  was 
not  obliged  to  say  that  he  believed  her  to  have  been  right  in  originally 
dividing  them,  he was ready  to say almost every thing  else in  her  favour; 
and  as  for  Mrs.  Smith,  she  had  claims  of various  kinds  to  recommend 
her quickly and  permanently. 
Her  recent good  offices  by Anne  had  been  enough  in themselves; and 
their  marriage,  instead  of depriving  her  of one  friend,  secured  her  two. 
She  was  their  earliest  visitor  in  their  settled  life;  and  Captain  Went02
worth,  by putting her  in the  way of recovering her husband's  property  in 
the  West  Indies;  by  writing  for  her,  acting  for  her,  and  seeing  her 
through  all  the  petty  difficulties  of the  case,  with  the  activity  and  exer02
tion of a fearless man  and  a determined  friend,  fully  requited  the services 
which  she  had  rendered,  or ever meant  to  render,  to his wife. 
Mrs.  Smith's  enjoyments  were  not  spoiled  by  this  improvement  of 
income,  with  some  improvement  of health,  and  the  acquisition  of such 
friends  to be often  with,  for her cheerfulness  and  mental  alacrity did  not 
168 
[THE  ORIGINAL  ENDING  OF  PERSUASION] 
fail  her;  and  while  these  prime  supplies  of good  remained,  she  might 
have  bid  defiance  even  to  greater  accessions of worldly  prosperity.  She 
might have been absolutely rich and  perfectly healthy, and yet be  happy. 
Her  spring  of felicity  was  in  the  glow of her  spirits,  as her  friend  Anne's 
was in  the  warmth  of her  heart.  Anne was tenderness  itself, and  she had 
the full  worth  of it in Captain  Wentworth's  affection.  His profession  was 
all  that  could  ever  make  her  friends  wish  that  tenderness  less; the  dread 
of  a  future  war  all  that  could  dim  her  sunshine.  She gloried  in  being a 
sailor's  wife,  but  she  must  pay  the  tax  of quick  alarm  for  belonging  to 
that  profession  which  is,  if possible,  more  distinguished  in  its domestic 
virtues  than  in  its national  importance. 
THE  END 
[The  Original  Ending  of Persuasion] t 
[The  two  chapters  here  printed  comprise  Austen's  original  ending  to  Per02
suasion.  They were  replaced  by the  final  two chapters  of the  present text.] 
CHAPTER 
lO 
July 8. 
With  all  this  knowledge  of  Mr  E―and  this  authority  to  impart  it, 
Anne  left  Westgate  Buildgs―her  mind  deeply  busy  in  revolving  what 
she  had  heard,  feeling,  thinking,  recalling  and  forseeing  everything; 
shocked  at  Mr  Elliot―sighing  over  future  Kellynch,  and  pained  for 
Lady Russell, whose confidence in  him  had  been  entire.―The Embar02
rassment  which  must  be  felt  from  this  hour  in  his  presence!―How  to 
behave to him?―how to get rid of him?―what  to do by any of the  Party 
at  home?―where  to  be  blind?  where  to  be  active?―It was altogether  a 
confusion  of Images and  Doubts―a  perplexity,  an  agitation  which  she 
could  not  see  the  end  of―and  she  was  in  Gay  St  and  still  so  much 
engrossed,  that  she  started  on  being  addressed  by  Adml  Croft,  as  if he 
were  a  person  unlikely  to  be  met  there.  It was within  a few steps  of his 
own  door.―"You  are  going  to  call  upon  my  wife,  said  he,  she will  be 
very  glad  to  see you."―Anne  denied  it  "No―she  really  had  not  time, 
she was  in  her  way home"―but  while she spoke, the Adml  had  stepped 
back and  knocked at the  door,  calling out,  "Yes,  yes, do go in; she is all 
alone,  go in  and  rest yourself. "―Anne  felt  so little disposed  at this  time 
to be  in  company  of any  sort,  that  it vexed her to be thus  constrained― 
but  she was obliged to stop.  "Since  you  are so very kind,  said she,  I will 
just  ask  Mrs  Croft  how  she  does,  but  I really cannot  stay  5  minutes.― 
You  are  sure  she  is  quite  alone."―The  possibility  of  Capt.  W.  had 
t  Reprinted from Jane  Austen's Autograph,  edited by R. W. Chapman (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1926) by permission of Oxford  University Press. 
[THE  ORIGINAL  ENDING  OF  PERSUASION] 
169 
occurred―and  most fearfully  anxious was she to be assured―either  that 
he was within  or that  he  was not;  which,  might  have been  a  question.― 
"Oh!  yes,  quite  alone―Nobody  but  her  Mantuamaker  with  her,  and 
they  have  been  shut  up  together  this  half  hour,  so  it  must  be  over 
soon."―"Her  Mantua  maker!―then  I am  sure  my  calling now,  would 
be  most  inconvenient.―Indeed  you  must  allow  me  to  leave  my  Card 
and  be so good as to explain  it afterwards  to Mrs C." "No,  no,  not at all, 
not  at  all.  She  will  be  very  happy  to  see  you.  Mind―I  will  not  swear 
that  she  has  not  something  particular  to  say  to  you―but  that  will  all 
come  out  in  the  right  place.  I  give  no  hints.―Why,  Miss  Elliot,  we 
begin to hear strange things of you―(smiling in her face)―But  you  have 
not  much 
the  Look  of  it―as  Grave  as  a  little  Judge."  ―Anne 
blushed.―"Aye,  aye,  that  will  do.  Now,  it  is  right.  I  thought  we  were 
not mistaken." She was left to guess at the direction  of his Suspicions;― 
the first wild  idea  had  been  of some disclosure  from  his  Br in  law―but 
she  was  ashamed  the  next  moment―and  felt  how  far  more  probable 
that  he  should  be  meaning  Mr  E.―The  door  was  opened―and  the 
Man  evidently  beginning  to  deny  his  Mistress,  when  the  sight  of  his 
Master  stopped  him.  The  Adml  enjoyed  the  joke  exceedingly.  Anne 
thought  his triumph  over  Stephen  rather  too  long.  At last however,  he 
was able to invite her  upstairs,  and  stepping  before her said―"I will just 
go up with you  myself and  shew you  in―.  I cannot stay, because I  must 
go to the  P.  Office,  but  if you will only sit down  for  5 minutes  I am  sure 
Sophy  will  come―and  you  will  find  nobody  to  disturb  you―there  is 
nobody  but  Frederick  here―"  opening  the  door  as  he  spoke.―Such  a 
person  to  be  passed  over  as  a  Nobody  to  her!―After  being  allowed  to 
feel  quite  secure―indifferent―at  her  ease,  to  have  it burst  on  her  that 
she was to be the  next moment  in  the  same  room  with  him!―No  time 
for  recollection!―for  planning  behaviour,  or  regulating  manners!― 
There  was  time  only  to  turn  pale,  before  she  had  passed  through  the 
door,  and  met the astonished  eyes of Capt.  W ―.  who was sitting by  the 
fire  pretending  to  read  and  prepared  for  no  greater  surprise  than  the 
Admiral's  hasty  return.―Equally  unexpected  was the  meeting,  on  each 
side.  There  was  nothing  to  be  done  however,  but  to  stifle  feelings  and 
be quietly polite;―and  the  Admiral  was too much  on  the  alert,  to leave 
any  troublesome  pause.―He  repeated  again  what  he  had  said  before 
about  his  wife  and  everybody―insisted  on  Anne's  sitting  down  and 
being  perfectly  comfortable,  was  sorry  he  must  leave  her  himself,  but 
was sure Mrs Croft would  be down  very soon, and  would  go upstairs  and 
give  her  notice  directly.―Anne  was  sitting  down,  but  now  she  arose 
again―to  entreat  him  not  to  interrupt  Mrs C―and  re-urge  the  wish of 
going away and  calling another  time.―But the Adml  would  not  hear of 
it;―and  if she did not return to the charge with  unconquerable Persever02
ance,  or did  not  with  a  more  passive  Determination  walk quietly  out of 
the  room―(as  certainly  she  might  have  done)  may  she  not  be  par-
170 
[THE  ORIGINAL  ENDING  OF  PERSUASION] 
doned?―If  she  had  no  horror  of a few  minutes  Tête-à-Tête with  Capt. 
W ―,  may she not be pardoned  for not wishing to give him  the idea  that 
she had?―She 
reseated  herself,  and  the Adml  took leave; but  on  reach 
ing  the  door,  said,  "Frederick,  a  word  with  you,  if you  please."―Capt. 
W―  went to him; and  instantly,  before they were well out  of the  room, 
the Adml  continued―"As  I am  going to leave you together,  it is but  fair 
I  should  give you  something  to  talk  of―and  so,  if you  please―"  Here 
the  door  was  very  firmly  closed; she  could  guess  by  which  of the  two; 
and  she  lost  entirely  what  immediately  followed;  but  it  was  impossible 
for  her  not  to distinguish  parts  of the  rest,  for the  Adml  on  the  strength 
of  the  Door's  being  shut  was  speaking  without  any  management  of 
voice,  tho'  she  could  hear  his  companion  trying  to  check  him.―She 
could  not  doubt  their  being  speaking  of her.  She heard  her  own  name 
and  Kellynch  repeatedly―she  was  very  much  distressed.  She knew  not 
what  to do,  or what  to  expect―and  among  other  agonies felt  the  possi 
bility  of Capt.  W―'s  not  returning  into  the  room  at  all,  which  after 
her  consenting  to stay would  have been―too bad  for Language.―They 
seemed  to  be  talking  of the  Admis  Lease of Kellynch.  She  heard  him 
say  something  of "the  Lease being  signed  or  not  signed"―that was  not 
likely  to  be  a  very  agitating  subject―but  then  followed  "I hate  to  be  at 
an  uncertainty―I  must  know  at once―Sophy thinks  the  same." Then, 
in  a  lower  tone,  Capt.  W―  seemed  remonstrating―wanting  to  be 
excused―wanting  to  put  something  off.  "Phoo,  Phoo―answered  the 
Admiral  now  is the  Time.  If you  will  not  speak,  I will  stop  and  speak 
myself."―"Very  well  Sir, very well  Sir, followed  with  some  impatience 
from  his companion,  opening  the  door  as he  spoke.―"You will  then― 
you  promise  you  will?"  replied  the  Admiral,  in  all  the  power  of  his 
natural  voice,  unbroken  even  by  one  thin  door.―"Yes―Sir―Yes." 
And  the  Adml  was  hastily  left,  the  door  was  closed,  and  the  moment 
arrived  in  which  Anne  was  alone  with  Capt.  W―.  She  could  not 
attempt  to see how  he  looked; but  he  walked  immediately to a  window, 
as if irresolute  and  embarrassed;―and  for about  the  space of 5 seconds, 
she repented  what  she had  done―censured  it as unwise,  blushed  over it 
as  indelicate.―She  longed  to  be  able  to  speak  of  the  weather  or  the 
Concert―but  could  only  compass  the  releif  of taking  a  Newspaper  in 
her  hand.―The  distressing  pause  was  soon  over  however;  he  turned 
round  in  half  a  minute,  and  coming  towards  the  Table where  she  sat, 
said,  in  a  voice  of  effort  and  constraint―  "You  must  have  heard  too 
much  already  Madam  to be  in  any  doubt  of my  having  promised  Adml 
Croft  to  speak  to  you  on  some  particular  subject―and  this  conviction 
determines  me  to  do  it―however  repugnant  to  my―to  all  my  sense 
of  propriety,  to  be  taking  so  great  a  liberty.―You  will  acquit  me  of 
Impertinence  I  trust,  by  considering  me  as  speaking  only  for  another, 
and  speaking  by  Necessity;―and  the  Adml  is a  Man  who  can  never  be 
thought  Impertinent  by one who knows him  as you do―.  His Intentions 
[THE  ORIGINAL  ENDING  OF  PERSUASION] 
171 
are  always  the  kindest  and  the  Best;―and  you  will  perceive  that  he  is 
actuated  by none  other,  in  the  application  which  I am  now  with―with 
very peculiar  feelings―obliged to  make. "―He  stopped―but  merely  to 
recover breath;―not  seeming to expect any  answer.―Anne  listened,  as 
if  her  Life  depended  on  the  issue  of his  Speech.―He proceeded,  with 
a  forced  alacrity.―"The Adml,  Madam,  was  this  morning  confidently 
informed  that you were―upon  my word  I am  quite at a loss,  ashamed― 
(breathing and  speaking  quick)―the awkwardness  of giving  Information 
of  this  sort  to  one  of the  Parties―You can  be  at  no  loss to  understand 
me―It  was  very  confidently  said  that  Mr  Elliot―that  everything  was 
settled  in  the  family  for  an  Union  between  Mr  Elliot―and yourself.  It 
was  added  that  you  were  to  live  at  Kellynch―that  Kellynch was  to  be 
given  up.  This,  the Admiral  knew could  not be correct―But it occurred 
to  him  that  it  might  be  the  wish  of the  Parties―And  my  commission 
from  him  Madam,  is to  say,  that  if the  Family wish  is such,  his Lease 
of  Kellynch shall  be  cancel'd,  and  he  and  my  sister will  provide  them02
selves  with  another  home,  without  imagining  themselves  to  be  doing 
anything  which  under  similar  circumstances  wd  not  be  done  for 
them.―This 
is all Madam.―A very few words  in  reply from  you will be 
sufficient.―That  / should  be the person  commissioned on this subject is 
extraordinary!―and  beleive  me  Madam,  it  is  no  less painful.―A  very 
few  words  however  will  put  an  end  to  the  awkwardness  and  distress  we 
may  both  be  feeling."  Anne  spoke  a  word  or  two,  but  they  were  un02
intelligible^―And  before  she  could  command  herself,  he  added,―"If 
you only tell me that  the  Adml  may address  a Line to  Sir Walter,  it will 
be  enough.  Pronounce  only  the  words,  he  may.―I  shall  immediately 
follow  him  with  your  message.―" This was  spoken,  as with  a  fortitude 
which seemed to meet the message.―"No Sir―said Anne―There is no 
message.―You  are  misin―the  Adml  is  misinformed.―I  do  justice to 
the  kindness  of  his  Intentions,  but  he  is  quite  mistaken.  There  is  no 
Truth  in  any  such  report."―He  was a moment  silent.―She turned  her 
eyes  towards  him  for  the  first  time  since  his  re-entering  the  room.  His 
colour  was  varying―and  he  was  looking  at  her  with  all  the  Power  and 
Keenness,  which  she  believed  no  other  eyes  than  his,  possessed.  "No 
Truth  in  any  such  report!―he  repeated.―No  Truth  in  any  part  of 
it?"―"None."―He had  been standing  by a chair―enjoying the  releif  of 
leaning  on  it―or of playing  with  it;―he  now  sat down―drew  it a little 
nearer  to  her―and  looked,  with  an  expression  which  had  something 
more  than  penetration  in  it,  something  softer;―Her  Countenance  did 
not discourage.―It was a silent,  but  a very powerful  Dialogue;―on  his 
side,  Supplication,  on  her's  acceptance.―Still, a  little  nearer―and  a 
hand  taken  and  pressed―and  "Anne,  my  own  dear  Anne!"―bursting 
forth  in  the  fullness  of exquisite feeling―and  all  Suspense and  Indeci02
sion  were  over.―They  were  re-united.  They  were  restored  to  all  that 
had  been  lost. They were carried back to the past,  with  only an  increase 
172 
[THE  ORIGINAL  ENDING  OF  PERSUASION] 
of attachment  and  confidence, and  only such a flutter of present Delight 
as made  them  little fit for the interruption  of Mrs  Croft,  when  she joined 
them  not long afterwards.―She probably,  in the observations of the next 
ten  minutes,  saw something  to  suspect―and  tho'  it was hardly  possible 
for  a  woman  of her  description  to  wish  the  Mantuamaker  had  impris02
oned  her  longer,  she  might  be  very  likely wishing  for  some  excuse  to 
run  about  the  house,  some  storm  to  break  the  windows  above,  or  a 
summons  to the  Admiral's  Shoemaker below.―Fortune favoured  them 
all  however  in  another  way―in  a  gentle,  steady  rain―just  happily  set 
in  as  the  Admiral  returned  and  Anne  rose  to  go.―She was  earnestly 
invited  to  stay  dinner;―a  note  was  dispatched  to  Camden  Place―and 
she staid;―staid  till  10 at night.  And during that time,  the Husband  and 
wife,  either  by  the  wife's  contrivance,  or  by  simply  going  on  in  their 
usual  way,  were  frequently  out  of the  room  together―gone  up  stairs to 
hear a noise, or down  stairs to settle their accounts, or upon the  Landing 
place  to  trim  the  Lamp.―And  these  precious  moments  were  turned  to 
so  good  an  account  that  all  the  most  anxious  feelings  of the  past  were 
gone  through.―Before  they  parted  at  night,  Anne  had  the  felicity  of 
being  assured  in  the  first  place  that―(so  far  from  being  altered  for  the 
worse!)―she  had  gained 
inexpressibly  in  personal  Loveliness; and  that 
as to Character―her's  was  now fixed on  his  Mind  as Perfection  itself― 
maintaining  the  just Medium  of Fortitude and Gentleness;―that he had 
never  ceased  to  love  and  prefer  her,  though  it  had  been  only  at 
Uppercross that  he  had  learn't to do  her Justice―and only at Lyme that 
he  had  begun  to  understand  his  own  sensations;―that  at  Lyme he  had 
received  Lessons of more  than  one kind;―the  passing admiration  of Mr 
Elliot  had  at least  roused  him,  and  the  scenes on  the Cobb and  at Capt. 
Harville's had fixed her superiority.―In  his preceding attempts  to attach 
himself  to  Louisa  Musgrove,  (the  attempts  of  Anger  and  Pique)―he 
protested  that  he  had  continually  felt  the  impossibility  of really  caring 
for  Louisa,  though  till  that  day,  till the  leisure for  reflection which  fol02
lowed  it,  he  had  not  understood  the  perfect  excellence  of the  Mind, 
with  which  Louisa's could  so  ill bear  a  comparison,  or  the  perfect,  the 
unrivalled  hold  it possessed  over  his  own.―There  he  had  learnt to dis02
tinguish  between  the  steadiness  of Principle  and  the  Obstinacy of  Self-
will,  between  the  Darings of Heedlessness, and  the  Resolution of a  col02
lected  Mind―there  he had  seen everything to exalt in his estimation  the 
Woman  he  had  lost, and  there begun  to deplore  the pride,  the folly,  the 
madness  of resentment  which  had  kept  him  from  trying  to  regain  her, 
when  thrown  in  his  way.  From  that  period  to  the  present  had  his  pen02
ance  been  the  most severe.―He  had  no  sooner been free from the  hor02
ror  and  remorse  attending  the  first  few  days  of  Louisa's  accident,  no 
sooner  begun  to  feel  himself  alive  again,  than  he  had  begun  to  feel 
himself  though  alive,  not  at  liberty.―He found  that  he  was considered 
by  his  friend  Harville,  as  an  engaged  Man.  The  Harvilles  entertained 
[THE  ORIGINAL  ENDING  OF  PERSUASION] 
173 
not  a  doubt  of  a  mutual  attachment  between  him  and  Louisa―and 
though this to a degree,  was contradicted  instantly―it yet made  him  feel 
that perhaps by her family,  by everybody,  by  herself  even, 
the  same  idea 
might  be  held―and  that  he  was  not  free  in  honour―though,  if  such 
were  to  be  the  conclusion,  too  free  alas!  in  Heart.―He  had  never 
thought  justly on this subject before―he had  not sufficiently considered 
that  his  excessive Intimacy  at  Uppercross  must  have  it's  danger  of ill 
consequence  in  many  ways,  and  that  while  trying  whether  he  could 
attach  himself to  either  of the  Girls,  he  might  be  exciting  unpleasant 
reports,  if not,  raising  unrequited  regard!―He  found,  too  late,  that  he 
had entangled himself―and  that precisely as he became thoroughly  sati02
sfied  of his not  caring  for Louisa at all, he  must  regard  himself as  bound 
to  her,  if her  feelings  for  him,  were  what  the  Harvilles  supposed.―It 
determined  him  to  leave  Lyme―and  await  her  perfect  recovery  else02
where.  He  would  gladly  weaken,  by  any  fair  means,  whatever  senti02
ments  or  speculations  concerning  him  might  exist;  and  he  went 
therefore  into  Shropshire  meaning  after  a while,  to  return  to the  Crofts 
at Kellynch,  and  act as he found  requisite.―He had  remained  in  Shrop02
shire,  lamenting the Blindness of his own  Pride,  and  the  Blunders of his 
own  Calculations,  till  at  once  released  from  Louisa  by  the  astonishing 
felicity  of her  engagement  with  Benwicke. Bath,  Bath―had  instantly 
followed,  in Thought;  and  not long after,  in fact.  To Bath, to arrive  with 
Hope,  to be torn  by Jealousy at the first sight  of Mr  E ―, to experience 
all  the changes of each at the Concert, to be miserable by this  morning's 
circumstantial  report,  to  be  now,  more  happy  than  Language  could 
express,  or any heart  but  his own  be capable of. 
He  was  very  eager  and  very  delightful  in  the  description  of what  he 
had  felt at  the  Concert.―The Eveng  seemed  to  have  been  made  up of 
exquisite  moments;―the  moment  of her  stepping  forward  in  the  Octa02
gon  Room to speak to him―the  moment  of Mr  E's appearing  and  tear02
ing her away, and  one or two subsequent  moments,  marked by returning 
hope,  or  increasing  Despondence,  were  all  dwelt  on  with  energy.  "To 
see  you,  cried  he,  in  the  midst  of  those  who  could  not  be  my  well-
wishers, to see your Cousin  close by you―conversing and  smiling―and 
feel  all the  horrible  Eligibilities and  Proprieties  of the  Match!―to con02
sider  it as the  certain  wish  of every  being  who  could  hope  to  influence 
you―even,  if your  own  feelings were  reluctant,  or  indifferent―to  con02
sider what powerful  supports would  be his!―Was not it enough  to make 
the  fool  of me,  which  my  behaviour  expressed?―How  could  I look  on 
without  agony?―Was not  the  very  sight  of the  Friend  who  sat  behind 
you?―was not the recollection of what had been―the knowledge of her 
Influence―the  indelible,  immoveable  Impression  of  what  Persuasion 
had  once  done,  was not  it all against me?"― 
"You  should  have  distinguished―replied  Anne―You  should  not 
have  suspected  me  now;―The  case so  different,  and  my  age  so  differ-
174 
[THE  ORIGINAL  ENDING  OF  PERSUASION] 
ent!―If  I  was  wrong,  in  yeilding  to  Persuasion  once,  remember  that  it 
was  to  Persuasion  exerted  on  the  side  of  Safety,  not  of  Risk.  When  I 
yeilded,  I thought  it was to Duty.―But  no  Duty  could  be called in  aid 
here.―In  marrying  a  Man  indifferent  to  me,  all  Risk would  have  been 
incurred,  and  all  Duty  violated."―"Perhaps  I  ought  to  have  reasoned 
thus,  he  replied,  but  I could  not.―I  could  not  derive  benefit  from  the 
later  knowledge  of your  Character  which  I  had  acquired,  I  could  not 
bring  it into play,  it was overwhelmed,  buried,  lost in  those earlier  feel02
ings,  which  I had  been  smarting  under  Year  after  Year.―I  could  think 
of  you  only  as  one  who  had  yeilded,  who  had  given  me  up,  who  had 
been  influenced  by any  one  rather  than  by  me―I  saw you with  the very 
Person  who  had  guided  you  in  that  year of Misery―I had  no  reason  to 
think  her  of less authority  now;―the  force of Habit was to be added. "― 
"I  should  have  thought,  said  Anne,  that  my  Manner  to yourself,  might 
have spared  you much,  or all of this."―"No―No―Your manner  might 
be only the ease, which your engagement to another Man would give.― 
I  left  you  with  this  beleif.―And  yet―I  was  determined  to  see  you 
again.―My  spirits  rallied  with  the  morning,  and  I felt  that  I had  still a 
motive  for  remaining  here.―The  Admirals  news  indeed,  was  a  revul02
sion.  Since  that  moment,  I have  been  decided  what  to do―and  had  it 
been  confirmed,  this would  have been  my  last  day  in Bath." 
There  was  time  for  all  this  to  pass―with  such  Interruptions  only  as 
enhanced  the  charm  of the  communication―and  Bath  could scarcely 
contain  any  other  two  Beings  at  once  so  rationally  and  so  rapturously 
happy  as during that  eveng  occupied  the  Sopha of Mrs Croft's  Drawing 
room  in  Gay St. 
Capt.  W .― had  taken  care to meet the Adml  as he  returned  into  the 
house,  to  satisfy  him  as to  Mr  E― and  Kellynch;―and the  delicacy of 
the  Admiral's  good  nature  kept  him  from  saying  another  word  on  the 
subject  to  Anne.―He  was  quite  concerned  lest  he  might  have  been 
giving her  pain  by touching  a tender  part.  Who  could  say?―She might 
be liking her Cousin,  better than  he  liked her.―And  indeed,  upon  rec02
ollection,  if they  had  been  to  marry  at  all why  should  they  have  waited 
so long?― 
When  the  Eveng  closed,  it  is probable  that  the  Adml  received  some 
new  Ideas  from  his  Wife;―whose particularly  friendly  manner  in  part02
ing  with  her,  gave  Anne  the  gratifying  persuasion  of  her  seeing  and 
approving. 
It  had  been  such  a  day  to Anne!―the  hours  which  had  passed  since 
her  leaving Camden  Place,  had  done  so much!―She was almost bewil02
dered,  almost too happy  in  looking back.―It was necessary to sit up  half 
the  Night  and  lie awake the  remainder  to comprehend  with  composure 
her  present  state,  and  pay  for  the  overplus  of  Bliss,  by  Headake  and 
Fatigue.― 
[THE  ORIGINAL  ENDING  OF  PERSUASION] 
175 
CHAPTER  11 
Who can  be in doubt of what followed?―When any two Young Peo 
ple take it into their heads  to marry,  they are pretty  sure by perseverance 
to carry their  point―be  they ever so poor,  or ever so imprudent,  or ever 
so little likely to be necessary to each other's ultimate comfort. This may 
be  bad  Morality to  conclude  with,  but  I beleive it  to  be  Truth―and  if 
such  parties  succeed, how  should  a Capt.  W― and  an  Anne  E ―, with 
the  advantage  of  maturity  of  Mind,  consciousness  of  Right,  and  one 
Indépendant  Fortune  between  them,  fail  of bearing down  every opposi 
tion? They might  in  fact,  have  born  down  a great  deal  more  than  they 
met  with,  for  there  was  little to  distress  them  beyond  the  want  of Gra-
ciousness and  Warmth.  Sir W.  made  no objection, and  Elizth did  noth 
ing  worse  than 
look  cold  and  unconcerned.―Capt.  W―  with 
0525,000―and  as high  in  his Profession as Merit & Activity could  place 
him,  was  no  longer  nobody.  He  was  now  esteemed  quite  worthy  to 
address  the  Daughter  of a foolish spendthrift  Baronet, who  had  not  had 
Principle or sense enough  to maintain  himself  in the  Situation in  which 
Providence  had  placed  him,  and  who  could  give  his  Daughter  but  a 
small  part  of the  share  of ten  Thousand  pounds  which  must  be  her's 
hereafter.―Sir  Walter indeed  tho'  he had  no affection for his  Daughter 
and  no  vanity  flattered  to  make  him  really happy  on  the  occasion, was 
very  far  from  thinking  it a  bad  match  for  her.―On  the  contrary  when 
he saw more of Capt.  W .― and eyed him well, he was very much  struck 
by  his personal  claims and  felt  that  his  superiority  of appearance  might 
be  not  unfairly  balanced  against  her superiority  of Rank;―and  all  this, 
together with  his well-sounding  name,  enabled  Sir W.  at last to  prepare 
his pen  with  a  very good  grace for  the  insertion  of the  Marriage  in  the 
volume  of Honour.―The  only  person  among  them  whose  opposition 
of  feelings  could  excite any  serious  anxiety,  was  Lady  Russel.―Anne 
knew that  Lady R― must  be suffering  some pain  in  understanding  and 
relinquishing  Mr  E―  and  be  making  some  struggles  to  become  truly 
acquainted  with  and  do  justice to  Capt.  W.―This however,  was  what 
Lady  R―  had  now  to  do.  She  must  learn  to  feel  that  she  had  been 
mistaken  with  regard  to both―that  she had  been  unfairly  influenced  by 
appearances  in each―that,  because Capt.  W.'s manners  had  not  suited 
her  own  ideas,  she  had  been  too quick  in  suspecting  them  to  indicate a 
Character  of dangerous  Impetuosity,  and  that  because Mr  Elliot's man 
ners  had  precisely pleased  her  in  their  propriety  and  correctness,  their 
general politeness and  suavity, she had  been too quick in receiving them 
as  the  certain  result  of  the  most  correct  opinions  and  well  regulated 
Mind.―There was nothing  less for Lady R. to do than to admit that  she 
had  been  pretty  completely wrong,  and  to take  up  a  new set of opinions 
and  hopes.―There is a quickness of perception  in  some, a nicety in  the 
discernment  of  character―a  natural  Penetration  in  short  which  no 
176 
[THE  ORIGINAL  ENDING  OF  PERSUASION] 
Experience  in  others  can  equal―and  Lady  R.  had  been  less girted  in 
this  part  of Understanding  than  her  young  friend;―but  she  was  a very 
good Woman; and  if her second object was to be sensible and  well judg02
ing,  her  first  was  to  see  Anne  happy.  She  loved  Anne  better  than  she 
loved  her  own  abilities―and  when  the  awkwardness  of the  Beginning 
was  over,  found  little  hardship  in  attaching  herself  as  a  Mother  to  the 
Man  who  was  securing  the  happiness  of her  Child.  Of all  the  family, 
Mary  was  probably  the  one  most  immediately  gratified  by the  circum02
stance.  It was  creditable to  have  a  Sister  married,  and  she  might  flatter 
herself  that  she  had  been  greatly  instrumental  to  the  connection,  by 
having  Anne  staying  with  her  in  the  Autumn;  and  as  her  own  Sister 
must be better than  her Husbands  Sisters,  it was very agréable that  Captn 
W―  should  be a richer Man  than  either Capt.  B. or Charles  Hayter.― 
She had  something to suffer perhaps  when  they came into contact again, 
in  seeing  Anne  restored  to  the  rights  of Seniority and  the  Mistress of a 
very pretty  Landaulet―but  she had  a future  to look forward  to, of power02
ful  consolation―Anne had  no  Uppercross  Hall  before  her,  no  Landed 
Estate,  no  Headship  of a family,  and  if they could  but  keep Capt.  W― 
from  being  made  a  Baronet,  she  would  not  change  situations  with 
Anne.―It would  be well for the Eldest  Sister  if she were equally satisfied 
with  her  situation,  for  a  change  is  not  very  probable  there.―She  had 
soon  the  mortification  of seeing Mr  E.  withdraw,  and  no  one of proper 
condition  has since presented  himself to raise even the unfounded  hopes 
which  sunk  with  him.  The news of his Cousin Anne's engagement  burst 
on  Mr  Elliot  most  unexpectedly.  It deranged  his  best plan  of domestic 
Happiness,  his  best  hopes  of keeping  Sir  Walter  single  by  the  watch02
fulness  which  a son  in  law's rights would  have  given―But tho' discom02
fited  and  disappointed,  he  could  still do  something  for  his  own  interest 
and  his  own  enjoyment.  He  soon  quitted  Bath and  on  Mrs Clay's  quit02
ting  it  likewise soon  afterwards  and  being  next  heard  of,  as  established 
under  his  Protection  in  London,  it was evident  how  double  a Game  he 
had  been  playing,  and  how  determined  he  was  to  save  himself  from 
being  cut  out  by one  artful  woman  at  least.―Mrs Clay's affections  had 
overpowered  her  Interest,  and  she  had  sacrificed  for  the  Young  Man's 
sake, the possibility of scheming longer for Sir Walter;―she has Abilities 
however  as  well  as  Affections,  and  it  is  now  a  doubtful  point  whether 
his cunning  or hers  may  finally  carry the  day,  whether,  after  preventing 
her  from  being  the  wife  of  Sir  Walter,  he  may  not  be  wheedled  and 
caressed  at last into  making  her  the wife of Sir William.― 
It cannot be doubted  that  Sir Walter and  Eliz: were shocked and  mor02
tified  by the loss of their companion  and  the discovery of their deception 
in her.  They had  their great cousins to be sure,  to resort to for comfort― 
but  they  must  long  feel  that  to  flatter  and  follow  others,  without  being 
flattered  and  followed  themselves is but  a state of half  enjoyment. 
Anne,  satisfied  at  a  very  early  period,  of  Lady  Russel's  meaning 
to 
[THE  ORIGINAL  ENDING  OF  PERSUASION] 
1 77 
love Capt.  W― as she ought,  had  no other alloy to the  happiness  of her 
prospects,  than  what arose from  the consciousness of having no  relations 
to bestow on  him  which  a  Man  of Sense could  value.―There,  she  felt 
her  own  Inferiority  keenly.―The  disproportion  in  their  fortunes  was 
nothing;―it did  not give her a moment's  regret;―but  to have no Family 
to  receive and  estimate him  properly,  nothing  of respectability,  of Har02
mony,  of  Goodwill  to  offer  in  return  for  all  the  Worth  and  all  the 
prompt  welcome which  met her in his Brothers and  Sisters, was a source 
of  as lively pain,  as her  Mind  could  well  be  sensible of,  under  circum02
stances  of  otherwise  strong  felicity.―She had  but  two  friends  in  the 
World,  to add  to his List, Lady R. and  Mrs Smith.―To those  however, 
he  was very well-disposed  to attach  himself.  Lady  R― inspite  of all  her 
former  transgressions,  he  could  now  value  from  his  heart;―while  he 
was  not  obliged  to  say that  he  beleived  her  to  have  been  right  in  origi02
nally  dividing  them,  he  was  ready  to  say  almost  anything  else  in  her 
favour;―and  as for  Mrs  Smith,  she  had  claims of various  kinds  to  rec02
ommend  her  quickly  and  permanently.―Her  recent  good  offices  by 
Anne  had  been  enough  in  themselves―and  their  marriage,  instead  of 
depriving  her  of one  friend  secured  her  two.  She was  one  of their  first 
visitors  in  their  settled  Life―and  Capt.  Wentworth,  by  putting  her  in 
the way of recovering her  Husband's  property  in  the W.  Indies,  by writ02
ing  for  her,  and  acting  for  her,  and  seeing  her  through  all  the  petty 
Difficulties  of the  case, with  the  activity and  exertion of a fearless  Man, 
and  a  determined  friend,  fully  requited  the  services she  had  rendered, 
or had  ever meant  to render,  to his Wife.  Mrs Smith's enjoyments  were 
not  spoiled  by this  improvement  of Income, with  some improvement  of 
health,  and  the  acquisition  of  such  friends  to  be  often  with,  for  her 
chearfulness  and  mental  Activity did  not fail her,  and  while those  prime 
supplies  of Good  remained,  she might have bid defiance  even  to greater 
accessions  of worldly  Prosperity.  She  might  have  been  absolutely  rich 
and  perfectly  healthy,  and  yet be  happy.―Her  spring  of Felicity  was  in 
the  glow  of her  Spirits―as her  friend  Anne's  was  in  the  warmth  of her 
Heart.―Anne  was  Tenderness  itself;―and  she  had  the  full  worth  of it 
in  Captn  Wentworth's  affection.  His  Profession  was  all  that  could  ever 
make  her  friends  wish  that  Tenderness  less; the  dread  of a future  War, 
all  that  could  dim  her  Sunshine.―She gloried  in  being  a  Sailor's wife, 
but she must pay the tax of quick alarm,  for belonging to that  Profession 
which  is―if possible―more distinguished  in it's Domestic Virtues,  than 
in  it's National  Importance.― 
FINIS 
July  18.―1816. 
BACKGROUNDS  AND 
CONTEXTS 
[WILLIAM  HAYLEY] 
[On  Old  Maids] t 
[This passage from the third volume of William  Hayley's anonymously pub02
lished  treatise  on  old  maids  belongs to  an  extended  fantasy:  the  narrator's 
dream-vision.  It consists mainly  of an  oration  delivered  by a  speaker at  an 
imagined  banquet.  The  previous  speaker  (referred  to  in  the  his of the first 
sentence) has presented  the claims of widows. ] 
*  * * When his peroration  was ended,  which,  being tender and pathetic, 
formed  a pleasing contrast to the humorous  arguments  of his predecessor, a 
gentleman arose, who possessed, with a very graceful person, an  uncommon 
archness of countenance; and  in a voice peculiarly melodious,  he delivered 
the following oration: 
Mr.  President, 
Though  I was aware that a very formidable majority of speakers  would 
appear against me,  it is yet with confidence that I engage on the  unpopu02
lar  side  of the  present  question;  a  question  upon  which  the  prejudices, 
the  passions,  and  the  practice  of mankind,  are  in  direct  opposition  to 
the  clearest dictates  of reason  and  of justice!  Yes! Sir,  I will be  so bold 
as to affirm,  that  if the conduct and  the opinions of men  were under  the 
steady guidance  of equity,  this question  could  not  remain  doubtful  for a 
single  minute,  in  the  mind  of any  man;  it  must  be  decided,  without  a 
moment's  hesitation,  in  favour  of that  injured,  that  derided  being,  the 
involuntary  Old  Maid,  whose advocate I profess  myself: nor would  such 
a  decision  depend  on  any  prior  sentiments,  which  the  arbiter  might 
form,  to the  discredit,  or to the  glory,  of wedlock; for,  whether  we con02
sider marriage  as a burthen  or as an  enjoyment,  it is equally  unjust  that 
any female should twice suffer that burthen,  or be twice indulged  in  that 
enjoyment,  while  another,  at  the  same  period  of life,  is  kept  an  utter 
stranger  to the  cares or to the  delights of an  important  office,  which  she 
is equally ready to assume,  and  equally able to support. This position is, 
I trust, so evident,  that,  if I could convert this assembly into the  supreme 
court  of judicature,  and  bring  to  its  bar  both  the  Widow  and  the  Old 
Maid,  as  rival  claimants of the  nuptial  coronet,  on  the  mere  principles 
of right,  I am  persuaded  the  integrity of this audience would  soon  termi02
nate  the  contest,  and  ratify  the  title  of  my  client  by  an  unanimous 
decree.  But alas! in this point there  is no tribunal  on earth,  to which  the 
disconsolate  Old  Maiden  can  successfully apply  for  substantial  justice. 
t  From  [William  Hayley],  A Philosophical,  Historical,  and  Moral  Essay on Old  Maids,  3 vols. 
(London,  1785),  3: 176-196.  All notes are by the editor of this Norton Critical  Edition. 
181 
182 
[WILLIAM  HAYLEY] 
The  clamour of prejudice is against her,  and  her pretensions are  derided; 
while custom  and  commodity, 
That  smooth-facd 
gentleman, 
tickling 
commodity, 
are  such  active  and  prosperous  agents  for  her  antagonist,  the  Widow, 
that  she,  this  insidious  antagonist!  is admitted,  perhaps,  three,  four,  or 
even  five  times  to  the  recent  altar  of  Hymen,1  while  my  unfortunate 
client,  the  neglected Old Maid,  however wishfully  she may look towards 
the  portal,  is not  allowed  to  find  even  a temporary  shelter within  a  por02
tico  of the  temple.―Can  this,  Sir, be called equity?  Is it  not  injustice? 
Is it not barbarity?―But I may be told,  that  in the common occurrences 
of  life,  in a transaction  such  as marriage,  peculiarly subject to fancy  and 
caprice,  we  must  not  expect,  we  must  not  require  men  to  observe  the 
nicer dictates of strict equity, and  a speculative rule of right.―Be it so!― 
I  will  not,  therefore,  on  this  important  question,  appeal  solely  to  the 
consciences of men;  I will appeal  to their  interests.  I will prove to  them, 
that  he  who  marries  an  Old  Maid,  has  a  much  greater  chance of being 
invariably  beloved  by  his  wife,  or,  in  other  words,  of being  happy  in 
wedlock,  than  he  has,  who  rashly throws  himself  into the  open  arms of 
a  Widow.―Sir,  I  flatter  myself,  it  will  require  no  long  chain  of argu02
ments to establish and  fortify,  on the most solid ground,  this  momentous 
position.  I  trust,  that  I  shall  be  able  to  accomplish  it,  merely  by 
reminding  this  audience  of  a  propensity  in  the  human  mind,  which 
cannot  be  called in  question;  I mean  the  propensity  to exalt in  our  esti02
mation  those possessions of which we are deprived,  and to sink the  value 
of  what  is actually  in  our  hands.―Sir,  the first part of this propensity  is 
so general,  and  it operates  with  such  amazing  force on  the  character to 
whom  I wish  to apply  it,  that  I remember the admirable  Fielding,2 with 
a  most happy  coincidence of humour  and  of truth,  calls the death  of an 
husband  'an  infallible recipe to recover the  lost affections of a wife.' 
Let  me,  Sir, entreat  this  assembly to  retain  in  their thoughts  the  pro02
pensity  I have  mentioned,  and  then  to contemplate with  me the feelings 
of the  late Widow towards  her  second or third  husband,  and  the feelings 
of  the  quondam  Old  Maid,  now  joyfully  united  to  her  first  and  only 
love.―Sir,  the  affection  of the  re-married  Widow  is a pocket telescope; 
she directs the  magnifying  end  of it towards  her  good  man  in  the  grave, 
and  it enlarges to a marvellous degree all the mental  and  all the  personal 
endowments  of the  dear  departed.  She  then  turns  the  inverted  glass to 
his  diminishing  successor,  and,  whatever  his  proportion  of  excellence 
may  be,  the  poor  luckless living  mortal  soon  dwindles  in  her  sight to a 
comparative pigmy.  But,  Sir, this is not the  case with  our quondam  Old 
Maid.  No! Sir―her affection  is a portable  microscope, which  magnifies 
1.  God of marriage. 
2.  Henry Fielding (1707-1754),  author of Tom Jones.  The quoted phrase occurs in a chapter title 
(bk.  2, chap. 8). 
[ON  O LD  MAIDS] 
183 
in a stupendous  manner  all the  attractive merits and  powers  of pleasing, 
however  inconsiderable  they  may  be,  in  the  favourite  creature  upon 
whom  she gazes.  Like an  inexperienced but  a passionate  naturalist,  she 
continues  to  survey  the  new  and  sole object  of her  contemplation,  not 
only  with  unremitted  assiduity,  but  with  increasing  amazement  and 
delight.  He  fills  her  eye; he  occupies her  mind;  he  engrosses her  heart. 
But  it may be said  in  reply,  If the  man  who  marries an  Old  Maid  has 
this  superior  chance  of being  uniformly  beloved  by  his  wife,  since it is 
certainly  the  wish  of every  man  who  marries  to  be  so,  how  happens  it 
that  men  decide  so  preposterously  against  themselves,  and  perpetually 
prefer the Widow to the Old Maid? Is not this constant preference a very 
strong  argument  in  favour  of  the  character  so  preferred?  Does  it  not 
prove,  that  the Widow  has acquired  the  art,  or the  power,  of conferring 
more  happiness  on  her  second  husband  than  the  Old  Maid  is  able  to 
bestow  upon  her  first?  for  can  we  suppose  that  men,  instructed  by  the 
experience of ages,  would  continue  to act in constant opposition  to their 
own  domestic happiness,  in  the  most important  article of human  life? 
Alas! Sir, I fear there  are more  articles than  one,  in which  we  incon02
siderate  mortals  may  be  frequently  observed  to  act  against  experience, 
against  our  reason,  and  against  our  felicity.  That  the  Widow  is  con02
stantly preferred  to the  Old  Maid,  I most readily admit; nay,  I complain 
of it as an  inveterate grievance; but I trust,  Sir, that  I can account for this 
unreasonable  preference,  without  adding a single grain  to the weight,  or 
rather  to the  empty  scale,  of the  Widow. 
I  believe,  Sir, a  very  simple  metaphor  will  illustrate  the  whole  affair 
on  both  sides. 
The  Widow  is an  experienced and  a skilful  angler,  who  has  acquired 
patience to wait  for  the  favourable  minute,  and  rapidity  to  strike  in  the 
very  instant  when  the  fish  has  fairly  risen  to  the  hook.  By this  double 
excellence  her  success  is  ensured.  But  alas!  Sir,  the  Old  Maid  is  an 
angler,  whom  fruitless  expectation  has  rendered  both  impatient  and 
unskilful;  she  is  thrown  into  trepidation  by  the  first  appearance  of  a 
nibble,  and  by  making  a  too  hasty  movement  at  that  critical  juncture, 
she  too  often  renders  her  bait,  however  sweet  it  may  be,  an  object  of 
terror,  instead  of allurement,  to  what  she  wishes  to  catch.  Though  my 
allusion  may  sound  a  little  coarsely,  let  me  entreat  you,  Sir,  not  to 
imagine  that  I  mean  to  express  any  degree  of disrespect  to  my  honest 
and  worthy  client,  the  unprosperous  Old  Maid.  Allow  me,  Sir,  to 
remind  you,  that  ingenuous  and  unhacknied  spirits,  though  actively 
inclined,  are  often  reduced  to  do  nothing,  by  their  too  eager  desire  to 
do  well;  and  this  is  frequently  the  case  of the  good  and  delicate  Old 
Maid,  in  her  laudable  project of securing a husband:  so that  even  when 
she  is  herself  the  cause  of her  own  failure  in  this  worthy  purpose;  she 
deserves  not  our  censure but  our  compassion.  Yes! Sir, the  partizans of 
the  Widow  may  smile,  if they  please,  at  my  assertion; but  I scruple  not 
1 84 
[WILLIAM  HAYLEY] 
to affirm,  that  the  solitary,  neglected Old  Maid  is more truly  entitled  to 
pity,  that soft harbinger  of love,  than  the weeping Widow herself.  Much 
has  been  said,  and,  I  confess,  with  great  eloquence,  on  the  Widow's 
attractive  sorrow.  It  is,  indeed,  attractive;  and  so  attractive,  that  it  has 
frequendy  recalled to  my  imagination  the  moan  of the  hyaena,  that  art02
ful,  destructive,  and  insatiable creature,  who  is said by the ancient  natu02
ralists to  lure  into  her  den,  by a  treacherous  cry of distress,  the  unwary 
traveller  whom  she  intends  to  devour.  This  insidious  behaviour  of the 
hyaena  is a  questionable  fact,  that  no  one,  perhaps,  can  fully  prove  or 
refute; but all persons of any experience in the world have seen instances 
of  men,  who  have  been  allured  into  the  snare  of the  Widow,  and  have 
lamented,  when  it  was  too  late  to  retreat,  that  they  fell  the  victims of 
their  own  generous,  but  misplaced  compassion. 
The  habit  of changing  is  very  apt  to  produce  a  passion  for  novelty; 
and  the  wife,  who  has buried  one or two husbands,  on a slight disagree02
ment with  her second or third,  will soon wish him  to sleep in peace with 
his departed  predecessor,  from  her hope of being more lucky in her next 
adventure.  You  may  remember,  Sir,  that  our  old  poet  Chaucer,  that 
admirable  and  exact  painter  of  life  and  manners!  has  very  happily 
marked  this  prevalent  disposition  of the  re-married  Widow,  in  the  long 
prologue which  he assigns to his Wife  of Bath. That good lady glories in 
having  already  buried  four  husbands,  and  expresses a perfect  readiness, 
whenever  Heaven  may give her  the  opportunity,  to engage with  a sixth. 
Let  it not  be said,  that  this  character is a  mere phantom,  created  by the 
lively  imagination  of a  satirical and  facetious poet! No! Sir, this  venera02
ble,  though  sportive  old  bard,  copied  nature  most  faithfully:  and,  as a 
proof  that  he  did  so  in  the  present  case,  I will  mention  a  more  marvel02
lous example of this passion  in the  re-marrying  Widow for an  unlimited 
succession of novelties.  Sir, the example I mean,  is recorded in an  eccle02
siastical  writer  of great authority,  whose  name  I cannot  in  this  moment 
recollect;  but  I  remember  he  mentions  it  as  a  fact,  which  happened  at 
Rome,  and  to  which  he  was  himself  an  eye-witness. This fact,  Sir, was 
the  marriage  of a  widow  to  her  twenty-second 
husband.  The  man  also 
had  buried  twenty  wives;  and  all  the  eyes  of Rome  were  fixed  on  this 
singular  pair,  as  on  a  couple  of gladiators,  anxious  to  see which  would 
conduct  the  other  to  the  grave.  If I  remember  right,  the  woman,  after 
all  her  funeral  triumphs,  was  the  victim  in  this  wonderful  conflict:  but 
the  story,  however  it might terminate,  sufficiently proves the passion for 
novelty,  which  I  have  ascribed  to  the  Widow.  Now,  Sir,  if the  second 
or third  husband  of a Widow  may  have  frequent  cause to imagine,  that 
his lady's transferrable  affections are veering toward  his probable  succes02
sor,  he  cannot  surely  be so happy,  or secure,  as the  man  who  has  more 
wisely united  himself to a worthy  Old Maid.  She, good soul! remember02
ing how  long she waited  for her first husband,  instead  of hastily looking 
forward  to a second,  will direct all her attention  to cherish  and  preserve 
[ON  O LD  MAIDS] 
185 
the  dear  creature,  whom  she  at  last  acquired  after  tedious  expectation. 
Her good  man  has  no  rival to fear,  either among  the  living or the  dead, 
and  may  securely  enjoy  the  delightful  prerogative  of believing  himself 
the  absolute master of his wife's affections.  I entreat you,  Sir, to observe 
how  very  different  the  case  is with  the  inconsiderate  man,  who  rashly 
married  a  Widow!  He  has  not  only  to  apprehend,  that  the  changeable 
tenderness  of his lady  may take a sudden turn  towards  his probable suc02
cessor,  but,  if her  thoughts  are too faithful,  and  too virtuous,  to  wander 
towards  the  living,  even  then,  Sir,  after  all  his  endeavours  to  take  full 
possession  of her  heart,  though  he  may  delude  himself  with  the  vain 
idea of being its sole proprietor,  he will frequently  find,  that  he  has only 
entered  into  partnership  with  a  ghost.  Yes! Sir,  though  my  opponents 
may  treat  the  expression  as  ludicrous,  I will  maintain  that  it  is literally 
just.  I  repeat,  he  has  entered  into  partnership  with  a  ghost,  and  I will 
add,  Sir,  the  very  probable  consequence of such  a  partnership;  he  will 
soon  find,  that by the subtle illusions of his invisible partner,  he  has lost 
even his poor moiety in that precarious possession, the heart of a  remar02
ried  Widow!  and  will  find  himself,  at  the  same  time,  a  real  bankrupt 
in  happiness.  Since  my  antagonists  have  been  pleased  to  smile  at  my 
expression,  as the  language  rather  of fancy than  of truth,  suffer  me,  Mr. 
President,  to quote a case,  in which this dead,  this derided  partner  made 
his actual appearance,  and  was bold enough  to urge an  exclusive claim. 
Sir,  I  trust  the  case  I  allude  to  is  a  case directly  in  point;  it  is  quoted, 
indeed,  on  a  different  occasion,  by  the  admirable  Addison,3  from  the 
seventeenth  book of the  Jewish historian,  Josephus.  I  mean  the  case of 
the  Widow  Glaphyra,  who,  having  been  twice  a  Widow,  took  for  her 
third  husband  Archelaus. You may  remember,  Sir, that  the  thoughts of 
this  lady,  after  her  third  adventure,  ran  so  much  on  her  first  lord,  that 
she saw the good  man  in  a vision―'Glaphyra,' said the  phantom,  'thou 
hast  made  good  the  old  saying,  that  women  are  not  to  be  trusted.  Was 
not  I  the  husband  of thy  virginity?  Have  I  not  children  by  thee?  How 
couldst  thou  forget  our  loves so far,  as to  enter  into  a  second  marriage, 
and after that  into a third?―But for our passed loves I will free thee  from 
thy  present  reproach,  and  make thee  mine  for  ever. '―Glaphyra  related 
her dream,  and  died  soon after.  This,  Sir, is a serious and  tragical proof, 
how  dangerous  it  is  to  marry  a  Widow.  Surely  no  considerate  man 
would  chuse  to  incur  the  hazard  of having  his bride  thus torn  from  his 
embraces by so arrogant  a phantom.―Allow  me,  Sir, to relate a story of 
a  comic cast,  which  will  equally  prove  the  secret perils  of such  a  mar02
riage.  I received  it  from  a  very worthy  old  gentleman,  not  unknown  to 
this  assembly.  He  was  acquainted,  in  his  youth,  with  a  famous  mimic 
of  the  last century,  who  was  the  principal  actor  in  this  comic or  rather 
farcical  scene, and  related  it circumstantially to my friend.  This mimic, 
3.  Joseph Addison (1672-1719),  essayist, founder (with Richard Steele) of The  Spectator, a popu02
lar weekly periodical. 
186 
[WILLIAM  HAYLEY] 
Sir,  a  man  of pleasantry  and  adventure,  courted,  in the  early part of his 
life,  a  very  handsome  and  opulent  Widow;  she  gave  him  the  highest 
encouragement;  but,  as avarice was her  foible,  she at last  jilted  him  for 
a  wealthy  suitor,  who,  though  of a  very  timid  constitution,  was  rash 
enough  to  marry  this  very  tempting  Widow.  The  discarded  mimic was 
inflamed  with  a  variety  of passions,  and  determined  to  take  some very 
signal  revenge.  An  opportunity  of vengeance  occurred  to  him,  which, 
as he knew the  extreme timidity  of his fortunate  rival, he seized  without 
the  pause  of apprehension.  His  valet  had  intrigued  with  the  favourite 
abig09il4  of the  Widow,  and  by  her  assistance the  mimic  commanded5 
the  nuptial  chamber  of the  bride.  He  had  known  the  person  of her first 
husband,  and,  having  concealed himself  under a toilet,6 till the hour of 
consummation,  he then  made  his appearance,  assuming  the  most exact 
similitude, both  in figure and  voice,  to the dear departed.  He had  hardly 
undrawn the  curtain,  when  the affrighted  bride fell  into a fit. The bride02
groom,  who  had  also known  his  deceased  predecessor,  was  seized  with 
a  panic still worse,  and  his trembling body soon diffused  so powerful  an 
effluvia,  that  although  it contributed  nothing  to his own  relief,  it recov02
ered  the  lady  from  her  swoon.  She  revived  in  perfect  possession  of her 
senses, and,  finding  the dead  husband  vanished,  and the living one  unfit 
for  a companion,  she  hastily arose.  As she  loved  money,  she had  taken 
the  prudent  precaution  of securing to  herself the  enjoyment  of her  own 
fortune,  and,  having some suspicion of the  trick which  had  been  played 
against her,  she resolved to make a wise use of it, and  declared,  that  she 
would  never proceed to consummate her marriage with a man,  who  had 
not  resolution  enough  to protect  her  from  a ghost.  She persisted  in  this 
conduct,  and  the  luckless derided  bridegroom  remained,  through  life,  a 
melancholy  example to  confirm  the  wisdom  of that  adage,  which  says, 
that  he  should,  indeed,  be  a  bold  man,  who  enters  into  the  service of 
a  Widow. 
Sir,  I should  entreat your pardon for having trespassed on the patience 
of  this  assembly by the  recital of so long a story,  did  I not  flatter  myself 
that  it  will  have  a  happy  tendency  to  guard  the  single gentlemen,  who 
hear  me,  from  the  iniquitous  temerity  of preferring  a Widow to an  Old 
Maid. 
I  might  alledge,  Sir,  many  arguments  which  I  have  not  hitherto 
touched  upon,  in  favour  of  my  client.  I  might  shew  of what  infinite 
importance  it is to matrimonial  felicity,  that  the husband  should receive 
into  his  arms  a  partner  for  life,  whose disposition  and  habits,  instead of 
being  fixed  already  by a former  lord,  are yet to be moulded  according to 
the  will and  abilities of her first and  only director.  Sir, in  this point,  the 
Widow is a piece of warped  wood,  which  the  most skilful workman  may 
4.  Maidservant. 
5.  Took possession of. 
6.  Dressing table. 
LETTERS  ABOUT  PERSUASION 
187 
find  himself  unable  to shape  as he  wishes; but  the  Old  Maid,  Sir, is the 
pliant  virgin  wax,  which  follows,  with  the  most  happy  ductility,  every 
serious design,  every ingenious device, every sportive whim,  of the  mod02
eller. 
But  I  will  relinquish  the  innumerable  arguments  that  I  might  yet 
adduce  in  support  of the  Old  Maid;  I  will  rest  her  cause  on  that  solid 
rock,  which  I  have  endeavoured,  Sir,  to  exhibit  in  different  points  of 
view,  I mean  the superior  security with  which  her husband  may  depend 
on  the stability of her  affection.  I will conclude by conjuring  every  gen02
tleman,  who  may  happen  to  hesitate  between  a  Widow  and  an  Old 
Maid,  to  remember,  that  reason  and  experience,  that  equity  and  the 
general  interest of mankind,  all loudly plead  for his preferring  the  latter: 
I will conjure  him  to  recollect, that  the  man  who  marries  a Widow  has 
great  cause  to  apprehend  unreasonable  expectations,  unpleasant  com02
parisons,  and  variable  affection;  while  he,  who  marries  an  Old  Maid, 
may with  confidence prepare  to meet unexacting tenderness,  increasing 
gratitude,  and  perpetual  endearments. 
JANE  AUSTEN 
Letters  about  Persuasion  t 
To  Fanny 
Knight 
Chawton,  Thursday  March  13.  [1817] 
As  to  making  any  adequate  return  for  such  a  Letter  as  yours  my 
dearest  Fanny,  it is absolutely impossible; if I were to labour at  it all  the 
rest of my  Life  and  live to the  age of Methuselah,  I could  never accom02
plish  anything  so long and  so perfect; but  I cannot  let William go  with02
out  a few Lines of acknowledgement  and  reply.  I have  pretty  well  done 
with  Mr.  Wildman.  By your  description  he  cannof  be in  love with  you, 
however  he  may  try  at  it,  and  I could  not  wish  the  match  unless  there 
were  a  great  deal  of Love on  his  side.  I do  not  know  what  to  do  about 
Jemima  Branfill.  What  does  her  dancing  away  with  so  much  spirit, 
mean?  that  she  does  not  care  for  him,  or  only  wishes  to  appear  not  to 
care  for  him?―Who  can  understand  a  young  Lady?―Poor  Mrs.  C. 
Milles,  that  she should  die on  a wrong  day at last,  after being about  it so 
long!―It was unlucky  that  the  Goodnestone  Party  could  not  meet  you, 
and  I hope her friendly,  obliging, social Spirit, which delighted  in  draw02
ing  People  together,  was  not  conscious of the  division  and  disappoint-
t  From  Jane  Austen's Letters,  edited by R. W.  Chapman,  2nd ed.  (London: Oxford  UP,  1959), 
letters  141 and  142. Reprinted by permission of Oxford  University Press.  All  notes are by the 
editor of this Norton Critical  Edition. 
188 
JANE  AUSTEN 
ment  she  was  occasioning.  I  am  sorry  and  surprised  that  you  speak of 
her  as  having  little to  leave,  and  must  feel  for  Miss Milles,  though  she 
is Molly, if a material  loss of Income is to attend  her other  loss.―Single 
Women  have  a  dreadful  propensity  for  being  poor―which  is one  very 
strong  argument  in  favour  of Matrimony,  but  I need  not  dwell  on  such 
arguments  with  you,  pretty  Dear,  you  do  not  want inclination.―Well, 
I  shall  say,  as  I  have  often  said  before,  Do  not  be  in  a  hurry;  depend 
upon  it,  the  right  Man  will  come  at  last; you  will  in  the  course  of the 
next  two  or  three  years,  meet  with  somebody  more  generally  unexcep02
tionable than  anyone  you  have yet known,  who will love you as warmly 
as ever He  did,  and  who will so completely attach you,  that you will feel 
you never really loved before.―And then,  by not beginning the business 
of  Mothering  quite  so early  in  life,  you  will be  young  in  Constitution, 
spirits,  figure  and  countenance,  while  Mrs  Wm  Hammond  is  growing 
old  by  confinements  and  nursing.  Do  none  of the  Plumtres  ever come 
to Balls now?―You have  never mentioned  them  as being at any?―And 
what  do  you  hear  of the  Gipps  or of Fanny and  her  Husband?―Mrs  F. 
A.1  is to be confined the  middle  of April, and  is by no means  remarkably 
Large  for  her.―Aunt  Cassandra  walked  to  Wyards  yesterday  with  Mrs. 
Digweed.  Anna  has  had  a  bad  cold,  looks pale,  and  we fear  something 
else.  She  has  just  weaned  Julia.―How  soon,  the  difference  of temper 
in  Children  appears!―Jemima  has  a  very  irritable  bad  Temper  (her 
Mother  says  so)―and  Julia  a  very  sweet  one,  always  pleased  and 
happy.―I  hope  as Anna  is so early  sensible of it's defects,  that  she will 
give  Jemima's  disposition 
it  must 
require.―I  have  also  heard  lately  from  your  Aunt  Harriot,  and  cannot 
understand  their  plans  in  parting  with  Miss  S―whom  she  seems  very 
much  to  value,  now  that  Harriot  and  Eleanor are  both  of an  age for a 
Governess  to  be  so  useful  to;―especially as  when  Caroline was sent  to 
School  some years,  Miss Bell  was still retained,  though  the  others  were 
then  mere  Nursery  Children.―They have some good reason  I dare say, 
though  I  cannot  penetrate  it,  and  till  I know  what  it  is I shall  invent  a 
bad  one,  and  amuse  myself  with  accounting  for  the  difference  of mea02
sures  by  supposing  Miss  S.  to  be  a  superior  sort  of Woman,  who  has 
never stooped to recommend  herself to the  Master of the family by Flat02
tery,  as Miss Bell did.―I  will  answer your kind questions more than  you 
expect.  Miss Catherine2  is  put  upon  the  Shelve for  the  present,  and  I 
do not know that she will ever come out;―but  I have a something  ready 
for Publication, which  may perhaps  appear  about a twelvemonth  hence. 
It  is  short,  about  the  length  of Catherine.―This  is  for  yourself alone. 
Neither  Mr.  Salusbury nor  Mr.  Wildman  are to know of it. 
the  early  and  steady  attention 
I  am  got  tolerably  well  again,  quite  equal  to  walking  about  and 
enjoying  the  Air; and  by sitting  down  and  resting a good  while  between 
1.  Mrs. Frederick Austen, her sister-in-law. "Confined" means confined for childbirth. 
2.  Presumably Northanger Abbey,  whose heroine is Catherine  Morland. 
LETTERS  ABOUT  PERSUASION 
189 
my  Walks,  I get exercise enough.  I have  a  scheme however  for accom02
plishing  more,  as the  weather  grows springlike.  I mean  to take to  riding 
the  Donkey.  It  will  be  more  indépendant  &  less troublesome  than  the 
use  of the  carriage,  &  I shall  be  able to go  about  with  At Cassandra  in 
her  walks  to  Alton  and  Wyards.―I  hope  you  will  think  Wm.  looking 
well.  He  was bilious the  other  day,  and  Aunt  Cass: supplied  him  with  a 
Dose at his own  request,  which  seemed to have good effect.―I  was  sure 
you  would  have  approved  it.  Wm.  and  I  are  the  best  of friends.  I  love 
him  very  much.  Everything  is so  natural  about  him,  his affections,  his 
Manners  and  his  Drollery.  He  entertains  and  interests  us extremely.― 
Max:  Hammond  and  A.  M.  Shaw  are  people  whom  I cannot  care  for, 
in  themselves,  but  I  enter  into  their  situation  and  am  glad  they  are  so 
happy.―If  I were the Duchess of Richmond, I should  be very miserable 
about  my  son's  choice.  What  can  be  expected  from  a  Paget,  born  and 
brought  up  in  the  centre  of conjugal  Infidelity  &  Divorces?―I will  not 
be  interested  about  Lady Caroline.  I abhor  all the  race of Pagets.―Our 
fears  increase  for  poor  little  Harriet;  the  latest  account  is  that  Sir  Ev: 
Home  is confirmed  in  his  opinion  of there  being water  on  the  brain.― 
I  hope  Heaven  in  its mercy will take her  soon.  Her  poor  Father will be 
quite  worn  out  by his  feelings for  her.―He  cannot  spare  Cassy at  pres02
ent,  she is an  occupation  and  a comfort to  him. 
Adieu  my dearest  Fanny.  Nothing  could be more delicious than  your 
Letter; and  the assurance  of your feeling releived by writing  it,  made  the 
pleasure perfect.―But how could  it possibly be any new idea to you  that 
you have a great deal  of Imagination?―You  are all over  Imagination.― 
The  most astonishing part of your Character is, that with so much  Imag02
ination,  so much  flight  of Mind,  such  unbounded  Fancies,  you  should 
have  such  excellent Judgement  in  what  you  do!―Religious Principle I 
fancy  must  explain  it.―Well,  good bye and  God  bless you. 
Yrs very  affecly 
J.  Austen 
To  Fanny 
Knight 
Chawton,  Sunday  March  23.  [1817] 
I  am  very  much  obliged  to  you  my  dearest  Fanny  for  sending  me  Mr. 
Wildman's  conversation,  I  had  great  amusement  in  reading  it,  and  I 
hope  I am  not  affronted  and  do  not  think  the  worse of him  for  having  a 
Brain  so  very  different  from  mine,  but  my  strongest  sensation  of all  is 
astonishment  at your  being able to press him  on  the  subject so persever-
ingly―and  I agree with  your  Papa,  that  it was not fair.  When  he  knows 
the  truth  he  will  be  uncomfortable.―You  are  the  oddest  Creature!― 
Nervous  enough  in  some  respects,  but  in  others  perfectly  without 
nerves!―Quite  unrepulsible,  hardened  and  impudent.  Do  not  oblige 
him  to  read  any  more.―Have  mercy  on  him,  tell  him  the  truth  and 
190 
JANE  AUSTEN 
make him  an  apology.  He  and  I should  not  in  the  least agree of course, 
in  our  ideas  of  Novels  and  Heroines;―pictures  of  perfection  as  you 
know  make  me  sick  and  wicked―but  there  is some  very good  sense  in 
what  he  says, and  I particularly  respect him  for wishing to think  well of 
all  young  Ladies; it  shews  an  amiable  and  a  delicate  Mind.―And  he 
deserves  better  treatment  than  to  be  obliged  to  read  any  more  of  my 
Works.―Do  not  be  surprised  at  finding  Uncle  Henry  acquainted  with 
my  having  another  ready  for  publication.  I  could  not  say  No  when  he 
asked  me,  but  he  knows  nothing  more  of it.―You  will  not  like  it,  so 
you  need  not be impatient.  You may  perhaps  like the  Heroine,  as she is 
almost too good for me.―Many thanks for your kind care for my  health; 
I  certainly  have  not  been  well for  many  weeks,  and  about  a week ago I 
was very poorly,  I have  had  a good deal  of fever at times and  indifferent 
nights,  but  am  considerably  better  now,  and  recovering  my  Looks  a 
little,  which  have  been  bad  enough,  black and  white  and  every  wrong 
colour.  I  must  not  depend  upon  being  ever very blooming again.  Sick02
ness is a dangerous  Indulgence at my time of Life.  Thank you for every02
thing  you  tell  me;―I  do  not  feel  worthy  of it  by  anything  I can  say  in 
return,  but  I assure  you  my  pleasure  in  your  Letters is quite  as great as 
ever,  and  I am  interested and  amused  just as you could wish me.  If  there 
is a Miss Marsden,  I perceive whom  she will  marry. 
Eveng.―I  was  languid  and  dull  and  very bad  company  when  I wrote 
the  above;  I  am  better  now―to  my  own  feelings  at  least―and  wish  I 
may  be  more  agréable.  We  are going  to  have  Rain,  and  after  that,  very 
pleasant genial weather,  which  will exactly do for me,  as my Saddle will 
then  be  completed―and  air  and  exercise is what  I want.  Indeed  I shall 
be  very  glad  when  the  event  at  Scarlets3  is  over,  the  expectation  of it 
keeps us  in  a worry,  your  Grandmama  especially; she sits brooding  over 
Evils  which  cannot  be  remedied  and  Conduct  impossible to  be  under02
stood.―Now,  the  reports  from  Keppel  St.  are  rather  better,  little  Har02
riet's headaches are abated,  and  Sir Evd: is satisfied with  the effect  of the 
Mercury,  and  does  not  despair  of a  Cure.  The  Complaint  I  find  is  not 
considered  Incurable  nowadays,  provided  the  Patient  be  young  enough 
not  to  have  the  Head  hardened.  The  Water  in  that  case may  be drawn 
off by Mercury.  But though  this is a new idea to us,  perhaps  it may  have 
been  long  familiar  to  you,  through  your  friend  Mr.  Scud:―I hope  his 
high  renown  is maintained  by driving  away William's cough.  Tell  Wil02
liam  that  Triggs  is  as  beautiful  and  condescending  as  ever,  and  was  so 
good as to dine  with  us today,  and  tell him  that  I often  play at Nines  and 
think  of him.―Anna  has  not  a  chance  of escape; her  husband  called 
here  the  other  day,  and  said  she was pretty  well but  not  equal  to so long 
a  walk; she  must  come  in  her  Donkey  Carriage.―Poor  Animal,  she will 
be  worn  out  before  she  is thirty.―I  am  very sorry for  her.―Mrs  Clem-
3.  Home of Mr.  and Mrs.  James  Leigh Perrot,  Austen's uncle and aunt. 
BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE  OF  THE  AUTHOR 
191 
ent  too  is  in  that  way  again.  I  am  quite  tired  of so  many  Children.― 
Mrs Benn has a  13th.―The Papillons came back on  friday  night,  but  I 
have  not  seen  them  yet,  as  I do  not  venture  to  Church.  I cannot  hear 
however,  but  that  they  are  the  same  Mr.  P.  and  his  sister they  used  to 
be.  She has  engaged  a  new  Maidservant  in  Mrs.  Calker's room,  whom 
she means to make also Housekeeper under herself.―Old Philmore was 
buried  yesterday,  and  I, by way of saying something  to Triggs, observed 
that  it had been a very handsome  Funeral,  but his manner  of reply  made 
me  suppose  that  it was  not  generally esteemed  so.  I can  only be sure of 
one  part  being  very  handsome,  Triggs  himself,  walking  behind  in  his 
Green  Coat.―Mrs. Philmore attended  as chief  Mourner,  in Bombasin, 
made  very short,  and  flounced  with  Crape. 
Tuesday.―I  have had  various plans as to this Letter, but  at last I have 
determined  that  Un: Henry  shall  forward  it from  London.  I want  to see 
how  Canterbury  looks in  the  direction.―When  once  Une.  H.  has  left 
us I shall wish  him  with  you.  London  is become a hateful  place to  him, 
and  he  is always depressed  by the  idea  of it.―I hope  he  will be  in  time 
for  your  sick.  I am  sure  he  must  do  that  part  of his  Duty  as excellently 
as all the  rest.  He  returned  yesterday  from  Steventon,  & was with  us by 
breakfast,  bringing  Edward  with  him,  only  that  Edwd  staid  to  breakfast 
at  Wyards.  We  had  a  pleasant  family-day,  for  the  Altons  dined  with 
us;―the  last visit of the  kind  probably,  which  she will be able to pay  us 
for many a month;―Very well, to be able to do it so long, for she  expects 
much  about  this  day  three  weeks,  and  is generally  very  exact.―I  hope 
your  own  Henry  is  in  France and  that  you  have  heard  from  him.  The 
Passage once over,  he will feel  all Happiness.―I  took my  1st ride yester02
day  and  liked  it  very  much.  I  went  up  Mounters  Lane,  and  round  by 
where the new Cottages are to be, and  found  the exercise and  everything 
very  pleasant,  and  I  had  the  advantage  of agréable  companions,  as  At 
Cass:  and  Edward  walked  by  my  side.―At  Cass,  is  such  an  excellent 
Nurse,  so assiduous  and  unwearied!―But  you  know all that  already.― 
J.  Austen 
Very affecly  Yours 
HENRY  AUSTEN 
Biographical  Notice  of  the  Author t 
The  following  pages  are  the  production  of a  pen  which  has  already 
contributed  in  no small degree  to the  entertainment  of the  public.  And 
when  the  public,  which  has  not  been  insensible to the  merits  of "Sense 
and  Sensibility,"  "Pride  and  Prejudice,"  "Mansfield  Park,"  and 
t  Preface to Northanger  Abbey  and  Persuasion,  London,  1818. All  notes are by the editor of this 
Norton Critical  Edition. 
192 
HENRY  AUSTEN 
"Emma," shall be informed  that the hand  which  guided  that pen  is now 
mouldering  in  the  grave, perhaps a brief account of Jane Austen  will be 
read  with  a kindlier sentiment than  simple curiosity. 
Short  and  easy will be the  task of the  mere  biographer.  A life  of use02
fulness,  literature,  and  religion,  was  not  by  any  means  a  life  of event. 
To  those  who  lament  their  irreparable  loss,  it  is  consolatory  to  think 
that,  as she never deserved disapprobation,  so, in the circle of her family 
and  friends,  she never met reproof; that her wishes were not only reason02
able,  but  gratified;  and  that  to  the  little  disappointments  incidental  to 
human  life was never added,  even for a moment,  an abatement of good02
will  from  any who  knew  her. 
Jane Austen  was born  on  the  16th of December,  1775,  at Steventon, 
in the  county  of Hants.1  Her father  was Rector of that parish  upwards of 
forty  years.  There  he  resided,  in  the  conscientious and  unassisted  dis02
charge  of his  ministerial  duties,  until  he  was  turned  of seventy  years. 
Then  he  retired  with  his wife,  our authoress,  and  her sister, to Bath,  for 
the  remainder  of his  life,  a period  of about  four  years.  Being  not  only a 
profound  scholar,  but  possessing a  most  exquisite taste  in  every species 
of  literature,  it is not  wonderful  that  his daughter  Jane  should,  at a very 
early age,  have become sensible to the  charms of style,  and  enthusiastic 
in  the/fultivation  of her  own  language.  On  the  death  of her  father  she 
removed,  with  her  mother  and  sister, for a short time,  to  Southampton, 
and  finally,  in  1809, to  the  pleasant  village  of Chawton,  in  the  same 
county.  From  this  place she  sent into  the  world  those  novels, which by 
many  have  been  placed  on  the  same  shelf  as  the  works  of a  D'Arblay 
and  an  Edgeworth.2  Some  of these  novels had  been  the  gradual  perfor02
mances of her  previous  life.  For though  in  composition she was equally 
rapid  and  correct,  yet  an  invincible  distrust  of  her  own  judgement 
induced  her  to  withhold  her  works from  the  public,  till time  and  many 
perusals  had  satisfied  her  that  the  charm  of recent composition was dis02
solved. The natural  constitution,  the regular habits, the quiet and happy 
occupations  of our  authoress,  seemed  to  promise  a  long  succession of 
amusement  to  the  public,  and  a  gradual  increase of reputation  to  her02
self.  But the  symptoms  of a  decay,  deep  and  incurable,  began  to  shew 
themselves  in  the  commencement  of  1816.  Her  decline  was  at  first 
deceitfully  slow;  and  until  the  spring  of  this  present  year,  those  who 
knew  their  happiness  to  be  involved  in  her  existence could  not  endure 
to despair.  But in  the  month  of May,  1817, it was found  advisable  that 
she should  be removed to Winchester for the benefit of constant medical 
aid,  which  none  even  then  dared  to hope  would  be permanently  bene02
ficial.  She  supported,  during  two  months,  all  the  varying  pain,  irk-
someness,  and  tedium,  attendant  on  decaying  nature,  with  more  than 
1.  Hampshire. 
2.  Frances  Bumey  (1752-1840),  whose  married  name  was  D'Arblay,  and  Maria  Edgeworth 
(1767-1849),  both popular novelists. 
BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE  OF  THE  AUTHOR 
193 
resignation,  with  a truly  elastic cheerfulness.  She retained  her  faculties, 
her  memory,  her  fancy,  her  temper,  and  her  affections,  warm,  clear, 
and  unimpaired,  to the  last.  Neither  her  love of God,  nor  of her  fellow 
creatures flagged for a moment.  She made  a point  of receiving the sacra02
ment  before  excessive bodily weakness  might  have  rendered  her  percep02
tion  unequal  to her  wishes.  She wrote  whilst she could  hold  a pen,  and 
with  a pencil when  a pen  was become too laborious.  T he day  preceding 
her  death  she  composed  some  stanzas  replete  with  fancy  and  vigour. 
Her last voluntary  speech conveyed thanks  to her  medical attendant;  and 
to  the  final  question  asked  of her,  purporting  to  know  her  wants,  she 
replied,  "I want  nothing  but  death." 
She  expired  shortly  after,  on  Friday  the  18th  of July,  1817,  in  the 
arms  of her  sister,  who,  as  well  as  the  relator  of these  events,  feels  too 
surely  that  they  shall  never  look upon  her  like again. 
Jane  Austen  was  buried  on  the  24th  of July,  1817, in  the  cathedral 
church  of  Winchester,  which,  in  the  whole  catalogue  of  its  mighty 
dead,  does  not  contain  the  ashes  of  a  brighter  genius  or  a  sincerer 
Christian. 
Of personal  attractions  she possessed a considerable share.  Her  stature 
was  that  of  true  elegance.  It  could  not  have  been  increased  without 
exceeding  the  middle  height.  Her  carriage  and  deportment  were  quiet, 
yet  graceful.  Her  features  were  separately  good.  Their  assemblage  pro02
duced  an  unrivalled  expression  of  that  cheerfulness,  sensibility,  and 
benevolence,  which  were  her  real  characteristics.  Her  complexion  was 
of the finest texture.  It might with  truth  be said,  that  her  eloquent  blood 
spoke  through  her  modest  cheek.  Her  voice was  extremely  sweet.  She 
delivered  herself  with  fluency  and  precision.  Indeed  she was formed  for 
elegant  and  rational  society,  excelling  in  conversation  as  much  as  in 
composition.  In  the  present  age it is hazardous  to  mention  accomplish02
ments.  Our  authoress  would,  probably,  have  been  inferior  to  few  in 
such  acquirements,  had  she  not  been  so  superior  to  most  in  higher 
things.  She  had  not  only  an  excellent  taste  for  drawing,  but,  in  her 
earlier  days,  evinced  great  power  of  hand  in  the  management  of  the 
pencil.3  Her  own  musical  attainments  she  held  very  cheap.  Twenty 
years  ago  they  would  have  been  thought  more  of,  and  twenty  years 
hence  many  a  parent  will  expect  their  daughters  to  be  applauded  for 
meaner  performances.  She  was  fond  of dancing,  and  excelled  in  it.  It 
remains now to add  a few observations on that which  her friends  deemed 
more  important,  on  those  endowments  which  sweetened  every  hour  of 
their lives. 
If  there  be  an  opinion  current  in  the  world,  that  perfect  placidity of 
temper  is not reconcileable to the most lively imagination,  and the  keen02
est relish  for wit,  such  an  opinion  will be  rejected for ever by those  who 
3.  For drawing. 
194 
HENRY  AUSTEN 
have had  the  happiness  of knowing the authoress  of the following works. 
Though  the  frailties,  foibles,  and  follies  of others  could  not  escape  her 
immediate  detection,  yet even  on  their  vices did  she  never  trust  herself 
to  comment  with  unkindness.  The  affectation  of  candour4  is  not 
uncommon;  but  she  had  no  affectation.  Faultless  herself,  as  nearly  as 
human  nature  can  be,  she  always sought,  in  the  faults  of others,  some 
thing  to excuse, to forgive or forget.  Where extenuation  was impossible, 
she had  a sure refuge  in silence.  She never uttered  either a hasty, a silly, 
or  a  severe expression.  In  short,  her  temper  was  as polished  as her  wit. 
Nor were her  manners  inferior to her temper.  They were of the  happiest 
kind.  No  one  could  be  often  in  her  company  without  feeling  a  strong 
desire  of  obtaining  her  friendship,  and  cherishing  a  hope  of  having 
obtained  it.  She was tranquil  without  reserve or stiffness; and  communi 
cative  without  intrusion  or  self-sufficiency.  She  became  an  authoress 
entirely  from  taste and  inclination.  Neither  the  hope  of fame  nor  profit 
mixed  with  her  early  motives.  Most  of her  works,  as  before  observed, 
were  composed  many  years  previous  to  their  publication.  It  was  with 
extreme  difficulty  that  her  friends,  whose partiality  she suspected  whilst 
she  honoured  their  judgement,  could  prevail  on  her  to publish  her first 
work.  Nay,  so  persuaded  was  she  that  its  sale  would  not  repay  the 
expense  of publication,  that  she  actually  made  a  reserve from  her  very 
moderate  income to  meet  the  expected loss.  She could  scarcely believe 
what  she  termed  her  great  good  fortune  when  "Sense  and  Sensibility" 
produced  a clear profit of about  05150.  Few so gifted were so truly  unpre 
tending.  She  regarded  the  above  sum  as  a  prodigious  recompense  for 
that  which  had  cost her  nothing.  Her readers,  perhaps,  will wonder  that 
such  a  work  produced  so  little  at  a  time  when  some  authors  have 
received  more  guineas  than  they  have  written  lines.  The  works  of our 
authoress,  however,  may  live as  long  as those  which  have  burst  on  the 
world  with  more  éclat.5  But  the  public  has  not  been  unjust;  and  our 
authoress  was  far  from  thinking  it  so.  Most  gratifying  to  her  was  the 
applause  which from  time to time reached her ears from  those who were 
competent to discriminate.  Still,  in  spite of such  applause,  so much  did 
she  shrink  from  notoriety,  that  no  accumulation  of fame  would  have 
induced  her,  had  she  lived,  to affix  her  name  to any productions  of her 
pen.  In  the  bosom  of her own  family she talked of them  freely,  thankful 
for  praise,  open  to  remark,  and  submissive  to  criticism.  But  in  public 
she turned  away from  any allusion  to the  character of an  authoress.  She 
read  aloud  with  very  great  taste  and  effect.  Her  own  works,  probably, 
were  never heard  to so much  advantage  as from her own  mouth;  for she 
partook  largely in  all  the  best gifts  of the  comic  muse.  She was a  warm 
and  judicious admirer  of landscape,  both  in  nature  and  on  canvass. At 
4.  Generosity. 
5.  Brilliance,  dazzling effect. 
BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE  OF  THE  AUTHOR 
195 
a  very early  age she was enamoured  of Gilpin 6  on  the  Picturesque;  and 
she seldom  changed  her  opinions  either on  books or  men. 
Her  reading  was  very  extensive  in  history  and  belles lettres; and  her 
memory  extremely tenacious.  Her  favourite  moral writers were Johnson 
in  prose,  and  Cowper  in  verse.7  It is difficult  to say at what  age she  was 
not  intimately  acquainted  with  the  merits  and  defects  of the  best essays 
and  novels  in  the  English  language.  Richardson's8  power  of  creating, 
and  preserving the consistency of his characters, as particularly exempli02
fied  in  "Sir Charles  Grandison,"  gratified  the  natural  discrimination  of 
her  mind,  whilst her  taste secured  her  from  the  errors  of his prolix style 
and  tedious  narrative.  She did  not  rank  any  work  of Fielding9 quite  so 
high.  Without  the  slightest  affectation  she  recoiled  from  every  thing 
gross.  Neither  nature,  wit,  nor  humour,  could  make  her  amends  for so 
very low a scale of morals. 
Her  power  of inventing  characters seems to  have  been  intuitive,  and 
almost  unlimited.  She drew from  nature;  but,  whatever  may  have  been 
surmised  to the  contrary,  never  from  individuals. 
The  style of her  familiar  correspondence  was  in  all  respects the  same 
as that  of her  novels.  Every thing  came  finished  from  her  pen; for on  all 
subjects  she had  ideas as clear as her  expressions were well chosen.  It is 
not hazarding too much  to say that  she  never dispatched  a note  or letter 
unworthy of publication. 
One  trait  only  remains  to  be  touched  on.  It  makes  all  others  unim02
portant.  She  was  thoroughly  religious  and  devout;  fearful  of  giving 
offence  to God,  and  incapable of feeling it towards any  fellow creature. 
On  serious subjects she was well-instructed,  both by reading and  medita02
tion,  and  her  opinions  accorded  strictly  with  those  of our  Established 
Church. 
London,  Dec.  13, 1817. 
POSTSCRIPT 
Since concluding the above remarks,  the  writer of them  has been  put 
in  possession  of some  extracts  from  the  private  correspondence  of  the 
authoress.  They are few and  short; but  are submitted  to the  public  with02
out  apology,  as  being  more  truly  descriptive  of her  temper,  taste,  feel02
ings,  and  principles  than  any  thing  which  the  pen  of a  biographer  can 
produce. 
The first extract is a playful  defence  of herself from a mock charge of 
6.  William Gilpin  (1724-1804)  articulated  a theory of the picturesque in  Three  Essays: On  Pic02
turesque Beauty,  On  Picturesque Travel,  and  On  Sketching Landscape  (1792). 
7.  Samuel Johnson (1709-1784),  essayist and author of the moral tale Rasselas; William Cowper 
(1731-1800),  poet, author of  ThfTask* 
8.  Samuel Richardson  (1689-1761),  didactic novelist,  who  published  Sir Charles  Grandison  in 
1753. 
9.  Henry Fielding (1707-1754),  whose best-known novel was Tom  Jones. 
196 
[RICHARD  WHATELEY] 
having  pilfered  the  manuscripts  of a young  relation. 
"What  should  I  do,  my  dearest  E.  with  your  manly,  vigorous 
sketches,  so full  of life  and  spirit? How  could  I possibly join them  on  to 
a  little  bit  of ivory,  two  inches  wide,  on  which  I work  with  a  brush  so 
fine  as to produce  little effect  after  much  labour?" 
The  remaining  extracts are from  various parts  of a letter written  a few 
weeks before her  death. 
"My  attendant  is encouraging,  and  talks  of making  me  quite  well.  I 
live  chiefly  on  the  sofa,  but  am  allowed  to  walk  from  one  room  to  the 
other.  I  have  been  out  once  in  a  sedan-chair,  and  am  to  repeat  it,  and 
be  promoted  to  a  wheel-chair  as  the  weather  serves.  On  this  subject I 
will only say further  that my dearest sister, my tender,  watchful,  indefat02
igable  nurse,  has  not  been  made  ill by  her  exertions.  As to what  I  owe 
to  her,  and  to  the  anxious  affection  of all  my  beloved  family  on  this 
occasion,  I  can  only  cry  over  it,  and  pray  to  God  to  bless them  more 
and  more." 
She  next touches  with  just and  gentle  animadversion  on  a  subject of 
domestic  disappointment.  Of  this  the  particulars  do  not  concern  the 
public.  Yet in  justice to her characteristic sweetness and  resignation,  the 
concluding  observation  of  our  authoress  thereon  must  not  be  sup02
pressed. 
"But  I am  getting  too near complaint.  It has been the appointment of 
God,  however  secondary  causes may have  operated." 
The  following and  final  extract will prove  the  facility with  which  she 
could  correct  every  impatient  thought,  and  turn  from  complaint  to 
cheerfulness. 
"You  will  find  Captain 
a  very  respectable,  well-meaning 
man,  without  much  manner,  his  wife  and  sister all  good  humour  and 
obligingness,  and  I hope  (since the  fashion  allows it) with  rather  longer 
petticoats than  last year." 
London,  Dec.  20, 1817. 
[RICHARD  WHATELEY] 
[A  New  Style  of  Novel] t 
The times seem to be past when  an apology was requisite from  review02
ers  for  condescending  to  notice  a  novel;  when  they  felt  themselves 
bound  in  dignity  to  deprecate  the  suspicion  of paying  much  regard  to 
such  trifles,  and  pleaded  the  necessity  of  occasionally  stooping  to 
humour  the  taste  of  their  fair  readers.  The  delights  of  fiction,  if  not 
t  From  [Richard  Whateley],  Review  of  Northanger  Abbey  and  Persuasion,  Quarterly  Review 
24(1821):  352-75.  All  notes are by the editor of this Norton Critical Edition. 
[A  NEW  STYLE  OF  NOVEL] 
197 
more  keenly  or  more  generally  relished,  are  at  least  more  readily 
acknowledged  by men  of sense and  taste; and  we have  lived to  hear  the 
merits of the  best of this class of writings  earnestly discussed  by some of 
the  ablest scholars and  soundest  reasoners of the  present  day. 
We are inclined to attribute  this change,  not so much  to an  alteration 
in  the  public  taste,  as  in  the  character  of the  productions  in  question. 
Novels  may  not,  perhaps,  display  more  genius  now  than  formerly,  but 
they  contain  more  solid sense; they  may  not  afford  higher  gratification, 
but  it is of a nature  which  men  are less disposed  to be ashamed  of avow02
ing.  We  remarked,  in  a  former  Number,  in  reviewing  a  work  of  the 
author  now  before  us,  that  'a  new  style  of novel  has  arisen,  within  the 
last fifteen or twenty  years, differing  from  the  former  in  the  points  upon 
which  the  interest  hinges;  neither  alarming  our  credulity  nor  amusing 
our  imagination  by  wild  variety  of  incident,  or  by  those  pictures  of 
romantic  affection  and  sensibility, which  were  formerly  as certain  attri02
butes  of fictitious characters as they  are  of rare  occurrence among  those 
who  actually  live and  die.  The  substitute  for  these  excitements,  which 
had  lost much  of their poignancy by the  repeated  and  injudicious  use of 
them,  was  the  art  of  copying  from  nature  as  she  really  exists  in  the 
common walks of life,  and  presenting  to the reader,  instead of the  splen02
did  scenes of an  imaginary  world,  a  correct and  striking  representation 
of that  which  is daily taking place around  him.' 
Now,  though  the  origin  of this new school of fiction may probably  be 
traced, as we there suggested,  to the exhaustion  of the mines from  which 
materials for  entertainment  had  been  hitherto  extracted,  and  the  neces02
sity of gratifying  the  natural  craving of the  reader  for variety,  by  striking 
into  an  untrodden  path;  the  consequences  resulting  from  this  change 
have  been  far  greater  than  the  mere  supply  of this  demand.  When  this 
Flemish  painting,  as  it were,  is introduced―this  accurate  and  unexag-
gerated  delineation  of events and  characters―it necessarily follows,  that 
a  novel,  which  makes  good  its pretensions  of giving  a  perfectly  correct 
picture  of common  life,  becomes a  far  more  instructive  work  than  one 
of equal  or superior  merit of the  other  class; it guides the  judgment,  and 
supplies  a kind  of artificial  experience.  It is a  remark  of the  great  father 
of  criticism,1  that  poetry  (i.e.,  narrative,  and  dramatic  poetry)  is  of a 
more philosophical character than  history; inasmuch  as the  latter details 
what  has  actually  happened,  of which  many  parts  may  chance  to  be 
exceptions to the general rules of probability, and  consequently  illustrate 
no general principles; whereas the former  shews us what  must  naturally, 
or would  probably,  happen  under given circumstances; and thus displays 
to  us  a  comprehensive  view  of  human  nature,  and  furnishes  general 
rules  of practical wisdom.  It is evident,  that  this will apply  only to  such 
fictions as are quite  perfect  in  respect of the probability of their story; and 
1.  Aristotle. 
198 
[RICHARD  WHATELEY] 
that  he,  therefore,  who  resorts  to  the  fabulist  rather  than  the  historian, 
for  instruction  in  human  character  and  conduct,  must  throw  himself 
entirely on  the  judgment  and  skill of his teacher, and  give him  credit for 
talents  much  more  rare  than  the  accuracy  and  veracity  which  are  the 
chief  requisites in  history.  We fear,  therefore,  that  the exultation  which 
we can  conceive some  of our  gentle readers  to feel,  at having Aristotle's 
warrant  for (what probably  they had  never dreamed  of) the 
philosophical 
character  of their  studies,  must,  in  practice,  be  somewhat  qualified,  by 
those  sundry  little violations of probability  which  are  to be  met  with  in 
most  novels; and  which  so far  lower their  value,  as  models  of real  life, 
that a person who had  no other preparation  for the world than  is afforded 
by  them,  would  form,  probably,  a  less accurate  idea  of things  as  they 
are,  than  he  would  of a  lion  from  studying  merely  the  representations 
on  China  tea-pots. 
Accordingly,  a heavy complaint has long lain against works of fiction, 
as giving a false picture  of what they profess to imitate,  and  disqualifying 
their readers  for the  ordinary  scenes and  everyday duties  of life.  And  this 
charge applies, we apprehend,  to the generality of what are strictly called 
novels,  with  even  more  justice than  to  romances.  When  all the charac02
ters  and  events  are  very  far  removed  from  what  we  see  around  us,― 
when,  perhaps,  even supernatural  agents are introduced,  the reader  may 
indulge,  indeed,  in occasional day-dreams,  but will be so little  reminded 
of what  he  has been  reading,  by any thing  that occurs in actual  life,  that 
though  he  may perhaps  feel  some disrelish  for the tameness of the scene 
before  him,  compared  with  the  fairy-land  he  has  been  visiting,  yet  at 
least his  judgment  will not  be depraved,  nor  his expectations misled; he 
will not apprehend  a meeting with  Algerine 2  banditti  on  English shores, 
nor  regard  the  old  woman  who  shews  him  about  an  antique  country 
seat,  as  either  an  enchantress  or  the  keeper  of an  imprisoned  damsel. 
But  it is otherwise  with  those  fictions  which  differ  from  common  life  in 
little  or  nothing  but  the  improbability  of the  occurrences: the  reader  is 
insensibly  led  to  calculate  upon  some  of  those  lucky  incidents  and 
opportune  coincidences of which  he  has  been  so  much  accustomed  to 
read,  and  which,  it is undeniable,  may  take place in  real life; and  to  feel 
a  sort of confidence, that  however romantic  his conduct  may be, and  in 
whatever  difficulties  it  may  involve  him,  all  will  be  sure  to  come  right 
at last,  as is invariably the  case with  the  hero  of a novel. 
On  the  other  hand,  so  far  as  these  pernicious  effects  fail  to  be  pro02
duced,  so  far  does  the  example  lose  its  influence,  and  the  exercise of 
poetical  justice is rendered  vain.  The  reward  of virtuous  conduct  being 
brought  about  by fortunate  accidents, he  who abstains (taught,  perhaps, 
by  bitter disappointments)  from  reckoning on  such  accidents, wants  that 
encouragement  to  virtue,  which  alone  has  been  held  out  to  him.  'If I 
2.  Algerian. 
[A  N EW  STYLE  OF  NOVEL] 
199 
were a man  in a  novel,'  we remember to have heard  an  ingenious  friend 
observe,  'I  should  certainly  act  so  and  so,  because  I  should  be  sure  of 
being  no  loser by the  most  heroic  self-devotion,  and  of ultimately  suc02
ceeding in  the  most daring enterprises. ' 
# 
* 
* 
When,  therefore,  the  generality,  even  of the  most  approved  novels, 
were of this character,  (to say nothing  of the heavier charges brought,  of 
inflaming  the  passions of young  persons  by warm  descriptions,  weaken02
ing  their  abhorrence  of profligacy  by  exhibiting  it  in  combination  with 
the  most  engaging  qualities,  and  presenting  vice  in  all  its  allurements, 
while setting forth  the  triumphs of  virtue  rewarded')  it is not to be  won02
dered  that  the  grave  guardians  of youth  should  have  generally  stigma02
tized  the  whole  class,  as  'serving  only  to  fill  young  people's  heads  with 
romantic love-stories, and  rendering  them  unfit  to mind  any thing  else.' 
That  this  censure  and  caution  should  in  many  instances be  indiscrimi02
nate,  can surprize  no one,  who  recollects how  rare a quality  discrimina02
tion  is; and  how  much  better  it suits  indolence,  as well as ignorance,  to 
lay down a rule,  than  to ascertain the exceptions to it: we are  acquainted 
with  a  careful  mother  whose  daughters,  while  they  never  in  their  lives 
read  a  novel  of any  kind,  are  permitted  to  peruse,  without  reserve,  any 
plays  that  happen  to fall  in their way; and  with  another,  from  whom  no 
lessons,  however  excellent, of wisdom  and  piety,  contained  in  a  prose-
fiction,  can  obtain  quarter;  but  who,  on  the  other hand,  is no  less indis02
criminately  indulgent  to  her  children  in  the  article  of tales  in  verse,  of 
whatever  character. 
The  change,  however,  which  we  have  already  noticed,  as  having 
taken  place in the  character of several modern  novels, has operated  in  a 
considerable degree to do  away this prejudice; and  has elevated this  spe02
cies of composition,  in  some respects at  least,  into a much  higher  class. 
For  most of that  instruction  which  used  to be presented  to the  world  in 
the  shape  of formal  dissertations,  or  shorter  and  more  desultory  moral 
essays,  such  as those of the  Spectator and  Rambler,3 we may  now  resort 
to the  pages  of the  acute  and  judicious,  but  not  less amusing,  novelists 
who  have lately appeared.  If their views of men  and  manners  are no less 
just than  those  of the  essayists who  preceded  them,  are  they  to be  rated 
lower  because  they  present  to  us  these  views,  not  in  the  language  of 
general description,  but  in  the  form  of well-constructed  fictitious  narra02
tive? If the  practical lessons they  inculcate are  no  less sound  and  useful, 
it is surely no diminution  of their merit that they are conveyed by exam02
ple instead  of precept:  nor,  if their  remarks  are  neither  less wise nor less 
important,  are they the  less valuable for being represented  as thrown  out 
3.  The Spectator,  the  work  of  Joseph  Addison  and  Richard  Steele,  appeared  daily  from  March 
1711  to December 1712; The Rambler,  by Samuel Johnson,  was published  from  1750 to  1752. 
Both periodicals consisted of short essays, often with moral emphasis. 
200 
[RICHARD  WHATELEY] 
in  the  course  of  conversations  suggested  by  the  circumstances  of  the 
speakers,  and  perfectly in  character. The praise and  blame of the  moral 
ist  are  surely  not  the  less  effectual  for  being  bestowed,  not  in  general 
declamation,  on  classes of men,  but  on  individuals  representing  those 
classes,  who  are  so  clearly  delineated  and  brought  into  action  before 
us,  that  we  seem  to  be  acquainted  with  them,  and  feel  an  interest  in 
their  fate. 
Biography  is allowed,  on  all  hands,  to  be  one  of the  most  attractive 
and  profitable  kinds of reading:  now such  novels as we have been  speak 
ing of,  being a kind  of fictitious biography,  bear the same relation to the 
real,  that  epic  and  tragic  poetry,  according  to  08ristode,  bear to  history: 
they  present  us  (supposing,  of course,  each  perfect  in  its kind) with  the 
general,  instead  of  the  particular,―the  probable,  instead  of the  true; 
and,  by  leaving  out  those  accidental  irregularities,  and  exceptions  to 
general  rules,  which  constitute  the  many  improbabilities  of real  narra 
tive,  present  us  with  a  clear  and  abstracted  view  of the  general  rules 
themselves; and  thus  concentrate,  as it were,  into a small compass,  the 
net  result of wide experience. 
Among  the  authors  of this  school there  is no  one  superior,  if equal, 
to the  lady  whose  last production  is now  before  us,  and  whom  we  have 
much  regret  in  finally  taking  leave  of: her  death  (in  the  prime  of  life, 
considered  as  a  writer) being  announced  in  this  the  first  publication  to 
which  her  name  is prefixed.  We  regret  the  failure  not  only  of a  source 
of  innocent  amusement,  but  also of that  supply  of practical good  sense 
and  instructive  example,  which  she  would  probably  have  continued  to 
furnish  better than  any  of her  contemporaries. 
*  *  * 
Miss  Austen  has  the  merit  (in  our  judgment  most  essential) of being 
evidentiy  a Christian  writer: a  merit  which  is much  enhanced,  both  on 
the  score of good taste,  and  of practical utility,  by her  religion being  not 
at  all  obtrusive.  She  might  defy  the  most  fastidious  critic to  call  any of 
her  novels, (as C04lebs4 was designated,  we will not say altogether  with 
out  reason,) a  'dramatic  sermon.'  The  subject is rather  alluded  to,  and 
that  incidentally,  than  studiously  brought  forward  and  dwelt  upon.  In 
fact  she  is  more  sparing  of it than  would  be  thought  desirable by  some 
persons;  perhaps  even  by  herself,  had  she  consulted  merely  her  own 
sentiments;  but  she  probably  introduced  it  as  far  as she  thought  would 
be  generally acceptable and  profitable: for when  the  purpose  of inculca 
ting a religious principle is made too palpably prominent,  many  readers, 
if they do  not  throw  aside the  book with  disgust,  are apt  to fortify  them 
selves  with  that  respectful  kind  of apathy  with  which  they  undergo  a 
4.  C04lebs  in Search  of a  Wife ( 1809),  a highly didactic novel―with considerably more instruction 
than fiction―by Hannah More. 
[A  NEW  STYLE  OF  NOVEL] 
201 
regular  sermon,  and  prepare  themselves as they  do  to  swallow a dose of 
medicine,  endeavouring  to get  it  down  in  large gulps,  without  tasting  it 
more than  is necessary. 
The  moral  lessons  also  of  this  lady's  novels,  though  clearly  and 
impressively conveyed,  are  not  offensively  put  forward,  but  spring  inci02
dentally  from  the  circumstances  of the  story; they  are  not  forced  upon 
the  reader,  but  he  is left  to  collect  them  (though  without  any  difficulty) 
for  himself: her's  is that  unpretending  kind  of instruction  which  is  fur02
nished  by  real  life;  and  certainly  no  author  has  ever  conformed  more 
closely  to  real  life,  as  well  in  the  incidents,  as  in  the  characters  and 
descriptions.  Her  fables  appear  to  us  to  be,  in  their  own  way,  nearly 
faultless; they  do  not  consist (like those  of some of the  writers who  have 
attempted  this  kind  of common-life novel writing) of a string  of uncon02
nected  events which  have  little or no bearing  on  one  main  plot,  and  are 
introduced  evidently  for  the  sole purpose  of bringing  in  characters  and 
conversations; but  have all that  compactness of plan  and  unity  of action 
which  is generally  produced  by  a  sacrifice  of probability: yet  they  have 
little  or  nothing  that  is not  probable; the  story  proceeds  without  the  aid 
of extraordinary  accidents; the  events which  take place are the necessary 
or  natural  consequences of what  has  preceded;  and  yet (which  is a  very 
rare  merit  indeed)  the  final  catastrophe  is scarcely ever  clearly foreseen 
from  the  beginning,  and  very often  comes, upon  the  generality  of read02
ers  at  least,  quite  unexpected.  We  know  not  whether  Miss Austin  ever 
had  access to  the  precepts  of Aristotle; but  there  are  few,  if any,  writers 
of  fiction  who  have  illustrated  them  more successfully. 
The  vivid distinctness of description,  the minute  fidelity  of detail,  and 
air of unstudied  ease in  the scenes represented,  which  are no  less neces02
sary than  probability of incident,  to carry the  reader's  imagination  along 
with  the  story,  and  give  fiction  the  perfect  appearance  of  reality,  she 
possesses  in  a  high  degree;  and  the  object  is  accomplished  with02
out  resorting  to  those  deviations  from  the  ordinary  plan  of  narrative 
in  the  third  person,  which  have  been  patronized  by  some  eminent 
masters. 
* 
*  * 
Miss  Austin,  though  she  has  in  a  few  places  introduced  letters  with 
great effect,  has on the whole conducted her novels on the ordinary  plan, 
describing, without  scruple, private conversations and  uncommunicated 
feelings: but  she has  not  been  forgetful  of the  important  maxim,  so long 
ago illustrated  by Homer,  and  afterwards  enforced by Aristotle, of saying 
as little as possible  in  her  own  person,  and  giving  a  dramatic  air  to  the 
narrative,  by  introducing  frequent  conversations;  which  she  conducts 
with  a regard  to character hardly  exceeded even  by Shakspeare himself. 
Like  him,  she  shows as admirable  a  discrimination  in  the  characters of 
202 
[RICHARD  WHATELEY] 
fools as of people of sense; a merit which  is far from common. To invent, 
indeed,  a conversation  full  of wisdom  or of wit,  requires  that  the  writer 
should  himself possess ability; but  the  converse does  not  hold  good: it is 
no fool that can describe fools well; and  many who have succeeded pretty 
well in painting  superior characters, have failed in giving individuality  to 
those  weaker  ones,  which  it  is necessary to  introduce  in  order  to give a 
faithful  representation  of real  life:  they  exhibit  to  us  mere  folly  in  the 
abstract,  forgetting  that  to  the  eye of a  skilful  naturalist  the  insects on  a 
leaf  present  as  wide  differences  as  exist  between  the  elephant  and  the 
lion.  Slender,  and  Shallow, and  Aguecheek,  as Shakspeare has  painted 
them,  though  equally  fools,  resemble one  another  no  more  than  Rich02
ard,  and  Macbeth,  and  Julius  Caesar; and  Miss Austin's  Mrs.  Bennet, 
Mr.  Rushworth,  and  Miss  Bates,  are  no  more  alike  than  her  Darcy, 
Knightley,  and  Edmund  Bertram.5  Some have  complained,  indeed,  of 
finding  her fools too much  like nature,  and  consequently tiresome; there 
is no disputing  about tastes; all we can say is, that such critics must (what02
ever  deference  they  may  outwardly  pay  to  received  opinions)  find  the 
Merry Wives of Windsor and Twelfth Night very tiresome; and that those 
who  look  with  pleasure  at  Wilkie's  pictures,6  or  those  of  the  Dutch 
school,  must admit  that  excellence of imitation  may confer attraction  on 
that which would  be insipid  or disagreeable in the reality. 
Her  minuteness  of  detail  has  also  been  found  fault  with;  but  even 
where  it  produces,  at  the  time,  a  degree  of tediousness,  we  know  not 
whether  that  can  justly  be  reckoned  a  blemish,  which  is  absolutely 
essential  to  a  very  high  excellence. Now,  it  is  absolutely  impossible, 
without  this,  to  produce  that  thorough  acquaintance  with  the  charac02
ters,  which  is necessary to  make  the  reader  heartily  interested  in  them. 
Let  any  one  cut  out  from  the  Iliad  or  from  Shakspeare's  plays  every 
thing  (we are  far  from  saying that  either  might  not  lose some parts  with 
advantage,  but  let  him  reject every thing) which  is absolutely devoid of 
importance  and  of interest  in  itself; and  he  will find that  what  is left will 
have lost more than  half its charms.  We are convinced that some writers 
have  diminished  the  effect  of their  works  by being  scrupulous  to  admit 
nothing  into them  which  had  not some absolute,  intrinsic, and  indepen02
dent  merit.  They have  acted  like those who  strip  off the  leaves of a  fruit 
tree,  as being of themselves good for  nothing,  with  the  view of securing 
more nourishment  to the fruit,  which  in fact cannot attain  its full  matu02
rity and  flavour  without  them. 
*  *  * 
5.  Mrs. Bennet belongs to Pride and  Prejudice,  Mr. Rushworth  to Mansfield Park, Miss Bates to 
Emma.  The last three  characters  named come respectively from Pride and  Prejudice,  Emma, 
and Mansfield  Park. 
6.  David Wilkie (1785-1841) often  painted such conventionally unpleasant realistic situations as 
"The Rent Day." The Dutch School is known for extremely realistic detail. 
[A  NEW  STYLE  OF  NOVEL] 
203 
But  we  must  proceed  to the  publication  of which  the  title  is prefixed 
to  this  article.  It  contains,  it  seems,  the  earliest and  the  latest  produc02
tions of the author; the first of them  having been purchased,  we are told, 
many  years  back  by  a  bookseller,  who,  for  some  reason  unexplained, 
thought  proper  to  alter  his  mind  and  withhold  it.  We  do  not  much 
applaud  his  taste; for  though  it  is decidedly  inferior  to  her  other  works, 
having  less plot,  and  what  there  is, less artificially wrought  up,  and  also 
less exquisite nicety of moral  painting;  yet the  same  kind  of excellences 
which characterise the other novels may be perceived in this, in a degree 
which  would  have  been  highly  creditable  to  most  other  writers  of  the 
same school, and  which  would  have  entitled  the  author  to  considerable 
praise,  had  she written  nothing  better. 
We already begin to fear,  that we have indulged  too much  in extracts, 
and  we  must  save  some  room  for  'Persuasion'  or  we  could  not  resist 
giving  a  specimen  of John  Thorpe,7  with  his  horse  that  cannot  go less 
than  10  miles  an  hour,  his  refusal  to  drive  his  sister  'because  she  has 
such  thick ankles,' and  his sober consumption  of five pints of port  a day; 
altogether  the  best  portrait  of a  species, which,  though  almost  extinct, 
cannot  yet be  quite  classed among  the  Palaeotheria,  the  Bang-up  Oxo02
nian.8  Miss Thorpe,  the  jilt  of middling  life,  is,  in  her  way,  quite  as 
good,  though  she has  not  the  advantage  of being the  representative  of a 
rare  or a diminishing  species. We fear few of our  readers,  however  they 
may  admire  the  naivete,  will  admit  the  truth  of poor  John  Morland's 
postscript,  'I can  never expect to know such  another  woman.' 
The  latter  of  these  novels,  however,  'Persuasion,'  which  is  more 
strictly to be considered as a posthumous  work,  possesses that  superiority 
which  might  be  expected  from  the  more  mature  age  at  which  it  was 
written,  and  is  second,  we  think,  to  none  of the  former  ones,  if  not 
superior  to  all.  In  the  humorous  delineation  of  character  it  does  not 
abound  quite  so much  as some  of the  others,  though  it  has  great  merit 
even  on  that  score; but  it has  more  of that  tender  and  yet elevated  kind 
of  interest which  is aimed  at by the  generality  of novels,  and  in  pursuit 
of which they seldom  fail  of running into romantic extravagance: on  the 
whole,  it  is  one  of the  most  elegant  fictions  of  common  life  we  ever 
remember to have  met  with. 
Sir  Walter  Elliot,  a silly and  conceited baronet,  has  three  daughters, 
the eldest two,  unmarried,  and the third,  Mary, the wife of a  neighbour02
ing  gentleman,  Mr.  Charles  Musgrove,  heir  to  a  considerable  fortune, 
and  living in a genteel cottage in the  neighbourhood  of the  Great  house 
which he  is hereafter  to inherit.  The second daughter,  Anne,  who  is the 
7.  A minor character in Northanger  Abbey. 
8.  Palaeotheria is an extinct species of mammal.  Whateley is saying that the perfect representation 
of the Oxford  man (a role to which John Thorpe aspires) is almost but not quite extinct.  Miss 
Thorpe and John  Morland both belong to Northanger  Abbey. 
204 
[RICHARD  WHATELEY] 
heroine,  and  the  only  one  of  the  family  possessed  of  good  sense,  (a 
quality  which  Miss Austin  is as sparing  of in  her  novels, as we fear  her 
great  mistress,  Nature,  has  been  in  real  life,)  when  on  a  visit  to  her 
sister,  is, by that  sort of instinct which  generally points  out  to all  parties 
the  person  on  whose  judgment  and  temper  they  may  rely,  appealed  to 
in  all  the  little family  differences  which  arise,  and  which  are  described 
with  infinite  spirit and  detail. 
* 
# 
# 
We  ventured,  in a former article,  to remonstrate against the  dethrone02
ment  of  the  once  powerful  God  of  Love,  in  his  own  most  especial 
domain,  the  novel; and  to  suggest  that,  in  shunning  the  ordinary  fault 
of  recommending  by  examples  a  romantic  and  uncalculating  extrava02
gance of passion,  Miss Austin had  rather fallen into the opposite extreme 
of  exclusively  patronizing  what  are  called  prudent  matches,  and  too 
much  disparaging  sentimental  enthusiasm.  We  urged,  that,  mischie02
vous as is the extreme on this side, it is not the one into which the  young 
folks  of the  present  day  are the  most likely to  run:  the  prevailing fault is 
not  now,  whatever  it may have been,  to sacrifice all for love. 
* 
*  * 
We  may  now,  without  retracting  our  opinion,  bestow  unqualified 
approbation;  for  the  distresses  of the  present  heroine  all  arise  from  her 
prudent refusal  to listen to the  suggestions of her  heart.  The  catastrophe 
however  is happy,  and  we are  left  in  doubt whether  it would  have  been 
better for her or  not,  to accept the first proposal; and  this we conceive is 
precisely the  proper  medium;  for,  though  we would  not have prudential 
calculations  the  sole  principle  to  be  regarded  in  marriage,  we  are  far 
from  advocating  their  exclusion.  To  disregard  the  advice  of  sober-
minded  friends  on  an  important  point  of conduct,  is an  imprudence  we 
would  by no  means  recommend; indeed,  it is a species of selfishness,  if, 
in  listening only to the  dictates of passion,  a man  sacrifices to its gratifi02
cation  the  happiness  of  those  most  dear  to  him  as  well  as  his  own; 
though  it  is not  now-a-days  the  most prevalent  form  of selfishness.  But 
it  is no  condemnation  of a sentiment  to say,  that  it becomes blameable 
when  it  interferes  with  duty,  and  is  uncontrouled  by  conscience: the 
desire  of  riches,  power,  or  distinction,―the  taste  for  ease  and  com02
fort,―are  to  be  condemned  when  they  transgress  these  bounds;  and 
love,  if it  keep  within  them,  even  though  it  be  somewhat  tinged  with 
enthusiasm,  and  a little at variance with what the worldly call  prudence, 
i.e.,  regard for pecuniary  advantage,  may afford  a better moral discipline 
to the  mind  than  most other passions.  It will not at least be denied,  that 
it  has  often  proved  a  powerful  stimulus  to  exertion  where  others  have 
failed,  and  has called forth  talents unknown  before even to the possessor. 
What,  though  the  pursuit  may  be  fruitiess,  and  the  hopes  visionary? 
[A  NEW  STYLE  OF  NOVEL] 
205 
The result may be a real and  substantial  benefit,  though  of another  kind; 
the  vineyard  may  have  been  cultivated  by  digging  in  it for  the  treasure 
which  is  never  to  be  found.  What,  though  the  perfections  with  which 
imagination  has  decorated  the  beloved  object,  may,  in  fact,  exist but  in 
a  slender  degree?  still  they  are  believed  in  and  admired  as  real;  if  not, 
the  love  is such  as  does  not  merit  the  name;  and  it  is proverbially  true 
that  men  become assimilated  to the  character  (i.e.,  what  they  think  the 
character) of the being they fervently adore: thus,  as in the  noblest exhi02
bitions of the stage, though  that which is contemplated be but a fiction, it 
may  be  realized  in  the  mind  of the  beholder; and,  though  grasping  at a 
cloud,  he  may  become  worthy  of  possessing  a  real  goddess.  Many  a 
generous  sentiment,  and  many  a  virtuous  resolution,  have  been  called 
forth  and  matured  by admiration  of one,  who  may  herself perhaps  have 
been  incapable  of either.  It  matters  not  what  the  object  is  that  a  man 
aspires to be worthy  of, and  proposes as a model  for imitation,  if he  does 
but  believe  it to be  excellent.  Moreover,  all doubts  of success  (and  they 
are  seldom,  if ever,  entirely  wanting)  must  either  produce  or  exercise 
humility;  and  the  endeavour  to  study  another's  interests  and  inclina02
tions,  and  prefer  them  to  one's  own,  may  promote  a  habit  of general 
benevolence  which  may  outlast  the  present  occasion.  Every  thing,  in 
short,  which  tends  to  abstract  a  man  in  any  degree,  or  in  any  way, 
from  self,―from  self-admiration  and  self-interest,  has,  so far  at  least,  a 
beneficial  influence  in  forming  the  character. 
On  the  whole,  Miss Austin's  works may  safely be recommended,  not 
only  as among  the  most  unexceptionable  of their  class,  but  as combin02
ing,  in an eminent degree,  instruction  with amusement,  though  without 
the  direct  effort  at  the  former,  of which  we  have  complained,  as some02
times defeating  its object.  For those  who  cannot,  or will  not,  learn  any 
thing  from  productions  of  this  kind,  she  has  provided  entertainment 
which  entitles her to thanks; for mere  innocent  amusement  is in  itself a 
good,  when  it interferes  with  no greater; especially as it may  occupy  the 
place  of some  other  that  may  not  be  innocent.  The  Eastern  monarch 
who  proclaimed  a  reward  to  him  who  should  discover  a  new  pleasure, 
would  have  deserved  well  of mankind  had  he  stipulated  that  it  should 
be blameless. Those, again,  who  delight  in  the  study  of human  nature, 
may improve  in the knowledge  of it,  and  in the  profitable  application of 
that  knowledge,  by the  perusal  of such  fictions  as those before  us. 
206 
ANONYMOUS 
Anonymous 
[Austen's  Characters] t 
*  *  * Without  any  wish  to  surprise  us  into  attention,  by  strangeness 
of  incident,  or  complication  of adventure,―with  no  great  ambition of 
being  amazingly  facetious,  or  remarkably  brilliant,―laboriously  witty, 
or  profoundly  sentimental,―of dealing  out  wise  saws  and  deep  reflec02
tions,  or  keeping  us  on  the  broad  grin,  and  killing  us  with  laughter;― 
the  stream  of  [Austen's]  Tale  flows  on  in  an  easy,  natural,  but  spring 
tide,  which carries us out of ourselves, and  bears our feelings, affections, 
and  deepest  interest,  irresistably along  with  it.  She  has  not  been  at  the 
trouble  to look out  for subjects for her pencil of a  peculiar and eccentric 
cast,  nor  cared  to  outstep  the  modesty  of nature,  by  spicing with  a  too 
rich  vein  of humour,  such  as fell  in  her way in  the  ordinary  intercourse 
of  life.  T he  people  with  whom  her  works bring  us acquainted  were,  we 
feel  certain,  like those  among  whom  she herself  shared  the  good and  ill 
of  life,―with  whom  she  thought  and  talked―danced  and  sung― 
laughed  and  wept―joked  and  reasoned.  They  are  not  the  productions 
of  an  ingenious  fancy,  but  beings  instinct  with  life;―they breathe  and 
move,  and  think  and  speak,  and  act,  before  our  mind's  eye, with  a dis02
tinctness,  that  rivals  the  pictures  we  see  in  memory  of scenes we  our02
selves  have  beheld,  and  upon  the  recollections  of  which  we  love  to 
dwell.  They  mingle  in  our  remembrances  with  those,  whom  we  our02
selves have known  and  loved, but whom  accident, or coldness, or death, 
have separated  from  us before the  end  of our  pilgrimage. 
Into  those  of  her  characters  in  particular,  who  engage  our  best 
affections,  and  with  whom  we  sympathise  most  deeply,  she  seems  to 
have  transfused  the  very essence of life.  These are,  doubtless,  the  finest 
of her compositions, and  with  reason; for she had  only, on any  supposed 
interesting  occurrence of life,  to  set her  own  kind  and  amiable feelings 
in  motion,  and  the  tide sprang up from  the heart to the pen,  and flowed 
in  a  rich  stream  of nature  and  truth  over  the  page.  Into  one  particular 
character,  indeed,  she  has  breathed  her  whole  soul  and  being;  and  in 
this we please ourselves with  thinking,  we see and  know herself. 
And  what  is  this  character?―A  mind  beautifully  framed,  graceful, 
imaginative,  and  feminine, but penetrating,  sagacious, and  profound.― 
A  soul  harmonious,  gentle,  and  most  sweetly  attuned,―susceptible  of 
all  that  is beautiful  in  nature,  pure  in  morals,  sublime  in  religion;―a 
soul―on  which,  if,  by  any  accidental  contact  with  the  vulgar,  or  the 
t  From anonymous review of Life and Adventures  of Peter Wilkins, Retrospective Review 7 ( 1823): 
131-35. 
[AUSTEN'S  CHARACTERS] 
207 
vicious,  the  slightest  shade  of  impurity  was  ever  thrown,  it  vanished 
instantaneously, 
like  man's  breath  from  the  polished  mirror;  and, 
retreating,  left  it in  undiminished  lustre.―A  heart  large and  expansive, 
the seat of  deep,  kind,  honest,  and benevolent feelings.―A  bosom capa02
cious of universal  love, but  through  which  there  flowed  a deeper  stream 
of  domestic  and  holy  affections,―as  a  river  through  the  lake's  broad 
expanse,  whose  basin  it  supplies  with  its  overflowing  waters,  and 
through  which  its course  is marked  only by a stronger current.―A tem02
per  even,  cheerful,  gladdening,  and  serene as the  mild  evening  of sum02
mer's  loveliest day,  in  which  the very insect that  lives but  an  hour,  doth 
desport  and  enjoy  existence.―Feelings generous  and  candid,―quick, 
but  not  irritable,―sensitive  to  the  slightest degree  of coolness in  friend 
or  lover, but  not easily damped;―or,  if overwhelmed  by any  heart-rend02
ing  affliction,  rallying,  collecting, settling  into  repose  again,  like  some 
still and  deep waters  disturbed  by the  fall  of an  impending  rock.―Mod02
est  in  hope,  sober  in  joy,  gay  in  innocence,―sweet  soother  of  others' 
affliction,―most  resigned  and  patient  bearer  of her  own.  With  a  sunny 
eye  to  reflect the  glad  smiles of happy  friends,―dim  and  cloudy  at  the 
sight of others' grief; but not revealing the deep seated woes of the  remote 
chambers of her  own  breast,  by aught  but  that  wild,  pensive,  regardful, 
profound  expression,  which  tells nothing  to a stranger  or  acquaintance, 
but,  if a  parent  or  friend,  might  break  your  heart  but  to  look  upon.― 
The  beloved  confidante  of the  young  and  infantine―at  once  playmate 
and  preceptress;―the  patient  nurser  of their  little  fretful  ailments;―the 
more patient  bearer of their  rude and  noisy mirth,  in  her  own  moments 
of  illness  or  dejection;―exchanging  smiles,  that  would  arrest  an  angel 
on his winged  way,  for obstreperous  laughs;―and  sweet low accents, for 
shrill  treble  screams.  The  friend  of  the  humble,  lowly,  and  indigent; 
respecting  in  them,  as  much  as  in  those  of highest  degree  and  lordliest 
bearing,  the  image  of their  common  Maker.  Easy,  pleasant,  amusing, 
playful,  and  kind  in the  intercourse  of equals―an  attentive  hearer,  con02
siderate,  patient,  cheerfully  sedate,  and  affectionate  in  that  of elders.  In 
scenes of distress or difficulty,  self-dependent,  collected, deliberate,  and 
provident,―the  one  to  whom  all  instinctively turned  for  counsel,  sym02
pathy,  and  consolation.  Strong  in  innocence as a  tower,  with  a  face  of 
serenity,  and  a  collectedness  of  demeanour,  from  which  danger  and 
misery―the  very  tawny  lion  in  his  rage―might  flee  discomfited,―a 
fragile,  delicate,  feeble,  and  most feminine  woman! 
Whether,  in  this  enumeration  of female  excellencies,  one  of  those 
deeply attached  friends,  of whom  she was sure to have had  many,  might 
recognize some,  or  most  of the  admirable  qualities  of JANE  AUSTEN,  we 
cannot  say;―but  sure  we are,  if our  memory  have  not  failed  us,  or  our 
fancy  deceived  us,  or  our  hearts  betrayed  us,  such,  or  nearly  such,  are 
those  of which  she  has  herself  compounded  one  of the  most  beautiful 
female  characters ever drawn;―we  mean,  the  heroine  of  Persuasion. 
208 
JULIA  KAVANAGH 
But we have digressed  farther  than  we intended.―Indeed,  so fast and 
thick  do  recollections of what  is beautiful  and  good  in  the  works of this 
admirable  woman,  throng  into our  mind,  that  we are borne away invol02
untarily  and  irresistibly. They stole into the  world  without  noise,―they 
circulated  in  quiet,―they  were  far  from  being  much  extolled,―and 
very  seldom  noticed  in  the  journals  of the  day,―they  came  into  our 
hands,  as  nothing  different  from  ordinary  novels,―and  they  have 
enshrined  themselves  in  the  heart,  and  live for  ever in  the  thoughts,― 
along  with  the  recollections of all  that  is  best  and  purest  in  our  own 
experience of life.  Their author  we,  ourselves,  had  not the  happiness of 
knowing,―a  scanty  and  insufficient  memoir,1  prefixed  to  her  posthu02
mous work,  not written  in the best taste,  is all the history of her life,  that 
we  or  the  world  have  before  us;  but,  perhaps,  that  history  is  not 
wanted,―her  own  works furnish  that  history.  Those imaginary  people, 
to  whom  she  gave their  most  beautiful  ideal  existence, survive  to speak 
for  her,  now that  she  herself  is gone. 
The  mention  of her  works  happened  to  fall  in  our  way as the  noblest 
illustration  we  could  give  of that  improvement  in  this  department  of 
literature,  which  we  are  fond  to  believe  in;  but  we  frankly  confess,  we 
would,  at any time,  have travelled far out of it to pay our humble  tribute 
of  respect  to  the  memory  of Jane  Austen.  Nor  is  it  so  foreign  to  our 
regular speculations, as the reader may be apt to imagine. Our conversa02
tion,  as one  of our  own  number  has well observed,  is among  the  tombs 
and  there  dwells  all  that  once  enshrined  in  a  form  of beauty  a  soul of 
exceeding  and  surpassing  brightness.―O  lost too  soon  to  us!―but  our 
loss has been  thy  immortal  gain. 
JULIA  KAVANAGH 
[The  Language of  Feeling] t 
* 
# 
* 
Beyond  any  other  of  Miss  Austen's  tales,  Persuasion  shows  us  the 
phase  of  her  literary  character  which  she  chose  to  keep  most  in  the 
shade: the  tender  and  the  sad.  In  this work,  as in  Sense  and  Sensibility, 
and  in  Mansfield  Park,  but  with  more power than  in either,  she showed 
what  can  be the  feelings of a woman  compelled to see the  love she most 
longs  for,  leaving  her  day  by  day.  The  judicious  Elinor1  is,  indeed, 
1.  The memoir printed above, pp.  191-96  [Editor]. 
t  From  Julia  Kavanagh,  English  Women  of Letters,  1862, 251-74.  All notes are by the editor of 
this Norton Critical  Edition. 
1.  A central  character in Sense  and  Sensibility. 
[THE  LANGUAGE  OF  FEELING] 
209 
conscious  that  she  is  beloved;  but  her  lover  is  not  free,  and  she  long 
thinks him  lost.  Fanny2  is her lover's confidante, 
and  must  be miserable 
when  he  is blest,  or  happy  when  he  is wretched.  The  position  of Anne 
Elliot has something  more desolate still. The opposition  of her relatives, 
and  the advice of friends,  induce  her to break with a young naval  officer, 
Captain  Frederick  Wentworth,  to  whom  she  is  engaged,  and  the  only 
man  whom  she  can  love.  They  part,  he  in  anger,  she  in  sorrow; he  to 
rise in  his  profession,  become a  rich  man,  and  outlive  his  grief; she  to 
pine  at  home,  and  lose  youth  and  beauty  in  unavailing  regret.  Years 
have  passed  when  they  meet  again.  Captain  Wentworth  is still  young, 
still  handsome  and  agreeable.  He  wishes  to  marry,  and  is looking for a 
wife.  Anne  Elliot, pale,  faded,  and  sad,  knows  it,  and  sees it―she sees 
the  looks, the  smiles of fresher  and  younger  beauties  seeking  him,  and 
apparently  not seeking him  in  vain. 
Here  we  see  the  first  genuine  picture  of  that  silent  torture  of  an 
unloved  woman,  condemned  to suffer  thus because she is a woman  and 
must  not  speak,  and  which,  many  years  later,  was  wakened  into  such 
passionate  eloquence  by  the  author  of Jane  Eyre.  Subdued  though  the 
picture  is  in  Miss  Austen's  pages,  it  is  not  the  less  keen,  not  the  less 
painful.  The  tale  ends  happily.  Captain  Wentworth's  coldness yields  to 
old love, Anne's beauty returns,  they are married,  yet the sorrowful  tone 
of  the  tale  is  not  effaced  by  that  happy  close.  The  shadow  of  a  long 
disappointment,  of secret grief,  and  ill-repressed  jealousy will ever hang 
over Anne Elliot. 
This  melancholy  cast,  the  result,  perhaps,  of  some  secret  personal 
disappointment,  distinguishes  Persuasion 
from  Miss  Austen's  other 
tales.  They were  never cheerful,  for even  the  gentlest of satire  precludes 
cheerfulness;  but  this  is sad. 
Of  the  popularity  of  Miss  Austen's  six  novels,  of the  estimation  in 
which  they  are  held,  we  need  not  speak.  It  is honourable  to  the  public 
that  she  should  be  so  thoroughly  appreciated,  not  merely  by  men  like 
Sir  Walter Scott and  Lord  Macaulay,3 but  by all who  take up  her books 
for  mere amusement.  Wonderful,  indeed,  is the power that out  of mate02
rials so slender,  out  of characters so  imperfectly  marked,  could  fashion 
a  story.  This  is  her  great,  her  prevailing  merit,  and  yet,  it  cannot  be 
denied,  it is one that  injures  her  with  many  readers.  It seems so natural 
that she should  have told things and  painted  people as they are,  so natu02
ral and  so easy, that  we are apt  to forget the performance  in  the  sense of 
its reality. The literary taste of the  majority  is always tinged  with coarse02
ness; it loves exaggeration,  and  slights the  modesty  of truth. 
2.  Heroine of Mansfield Park. 
3.  Sir Walter Scott (1771-1832),  the best-known novelist of his period, wrote appreciatively about 
all  of Austen's work in  his  review of Emma  in  The Quarterly  Review  (March  1816; number 
dated October  1815).  Thomas Babington Macaulay  (1800-1859),  best-known as a historian, 
praised Austen in an essay on  Frances Burney in the Edinburgh  Review  (1843). 
210 
JULIA  KAVANAGH 
Another of Miss Austen's excellencies is also a disadvantage.  She does 
not  paint  or analyze  her  characters; they  speak for themselves.  Her peo02
ple  have  never  those  set  sayings  or  phrases  which  we  may  refer  to  the 
author,  and  of which  we  may  think,  how  clever! They  talk  as  people 
talk  in  the  world,  and  quietly  betray  their  inner  being  in  their  folly, 
falsehood,  or assumption.  For instance,  Sir Walter Elliot  is  handsome; 
we are merely told  so; but  we never forget it,  for he does not.  He consid02
ers men  born  to be handsome,  and,  deploring  the fatal effect  of a seafar02
ing  life  on  manly  beauty,  he  candidly  regrets that  'naval  gentlemen  are 
not knocked on the head at once,' so disgusted  has he been with  Admiral 
Baldwin's  mahogany  complexion and  dilapidated  appearance.  And  this 
worship  of personal  appearance  is perfectly  unaffected  and  sincere. Sir 
Walter  Elliot's good looks have acted on  him  internally; his own daugh02
ter  Anne  rises  in  his  opinion  as  her  complexion grows  clearer,  and  his 
first  inquiry  concerning  his  married  daughter,  Mary,  is,  'How  is  she 
looking? T he last time  he,  Sir Walter,  saw her,  she had  a red  nose,  and 
he hopes that may not happen every day. ' He is assured  that the red nose 
must  have been  accidental, upon which  the affectionate father exclaims 
kindly:  '  " If I thought  it would  not  tempt  her  to  go  out  in  sharp  winds, 
and  grow coarse, I would  send  her a new  hat  and  pelisse." ' 
But  it  was  natural  that  powers  so  great  should  fail  somewhere,  and 
there  were some things  which  Miss Austen  could  not do.  She could  not 
speak the  language  of any  strong  feeling,  even  though  that  feeling were 
ridiculous  and  unjust.  A  rumour  of Mr.  Darcy's  marriage  with  Eliza02
beth  Bennet having  reached  his  aunt,  Lady  Catherine  de  Bourgh,  she 
hurries  down  to  Longbourn  to  tax  and  upbraid  Miss  Bennet with  her 
audacity,  and  to  exact from  her  a  promise  that  she  will  not  marry  Mr. 
Darcy.4  Elizabeth  refuses,  and  there  is  a  scene,  but  not  a  good  one. 
Lady Catherine's  interference  is insolent and  foolish, but  it is the  result 
of a strong feeling,  and,  to her,  it is an  important,  a mighty matter,  and 
this  we  do  not  feel  as  we  read.  Her  assertions  of her  own  importance, 
her  surprise  at  Elizabeth's  independence,  are  in  keeping,  but  we  want 
something  more,  and  that  something  never appears.  The delicate  mind 
that  could  evolve, so shrewdly,  foolishness from  its deepest recesses,  was 
powerless  when  strong  feelings  had  to  be  summoned.  They heard  her, 
but  did  not  obey the  call. 
This  want  of certain  important  faculties  is the  only  defect,  or  rather 
causes the  only defect,  of Miss Austen's works: that  everything  is told  in 
the same tone.  An elopement,  a death,  seduction,  are related as placidly 
as a dinner or ball, but with much  less spirit. As she is, however, we must 
take her,  and  what her extraordinary powers wanted  in extent, they  made 
up  in depth.  In her own  range,  and  admitting  her cold views of life to be 
true,  she is faultless, or almost faultless. By choosing to be all but perfect, 
4.  Characters and situation from  Pride and  Prejudice. 
FROM  LIFE  OF  JANE  AUSTEN 
211 
she sometimes became monotonous,  but  rarely.  The value  of light  and 
shade,  as  a  means  of  success,  she  discarded.  Strong  contrasts,  bold 
flights, she shunned.  To be true,  to show life  in  its everyday aspect,  was 
her ambition.  To hope to make so much  out of so little showed  no com02
mon confidence in her own powers,  and  more than common daring.  Of 
the  thousands  who  take  up  a pen  to write  a story  meant  to  amuse,  how 
many are there who can,  or who dare,  be true,  like Jane Austen? 
GOLDWIN  SMITH 
From  Life  of Jane  Austen  t 
"Persuasion" was  the  last work  of Miss Austen.  When  it was  written 
the  hand  of death  was upon  her,  and  when  the  last touch  was put  to  it 
she  was  very  near  her  end.  We  can  therefore  hardly  help  applying  in 
some  measure  to  herself  what  she  says  of  Lady  Elliot,  that  "she  had 
found  enough  in  her  duties,  her  friends,  and  her  children  to attach  her 
to life  and  make it no  matter  of indifference to her when  she was called 
on  to  quit  them."  That  she  would  feel  the  value  of life,  and  yet  quit  it 
with  resignation,  is what  we should  expect of a character like Jane Aus02
ten. There is also a passage on the melancholy charms of autumn  which 
reminds  us the writer's leaf was falling into the sere, though  it is followed 
and  relieved  by  an  allusion  to  the  farmer  ploughing  in  hope  of  the 
spring.  Perhaps  there  is  a  shade  of pensiveness  over  the  whole  novel, 
and  in  parts  an  increased  tenderness  of sentiment  such  as  comes  with 
the  evening  hour.  "Persuasion" has  had  passionate  admirers  in  two  per02
sons  not  unqualified  to  judge―Miss  Martineau  and  Miss  Mitford.1 
Though  as  a  whole  not  so  well  constructed  as  others  of Jane  Austen's 
novels,  it may be said to contain  the  finest  touches of her  art.  Its princi02
pal  character,  the  tender,  sensitive,  and  suffering  Anne  Elliot,  is  also 
perhaps the  most  interesting  of Jane Austen's  women,  setting  aside  the 
totally  different  charm  of the  blooming  and  joyous  Emma.  The  title 
denotes  the  gentle  influences  which  persuade  an  injured  and  resentful 
lover after  the  lapse of years to return to his early love. 
* 
* 
* 
Admiral  Croft is an  "old tough," as admirals  seem to have been called 
in  those days,  drawn  evidently  from  the  life  by one  who  knew  the  navy 
well. When  interrogated about the state of a friend,  who it was suspected 
had  been  wounded  in  his affections,  he  reassures the  inquirer  by telling 
t  From  Life of Jane  Austen  by Goldwin Smith (London: W. Scott,  1890),  pp.  167-68,  179-80. 
1.  Harriet Martineau (1802-1876),  writer of fiction, travel books, political treatises,  and an auto02
biography; Mary Russell Mitford  (1787-1855),  novelist and dramatist  [Editor]. 
212 
G07RALDINE  EDITH  MITTON 
him  that  the  supposed  sufferer  had  not  used  a  single oath.  His wife,  as 
seems to have  been  the  fashion  at that  time,  has been  a great deal at sea 
with  him;  she  is  a  female  "old  tough";  and  the  picture  of their  strong 
though  refined  affection,  drawn  evidently  with  hearty  relish  by  Jane 
Austen,  is an  "old  maid's" tribute  to the better state. 
It  has  been  already  said  that  there  are  some  weaknesses  in  the  con02
struction  of  the  novel.  Sir  Walter  Elliot  and  Elizabeth,  though  they 
occupy  a  good  deal  of space,  contribute  nothing  or  hardly  anything  to 
the  action.  They  are  a  little  too  like  the  mere  character  pictures  with 
which  we  are  sometimes  presented  in  place  of characters  brought  into 
play  and  developed  by  the  action  of  a  well-constructed  plot.  Louisa 
Musgrove  on  one  side,  and  Mr.  William  Elliot on  the  other,  serve  to 
add  to  the  complexity and  interest  of the  movement  by which  Captain 
Wentworth  is  to  be  reunited  to  Anne.  But  the  destruction  of William 
Elliot's  character  is  needless,  and  strikes  us  as  inartistic,  while  there  is 
something  unnatural  in  his  whole  relation  to  the  Elliot  family,  and 
something strained  in the account of his motives. The purpose  for which 
he  is introduced  and  afterwards  killed off is too obvious.  The transfer of 
Louisa  Musgrove  from  Captain  Wentworth  to Captain  Benwick, again, 
is  abrupt,  and  forced  as  well  as  sudden;  nor  does  Captain  Wentworth 
come  quite  clear  out  of the  affair.  The  description  of Mrs.  Clay's  art02
fulness,  and  of her  sinister  relation  to  the  foolish  baronet,  leads  us  to 
expect  something  lively  in  that  quarter;  but  nothing  comes,  and  Mrs. 
Clay  leaves the  scene at  last a "pale and  ineffectual"  figure,  without  our 
being  able  to  see  with  what  object  she  was  brought  upon  it.  Nor  does 
Lady  Russell,  though  she  seems  intended  for  an  important  part,  do 
much  more  than  solemnly  seal  by  her  ultimate  approbation  the  match 
which  she had  made  a grand  mistake in  breaking off. 
GERALDINE  EDITH  MITTON 
From  Jane  Austen  and  Her  Times t 
Last  Days 
The  evening  of Jane's  life  had  set in,  but  yet it had  not occurred  even 
to those  who  loved  her  best that  they  must  inevitably  lose her.  She was 
in  her  forty-first  year; recognition  from  the  public  had  just begun  to  be 
accorded  to  her;  in  the  novels  she  had  lately  written  no  sign  of decay 
could  be detected.  It is true  that  in  both  Emma  and  Persuasion 
there  is 
a  particular  maturity  of rendering,  and  a  kindlier  tone  that  marks  per-
t  From  Jane  Austen  and  Her Times by Géraldine Edith Mitton (New York: Putnam's,  1905), pp. 
313-15.  All  notes are by the editor of this Norton Critical Edition. 
FROM  JANE  AUSTEN  AND  HER 
TIMES 
213 
haps  a  difference,  but  not  degeneracy.  If the  word  seriousness  can  ever 
be  used  of such  clear-cut,  brilliant  work  as  hers,  we  might  say  that  a 
certain  sweet  seriousness  pervaded  these  two,  which  are  more  alike  in 
tone than  any  of the  other  novels.  Persuasion  has been  called the  "most 
beautiful  of all the novels"; it has many excellencies,  not the least among 
which  is the  character  of the  heroine,  whose  girlish  weakness  develops 
into  a  loyal  steadfastness.  She  has  also  that  endearingness  that  perhaps 
certain  others  of the  heroines  lack.  In  fact,  of all  the  principal  female 
characters that  of Anne  Elliot has most of that  nameless and  indefinable 
charm,  which  comes  from  a combination  of qualities  such  as  firmness, 
gentleness,  unselfishness,  sympathy  and  sweetness,  a  charm  which  is 
more lovable than  any number  of stereotyped  graces. Though  Anne was 
at one  time  weak,  we  feel  that  she outgrows  it,  that  it was the  weakness 
of  immaturity,  not  of character,  and  that  her  loyalty fully  redeems  it. 
Jane  herself says of Anne  Elliot,  "You may  perhaps  like the  heroine 
as  she  is  almost  too  good  for  me,"  yet  the  too-good  note  seems  less 
obtrusive  with  Anne  than  with  Fanny  Price,1  whose  exceeding  surface 
meekness  does  sometimes  produce  a  little  exasperation.  Anne  and 
Fanny  have the  most  in common  among  the  heroines of the  novels, yet 
what  a difference  is there! Fanny has many  virtues,  but  her  intense  ner02
vous sensitiveness makes one feel  her self-consciousness,  and  underlying 
all  her  shrinking  there  was  a  quality  of  obstinacy  that  is  felt  without 
being  insisted  upon.  It  is  just  the  subtle  difference  that  Jane  knew  so 
well how to make, the feeling perhaps  is that Fanny is not quite a gentle02
woman,  that  she  would  be  difficult  to  get  on  with,  however  meek  and 
self-effacing  on  the  surface,  while  Anne  could  never  be  anything  but  a 
delightful  companion. 
Incidentally  some  parts  of Persuasion  have  already  been  referred  to, 
Louisa  Musgrove's fall on  the  Cobb,  the  scenes that  take place in Bath, 
the  touching  words  of Anne  when  she  feels that  she  has  hopelessly lost 
her  lover,  which  strike  a  deeper  note  of feeling  than  any  other  in  the 
whole range of the novels. It remains therefore but to say that there  is no 
secondary character to equal those of Miss Bates or Mr. Collins,2 that  the 
secondary  characters are  in  all cases less sharply  defined  than  those  usu02
ally depicted  by Jane,  but  that  Captain  Wentworth  is equal  to  his  good 
fortune,  and  that as a pair of lovers he and  Anne stand  unrivalled. 
Persuasion  was  finished  in  July  1816, but  Jane was  not  satisfied  with 
it,  perhaps  her  own  failing  health  and  the  sense  of tiredness  that  went 
with  it,  had  made  her  lose that  grip  of the  action  that  she  had  hitherto 
held  so well; she  felt  the  story  did  not  end  satisfactorily,  that  it  wanted 
bringing  together  and  clinching  so  to  speak;  Mr.  Austen-Leigh3  says: 
"This weighed  upon  her  mind,  the  more  so probably  on  account of her 
1.  Central  character of Mansfield Park. 
2.  In Emma  and Pride and  Prejudice. 
3.  James Edward Austen-Leigh,  Austen's nephew,  published his Memoir of his aunt in 1870. 
214 
G07RALDINE  EDITH  MITTON 
weak  state  of health,  so  that  one  night  she  retired  to  rest  in  very  low 
spirits.  But such depression  was little in accordance with her nature,  and 
was soon shaken  off. The next morning  she woke to more cheerful  views 
and  brighter  inspirations;  the  sense  of power  revived  and  imagination 
resumed  its  course.  She  cancelled  the  condemned  chapter  and  wrote 
two others,  entirely different,  in  its stead." 
These  were the tenth  and  eleventh  chapters,  and  contained the scene 
in  which  Anne  so  touchingly  expresses  her  ideas  on  the  theme  of 
woman's  love.  There  is  no  question  that  the  story  as  it  now  stands  is 
improved  by  the  change,  and  that  her  instinct  was  true.  Mr.  Austen-
Leigh  gives  the  cancelled  chapter  in  his  Memoir,  and  it  certainly  is 
"tame  and  flat"  compared  with  the  others,  and  had  she  not  made  the 
substitution  it  might  justly  have  been  said  that  Persuasion,  however 
charming,  did  show signs of failing  power. 
This  book was  not  published  until  after  her  death,  when  it  appeared 
in  one  volume  with  Northanger  Abbey,  the first to which  her  name  was 
prefixed,  this  came  out  in  1818 with  a  Memoir by  her  brother  Henry. 
Up  to  the  time  of  her  death  she  had  received  nearly  seven  hundred 
pounds for the published  books, which,  considering her anonymity,  and 
entire  lack  of publicity  and  influence,  must  have  appeared  to  her,  and 
indeed  was, wonderful,  though  in comparison  with  the true value of the 
work very little  indeed. 
* 
# 
# 
MODERN  CRITICAL 
VIEWS 
A.  WALTON  LITZ 
New  Landscapes t 
As  we  seek to  define  the  special  qualities  of Jane Austen's  late  work 
our  attention  is  inevitably  drawn  to  the  new  importance  she  gives  to 
natural  landscapes.  In  the  earlier  fiction  we  visualize  the  characters 
against  a  man-made  landscape; when  the  setting  is not  a  drawing-room 
or  ball-room  it  tends  to  be  the  civilized  nature  of  eighteenth-century 
gardens  and  paintings.  Trees and  grass and  hills are  there,  but  they  are 
drawn  from  the  repertory  of the  picturesque,  and  belong  in  their  small 
way  to  what  Kenneth  Clark  has  called  the  "landscape  of  fantasy."1 
Nature  is contemplated  with  Gilpin2  and  the  "improvers"  in  mind;  the 
landscape  is described and  criticized as if it were a work of art.  Although 
the  young  Jane Austen  delighted  in  ridiculing  the  "sublime" nature of 
Gothic  fiction,  with  its rhetorical  imitations of Salvator Rosa,3  we know 
from  her brother  Henry  that  she had  been  "enamoured  of Gilpin  on  the 
Picturesque"  at  an  early  age.  It  is  not  surprising,  then,  that  Elizabeth 
Bennet's interest in the Lake Country  is that of the amateur  artist,  or that 
she views Pemberley Woods with an  eye to picturesque  stage-effects. But 
with  Mansfield  Park  a new feeling for external nature begins to emerge, 
and  in  Emma  we  find  an  expressive  use  of  landscape  that  contrasts 
sharply  with  the  descriptions  of the  early  fiction.  The  course  of Emma 
Woodhouse's life  is subtly related to the cycle of the seasons: Mr.  Elton's 
distressing  proposal  takes  place  against  the  background  of  a  dark  and 
snowy  December  evening,  while  Knightley's confession  of love  occurs 
on  a  delightful  day  in  July.  The  chapter  in  which  Jane Austen  brings 
Emma  and  Mr.  Knightley together opens with  a descriptive passage  that 
foreshadows  the  human  changes: 
The  weather  continued  much  the  same  [a cold  stormy  rain]  all 
the following morning; and  the same loneliness, and  the same mel02
ancholy,  seemed  to  reign  at  Hartfield―but  in  the  afternoon  it 
cleared;  the  wind  changed  into  a  softer  quarter;  the  clouds  were 
carried  off;  the  sun  appeared;  it  was  summer  again.  With  all  the 
eagerness  which  such  a  transition  gives,  Emma  resolved  to  be  out 
of  doors  as  soon  as possible.  Never  had  the  exquisite sight,  smell, 
sensation  of  nature,  tranquil,  warm,  and  brilliant  after  a  storm, 
been  more attractive to  her. 
t  From  A.  Walton Litz,  Jane  Austen:  A  Study  of Her Artistic Development  (New  York: Oxford 
UP,  1965) 150-60.  Reprinted by permission  of the  author.  All  notes  are by the editor of this 
Norton Critical  Edition. The author's notes have been  deleted. 
1.  Bibliographical  information  about  this  and  other  works  cited  in  the  essays  included  in  this 
section will be found  in the bibliography (pp.  315-16). 
2.  See note 6,  p. 194. 
3.  Neapolitan  painter (1615-1673)  whose  somber, often  sinister landscapes were much admired 
in the eighteenth century. 
2 17 
218 
A.  WALTON  LITZ 
This  symbolic  use  of  the  natural  setting  involves  a  "sensation  of 
nature"  foreign  to the  early works,  and  we  find  the  sensation  intensified 
in Persuasion,  where Anne  Elliot's melancholy and "early loss of bloom" 
are  continuously  presented  through  the  imagery  of autumn.  In  the  fol02
lowing description  of a  November walk Anne's feeling for the  landscape 
harmonizes  with  the  emotions prompted  by the  dialogue. 
Her  pleasure 
in  the  walk must  arise from  the  exercise and  the  day, 
from  the  view  of the  last smiles of the  year  upon  the  tawny  leaves 
and  withered  hedges,  and  from  repeating  to  herself  some  few of 
the  thousand  poetical  descriptions  extant  of autumn,  that  season 
of  peculiar  and  inexhaustible  influence  on  the  mind  of taste  and 
tenderness  .  .  .  After  one  of the  many  praises  of the  day,  which 
were continually bursting  forth,  Captain  Wentworth  added, 
"What  glorious  weather  for  the  Admiral  and  my  sister!  They 
meant to take a long drive this morning; perhaps  we may hail  them 
from  some  of these  hills.  They  talked  of coming  into  this  side of 
the  country.  I  wonder  whereabouts  they  will  upset  to-day.  Oh!  it 
does happen  very often,  I assure you―but  my sister makes  nothing 
of  it―she would  as lieve be tossed  out  as  not." 
"Ah! You  make  the  most  of it,  I know,"  cried  Louisa,  "but  if it 
were  really so,  I should  do  just the  same  in  her  place.  If I loved a 
man,  as she-loves the  Admiral,  I would  be always with  him,  noth02
ing  should  ever  separate  us,  and  I would  rather  be  overturned  by 
him,  than  driven  safely by anybody  else." 
It  was spoken  with  enthusiasm. 
"Had  you?" cried  he,  catching  the  same  tone;  "I  honour  you!" 
And  there  was silence between  them  for a little while. 
Anne  could  not  immediately  fall  into  a  quotation  again.  The 
sweet  scenes  of  autumn  were  for  a  while  put  by―unless  some 
tender  sonnet,  fraught  with  the  apt  analogy  of the  declining  year, 
with  declining  happiness,  and  the  images  of youth  and  hope,  and 
spring,  all  gone  together,  blessed  her  memory.  She roused  herself 
to say,  as they  struck by order  into another  path,  "Is not this one of 
the  ways  to  Winthrop?"  But  nobody  heard,  or,  at  least,  nobody 
answered  her. 
Winthrop,  however,  or  its environs―for  young  men  are,  some02
times,  to be met with,  strolling about  near home,  was their  destina02
tion;  and  after  another  half  mile  of gradual  ascent  through  large 
enclosures,  where  the  ploughs  at  work,  and  the  fresh-made  path 
spoke  the  farmer,  counteracting  the  sweets  of  poetical  despon02
dence,  and  meaning  to have  spring  again,  they gained  the  summit 
of  the  most  considerable  hill,  which  parted  Uppercross  and  Win02
throp,  and  soon  commanded  a full  view of the  latter,  at the foot of 
the  hill  on  the  other  side. 
The  effects  of this  passage  are  new  to  Jane Austen's  art.  Anne's  con02
sciousness  is the  focus of the  scene, and  our  interest  is in  her  reactions, 
NEW  LANDSCAPES 
219 
but  these  reactions  are  expressed  more  through  descriptive  details  than 
through  exposition.  The  tone  of  the  landscape  controls  the  passage: 
Anne's  regret  is  imaged  in  the  autumn  scene,  while  the  reminder  of 
spring―in  immediate  context  a  sad  reminder―may  also  be  read  as  a 
hint  of future  happiness.  This "poetic" reliance on  natural  landscape  is 
even  more  striking  in  Sanditon, 
the  fragmentary  work  that  closes Jane 
Austen's career.  As E.  M.  Forster has  observed,  the  town  of Sanditon  is 
"not like Lyme or  Highbury  or Northanger  or the  other  places that  pro02
vide scenes or titles to past novels. It exists in  itself and  for itself. Charac02
ter-drawing,  incident,  and  wit are on  the decline, but topography  comes 
to the front,  and  is screwed much  deeper  than  usual  into the  story." 
The  sources  of this  new  quality  in  Jane  Austen's  fiction  must  have 
been complex, but one point seems obvious. More than has been  gener02
ally  realized  or  acknowledged,  she  was  influenced  by  the  Romantic 
poetry of the early nineteenth  century.  Persuasion  and  Sanditon  contain 
a  number  of references to  contemporary  poets,  to  Byron,  Wordsworth, 
and  especially  Scott.  And  although  Jane Austen's  explicit use  of these 
authors  may  be  for  the  purposes  of satire,  her  late  prose  reflects  their 
influence.  Nature has ceased to be a mere backdrop; landscape is a struc02
ture  of feeling  which  can  express,  and  also  modify,  the  minds  of those 
who  view  it.  In  their  quiet  and  restrained  fashion,  Jane  Austen's  last 
works  are  part  of  the  new  movement  in  English  literature.  She  has 
learned  that  the  natural  setting  can  convey,  more  surely  than  any 
abstract vocabulary,  the  movements  of an  individual  imagination. 
This  method  for  expressing  individual  moods  was  needed  in  Persua02
sion,  for in her work on this novel Jane Austen  set herself a new  problem 
of communication.  To put  it quite  simply,  the  sense of community  has 
disappeared,  and  the  heroine  finds  herself terribly  alone.  Anne  Elliot 
has no trustworthy  confidante,  no Jane Bennet, or Mrs. Weston,  or Mr. 
Knightley.4  The  sympathetic  brothers,  sisters,  and  fathers  of the  earlier 
novels have disappeared;  Lady Russell cannot comprehend  Anne Elliot, 
and  the heroine  is locked in the world  of her own  consciousness. Anne's 
need  is as much  communication  as  it is love,  and  in  spite of the  happy 
ending  the  deepest  impression  we  carry  away  from  Persuasion 
is one of 
human  isolation.  D.  H.  Lawrence's well-known  attack  on  Jane  Austen 
is directly relevant  here: 
The  sense  of isolation,  followed  by  the  sense  of menace  and  of 
fear,  is  bound  to  arise  as  the  feeling  of oneness  and  community 
with  our  fellow-men  declines, and  the feeling of individualism  and 
personality,  which  is  existence in  isolation,  increases.  .  .  . Class-
hate  and  class-consciousness are  only  a  sign  that  the  old  togeth02
erness, the old blood-warmth  has collapsed, and every man  is really 
aware  of himself in  apartness.  . ..  In the  old  England,  the  curious 
4.  Characters from Pride and  Prejudice  (Jane Bennet) and  Emma. 
2 20 
A.  WALTON  LITZ 
blood-connections  held  the  classes together.  The  squires  might  be 
arrogant,  violent,  bullying  and  unjust,  yet in  some ways they  were 
at  one  with  the  people,  part  of the  same  blood-stream.  We  feel  it 
in  Defoe  or  Fielding.  And  then,  in  the  mean  Jane  Austen,  it  is 
gone.  Already this old  maid  typifies "personality" instead  of charac02
ter,  the  sharp  knowing  in  apartness  instead  of knowing  in  togeth02
erness  .  .  . 
After  we have discounted  Lawrence's masculine antagonism  toward Jane 
Austen,  and  his  characteristic identification  of art  with  life,  we are  left 
with  a  penetrating  statement  of the  essential themes  in  Persuasion. 
In a 
sense,  Persuasion  begins  where  the  other  novels  end:  Anne  knows  her 
own  heart,  and  is not deluded about  herself.  Yet she is isolated,  haunted 
by  a  "sense  of  menace  and  fear";  she  knows  only  in  "apartness."  Her 
despair  is that  of the  modern  "personality,"  forced  to  live within  itself. 
We  may  attribute  this  quality  in  Persuasion 
to  the  frustrations  of Jane 
Austen's  middle-age  (for  the  first  time  there  is  no  fictional  counterpart 
to  Cassandra),  but  such  biographical  speculations  are  of  limited  use02
fulness.  It is better to view Persuasion  as a final variation  on  one of Jane 
Austen's  most  persistent  themes,  the  perils of the  free  spirit in  its search 
for  social identity.  Here  this  theme  is given  its darkest  treatment.  Anne 
Elliot  is denied  the  retreat  into  obsolete manners  symbolized by Mans02
field  Park,  just  as  she  is  cut  off  from  the  fatherly  advice  of  a  Mr. 
Knightley.  The social world  of Persuasion  seems cruelly unhelpful,  and 
one  must  conclude that Jane Austen  is expressing in the novel her  alarm 
at contemporary  changes  in  English manners.  In  spite of the  final  mar02
riage  and  the  brave  flourishes  of the  last  chapter,  Persuasion 
looks for02
ward  to  a  society  where  the  burdens  of  personality  must  be  borne 
without  a  compensating  "feeling  of  oneness  and  community."  The 
familiar  world  of the  nineteenth-century  novel  is at  hand. 
The  technical difficulties Jane Austen faced in her work on  Persuasion 
were  formidable,  the  direct  result  of her  chosen  subject.  The  drama  of 
self-deception  and  self-recognition  which  holds  our  interest  in  the  ear02
lier  novels  is almost  totally  absent  from  Persuasion,  and  without  it  the 
field  for  irony  is greatly  reduced.  The  personality  of Anne  Elliot  must 
carry  all  our  interest  without  the  benefit  of  dramatic  irony,  and  to 
accomplish  this  Jane Austen  has  made  Anne's  point-of-view  that  of the 
reader.  Everything depends on  our  sympathy  with  Anne,  and  our  inter02
est  in  her  fate.  The  contrast  between  this  narrative  method  and  that of 
Emma 
is  highly  significant.  Since  Emma  Woodhouse  does  not  know 
her  own  mind,  we  soon  learn  that  we  cannot  identify  our  vision  with 
hers;  and  although  most  of  the  action  of  Emma 
is  seen  through  the 
heroine's  eyes  Jane  Austen  has  supplied  us  with  glimpses  into  other 
minds,  and  with  reliable commentary  from  herself and  Knightley. But, 
as Wayne  Booth has pointed  out,  the  only significant break in "angle of 
NEW  LANDSCAPES 
221 
vision"  between  the  first  and  last  chapters  of  Persuasion  occurs  in  the 
scene where  Anne  meets Captain  Wentworth  for the first time  in  many 
years.  The  sympathetic  reader  is likely to  assume  that  he  is still  in  love 
with  Anne.  As Booth says, 
All  the conventions of art favor such a belief: the emphasis is clearly 
on Anne and her unhappiness;  the lover has returned; we have only 
to  wait,  perhaps  with  some  tedium,  for  the  inevitable  outcome. 
Anne  learns  (chap,  vii) that  he  has  spoken  of her  as  so altered  "he 
should  not have known  her again." "These were words which  could 
not  but  dwell  with  her.  Yet she soon  began  to  rejoice  that  she  had 
heard  them.  They  were  of sobering  tendency;  they  allayed  agita02
tion;  they  composed,  and  consequently  must  make  her  happier." 
And  suddenly  we  enter  Wentworth's  mind  for  one  time  only: 
"Frederick  Wentworth  had  used  such  words,  or  something  like 
them,  but  without  an  idea that  they would  be carried round to  her. 
He  had  thought  her  wretchedly  altered,  and,  in  the  first  moment 
of appeal,  had  spoken  as he  felt.  He  had  not  forgiven  Anne  Elliot. 
She  had  used  him  ill"―and  so  he  goes  on,  for  five  more  para02
graphs.  The  necessary point,  the  fact  that  Frederick believes  him02
self  to  be  indifferent,  has  been  made,  and  it  could  not  have  been 
made  without  some kind  of shift from  Anne's consciousness. 
This  isolated excursion into the  mind  of another  character does  not dis02
turb us,  since in  the opening  chapter the author  has presented  the  situa02
tion and  characters to us in her own  voice; but I doubt if it has convinced 
many  readers.  We  know  that  Wentworth's  love  will  be  easily  reawak02
ened,  and  our  real  interest lies in Anne's struggle to overcome the  barri02
ers of social  isolation and  communicate with  the  man  she once knew so 
well.  It is for this  reason  that  Jane Austen  presents  almost all the  action 
from  her  point-of-view. 
Of  the  surviving  Austen  manuscripts,  the  two  "canceled" chapters of 
Persuasion  reveal the  most about  her artistic methods.  On  18 July 1816 
she  wrote  "Finis"  at  the  end  of the  second  volume,  which  then  con02
tained  eleven  chapters; but  the  handling  of the  reconciliation scene still 
did  not  satisfy  her,  and  during  the  next  two  weeks  or  so  she  recast  the 
tenth  chapter  into  the  present  tenth  and  eleventh  chapters,  recopying 
the last chapter (now the twelfth) with  verbal corrections. In his  separate 
edition  of  the  two  original  chapters  R.  W.  Chapman  has  recorded 
manuscript  corrections and  variants  from  the  posthumous  first  edition, 
and  a study  of these  corrections and  additions  reveals the  same  care for 
phrasing  and  rhythm  we  discovered  in  the  revisions  of The  Watsons. 
Presumably  more  verbal  changes  would  have  been  made  in  the  final 
preparation  for  the  press,  if  Jane  Austen  had  lived.  But  these  small 
changes  are  less  illuminating  than  the  structural  changes  which 
222 
A.  WALTON  LITZ 
occurred  when  the  original  Chapter  X was transformed  into the  present 
Chapters  X and  X I .5 By comparing  the  two  versions we can  gain  a  new 
sense of Jane Austen's  skill in  construction,  and  a feeling for the artistic 
ideals that  governed  her work on  Persuasion. 
In the  ninth chapter of the second volume Anne pays her visit to Mrs. 
Smith  at  Westgate-buildings,  in  the  course  of which  she  learns  of Mr. 
Elliot's  true  character.  This revelation  is the  subject of Anne's  thoughts 
at  the  beginning  of the  original  Chapter  X.  She  is walking  down  Gay 
Street,  considering  the  implications  of her  new  knowledge,  when  she 
encounters Admiral  Croft.  His home  is only a few steps away, and  Anne 
is  persuaded―much  against  her  wishes―to  enter  and  speak  to  Mrs. 
Croft.  It is only when  she has reached the threshold  of the drawing room 
that  Anne  is  casually  informed,  "there  is  nobody  but  Frederick  here." 
As  soon  as  she  is  confronted  with  Captain  Wentworth,  Admiral  Croft 
draws  him  outside  the  door  and  begins  a  conversation  in  which  Anne 
hears  "her  own  name  and  Kellynch"  mentioned  repeatedly.  Captain 
Wentworth  re-enters the  room,  and,  after a moment  of embarrassment, 
begins to speak on  the  Admiral's  behalf. 
"The  Adml,  Madam,  was  this  morning  confidently  informed  that 
you  were―upon  my  word  I am  quite  at a  loss,  ashamed―(breath02
ing and  speaking quick)―the awkwardness  of giving  Information of 
this sort to one  of the  Parties―You can  be at no loss to understand 
me―It  was  very  confidently  said  that  Mr  Elliot―that  everything 
was  settled  in  the  family  for  an  Union  between  Mr  Elliot―and 
yourself.  It was added  that  you  were  to live at  Kellynch―that Kel02
lynch  was  to  be  given  up.  This,  the  Admiral  knew  could  not  be 
correct―But  it  occurred  to  him  that  it  might  be  the  wish  of  the 
Parties―And  my  commission  from  him  Madam,  is to  say,  that if 
the  Family  wish 
is  such,  his  Lease  of  Kellynch  shall  be 
cancel'd  . . ." 
Falteringly,  Anne  informs Wentworth  that the Admiral  has been  misin02
formed;  and,  encouraged  by  her  denial  and  countenance,  the  Captain 
confesses  his love. 
Her  Countenance  did  not  discourage.―It  was  a  silent,  but  a very 
powerful  Dialogue;―on  his  side,  Supplication,  on  her's  accep02
tance.―Still,  a  little  nearer―and  a  hand  taken  and  pressed―and 
"Anne,  my  own  dear  Anne!"―bursting  forth  in  the  fullness  of 
exquisite feeling―and  all  Suspense and  Indecision were over. 
The  rest  of the  canceled  chapter  is given  over  to  Wentworth's  account 
of  his  own  feelings and  behavior during their  separation. 
It is easy to see why Jane Austen  was dissatisfied  with  this handling of 
5.  In the present edition,  chapters are numbered consecutively, without  regard for the divisions 
of the original two volumes.  Chapters X and XI of the second volume thus become Chapters 
XXII  and XXHI  in the single-volume version. 
N EW  LANDSCAPES 
223 
the  reconciliation.  The  climax  comes so  close on  the  heels  of Anne's 
visit to  Mrs.  Smith that  we are taken  by surprise; the  two  critical scenes 
are  so  close together  that  they  detract  from  each  other.  Furthermore, 
Anne's difficulties with her family have almost been forgotten.  In  rewrit02
ing  the  chapter  Jane  Austen  retained  a  good  portion  of  Wentworth's 
account  of his  own  feelings; this  needed  little  revision.  But  she  com02
pletely  altered  the  circumstances of the  reconciliation, and  separated  it 
from  the  visit  to  Westgate-buildings  by  a  new  chapter  devoted  to 
Anne's family. 
In the final version of the novel Chapter X opens with Anne returning 
home  after  her  visit  to  Mrs.  Smith.  She  is exposed  to  the  humiliating 
behavior  of Elizabeth  and  Mrs.  Clay; Mr.  Elliot  enters,  and  is  treated 
coldly by Anne.  We then  shift to the  next day; Anne is preparing to visit 
Lady  Russell  and  tell  her  of  Mr.  Elliot's true  nature,  when  the  Mus-
groves suddenly  arrive. The visit to Lady Russell is postponed,  and  Anne 
joins  her  friends  of the  past autumn  at  the  White  Hart.  Captain  Went02
worth  arrives,  and  Anne  must  shortly  suffer  another  meeting  between 
the  Captain  and  her  family.  Mr.  Elliot,  supposedly  out  of  town,  is 
glimpsed in the company of Mrs.  Clay. The next day (Chapter XI)  Anne 
returns to the White Hart and  finds that Captain Wentworth  has already 
arrived.  He  soon  calls for writing  materials and  begins a  letter.  Encour02
aged by the events of the  previous  day and  the  tenor of her conversation 
with  Captain  Harville,  which  he  overhears,  Wentworth  composes  a 
hasty love letter and  contrives to place it in Anne's hands.  The reconcili02
ation  has  been  accomplished,  and  when  they  meet  a  short  time  later 
Wentworth  launches into an explanation of his past feelings and actions. 
Even  this  crude  summary  of the  changes  made  in  revision  can  show 
the complexity of Jane Austen's aims and  the  sureness of her execution. 
The  new  tenth  chapter  reasserts  Anne's  isolation,  and―through  the 
momentary  revelation  of the  affair between  Mr.  Elliot  and  Mrs. Clay― 
confirms  the  impressions  of the  previous  chapter.  By decelerating  the 
pace  of events Jane Austen  has  given  full  weight  to  Mr.  Elliot's duplic02
ity,  and  prepared  us  for  the  understanding  between  Anne  and  Captain 
Wentworth.  In  this  connection  the  indirect  appeal  by  letter  seems  far 
superior  to  the  direct  confrontation  of the  earlier version; it  emphasizes 
that  difficulty  of  communication  which  has  been  the  novel's  major 
theme.  Significantly,  the  final  version  sustains  the  internal  point-of-
view,  allowing  us  to follow the  turns  of Anne's  mind,  while the  shorter 
draft  had  threatened  to break this psychological consistency and collapse 
into straight summary.  It is fortunate  that  this fine example of Jane Aus02
ten's  structural  revisions  has  survived,  since  it  gives  us  a  clear sense of 
the  rigorous  self-criticism  and  technical  control  which  went  into  the 
making of her  mature  novels. 
* 
* 
* 
224 
MARILYN  BUTLER 
MARILYN  BUTLER 
[On  Persuasion] t 
In  Captain  Frederick Wentworth  Persuasion  has  a  classic  case-study 
of  a  modern-minded  man  from  the  conservative  point  of view.  Went02
worth  is  personally  attractive  and  an  idealist,  but  he  has  the  fault  of 
trusting too  implicitly in  his  own  prior  conceptions. When,  eight years 
before  the  novel opens,  he first fell  in  love with Anne  Elliott, he  impul02
sively  demanded  that  she  should  marry  him,  contrary  to  the  wishes of 
her  family,  and  (since he  had  no  money for them  to live on) contrary at 
that  stage to common  prudence.  He  put  his faith  in  himself,  and  in  his 
powers  to  realize  his  own  destiny;  and  because,  two  years  later,  he  did 
make  a  fortune,  he  has  always  blamed  Anne  for  not  showing  the  same 
degree  of confidence  in  him,  or  the  courage  to  defy  her  connections, 
know  her  own  mind,  and  trust  her  own  will.  'She had  shewn  a  feeble02
ness of character  in  doing  so, which  his own  decided,  confident  temper 
could  not  endure. '  When  he  returns  to  the  neighbourhood,  and  Anne 
has  to  listen  to  snatches  of his  conversation  with  Louisa on  the  walk to 
Winthrop,  she hears  him  reiterate  his faith  in the self.  Louisa states that 
she  would  rather  be  overturned  by the  man  she loves than  driven  safely 
by  anyone  else,  and  Wentworth  exclaims 'with  enthusiasm,'  'I  honour 
you!'  Later,  when  Anne  overhears  their  conversation  within  the  hedge, 
she  hears  him  praise  'resolution,'  'decision,'  'firmness,'  'spirit,'  and 
finally,  in  truly  Godwinian  phraseology,  'powers  of mind.'  His  personal 
philosophy  approaches  revolutionary  optimism  and  individualism  and 
he  is impatient  of,  or barely recognizes, those claims of a mentor  which 
for  him  can  be dismissed  in  the  single word,  'persuasion.' 
With  Captain  Wentworth  thus  established as its well-intentioned  but 
ideologically  mistaken  hero,  the  novel  takes  a  course  familiar  to  the 
reader  of Jane Austen's  other  novels.  At Lyme his  eyes are  opened.  On 
the  Cobb  he  perceives  that  what  he  took  for  firmness  of character  in 
Louisa  is really an  extreme self-will which  disregards  rational  restraints. 
After  the  accident,  Anne's  behaviour  reveals  to  him  another  kind  of 
strength,  which  includes  self-forgetfulness,  self-control,  and  the  ability 
to act.  He  reflects over the  lessons of the incident,  and  afterwards  is able 
to admit  to Anne  that  his judgement  of her was prejudiced  by his bitter02
ness  at  the  broken  engagement.  He  learns  to  accept  that  Anne's  sub02
mission  to  Lady  Russell  was  neither  a  symptom  of  weakness,  nor 
cold-hearted  prudence,  but  a further  sign  of principle  and  fortitude.  In 
the  image  characteristic of Jane Austen's  faulty  heroines―that  of blind-
t  From  Marilyn Butler,  Jane  Austen  and  the War  of Ideas (Oxford: Clarendon,  1975),  275-84. 
Reprinted  by permission of Oxford  University Press.  All  notes are by the editor of this Norton 
Critical  Edition.  The author's notes have been deleted. 
[ON  PERSUASION] 
225 
ness  upon  which  light  suddenly  breaks―he  says  of his  own  errors,  'I 
shut my eyes, and  would  not understand you,  or do you  justice.' 
The  problem  about  this explanation  of the action of Persuasion 
is that 
although  Captain  Wentworth  is  the  protagonist  of the  novel  he  is  not 
the central character.  What  happens 
in  Persuasion,  Wentworth's choice 
of Anne  for a wife,  and  the  discovery of true values which  is implicit in 
that  choice,  remains  in  line  with  the  conservative  philosophy  of all of 
Jane Austen's other novels. But the novel's actual effect  is,  notwithstand02
ing,  distinct,  because  many  of  its  techniques  lead  the  attention  away 
from  the  moral  implications  of action,  and  the  kind  of truth  expressed 
by over-all  form. 
On  the  whole,  though  it  is  not  clear  how  far  this  effect  is  intended, 
the  action  and  most  of the  characters  in  Persuasion  seem  meaningful 
primarily  in  terms  of the  impression  they  make  upon  Anne.  The  slow, 
static,  at  times  rather  laborious  opening  is  indirectly  all  about  her:  its 
function  is  to  establish  her  setting,  first  in  an  atmosphere  of bankrupt 
family  pride and  cold formality  at  Kellynch Hall,  and  afterwards  among 
the  comfortable,  unexacting  Musgroves  at  Uppercross.  Morally  the 
Musgroves  are  not  nearly  as  censurable  as  the  Elliotts.  If we  feel  that 
there is a great deal wrong with them,  it is largely because they are stupid 
and  undiscriminating  about  Anne. 
Just  as  the  first  half  of the  first  volume  is  written  in  a  way  to  bring 
out the sorrows of Anne's situation,  so Captain  Wentworth's  entrance  is 
delayed for the same purpose.  When  at last they meet,  the scene is given 
through the  blurred,  rushed  imprint  it makes on  Anne's senses: 
Mary,  very  much  gratified  by  this  attention,  was  delighted  to 
receive  him;  while  a  thousand  feelings  rushed  on  Anne,  of which 
this was the  most consoling, that  it would  soon be over.  And  it was 
soon  over.  In  two  minutes  after  Charles's  preparation,  the  others 
appeared;  they  were  in  the  drawing-room.  Her  eye  half  met  Cap02
tain  Wentworth's; a bow,  a curtsey passed; she  heard  his voice―he 
talked  to  Mary,  said  all  that  was  right;  said  something  to  the  Miss 
Musgroves,  enough  to  mark  an  easy  footing:  the  room  seemed 
full―full  of  persons  and  voices―but  a  few  minutes  ended  it. 
Charles  showed  himself  at the  window,  all  was  ready,  their  visitor 
bowed  and  was gone; the  Miss Musgroves were gone too,  suddenly 
resolving to  walk  to  the  end  of the  village with  the  sportsmen;  the 
room  was  cleared,  and  Anne  might  finish  her  breakfast  as  she 
could. 
'It is over! it is over!' she repeated  to  herself again,  and  again,  in 
nervous  gratitude.  T he  worst  is over!' 
Mary  talked,  but  she could  not  attend.  She had  seen him.  They 
had  met.  They had  been  once more  in  the  same  room! 
In  Emma  syntax  is used  to  suggest  heightened  emotion,  but  there  is 
nothing  approaching  the  exclusively subjective viewpoint  of  Persuasion. 
226 
MARILYN  BUTLER 
In  the  earlier  novel  dialogue  is important,  and  even  Emma's  free  indi02
rect  speech  can  incorporate  the  tones  of another  character's  conversa02
tion.  Here  Anne  is  before  us,  and  no  one  else.  Her  selective view of 
external  'reality,' her  overwhelming  emotional  sense of a climax that  is 
also anti-climax, is suggested  by the  novelist's distortion  of the two  'nor02
mal'  outward  dimensions:  time  is  recklessly  speeded  up,  space  gro02
tesquely  contracted.  The 
the 
presentation  of Anne,  is that  the  senses have  a  decisive advantage  over 
reason  and  fact.  'Alas! with  all her  reasonings,  she found,  that  to  reten02
tive feelings eight years may be little more than  nothing. ' 
implication,  as  so  consistently  in 
Especially  after  the  cold,  distanced  beginning  to  the  novel,  with  its 
unsympathetic  handling  of  Elliotts and  Musgroves,  the  intimacy  with 
which  Jane  Austen  approaches  Anne's  consciousness  appears  to  be 
something  extraordinary.  So, too,  is the  effect  of high-wrought  nervous 
tension,  compared  with  the  mental  worlds  of other  characters,  whose 
attention  is  dissipated  among  the  trivia  of their  external  relationships. 
Unlike the  lesser figures,  Wentworth  is certainly capable of feeling,  but 
immediately after  his meeting with Anne we are deliberately shown  that 
his frame  of mind  is calm  and  nearly  dispassionate.  Every technique of 
contrast  is  used  to  throw  her  abnormally  intense  experience  into  high 
relief. 
There  is nothing  in  subjective writing  in  any  earlier English  novel  to 
compare  in  subtlety  of insight  or  depth  of feeling  with  the  sequence of 
nervous  scenes  between  the  hero  and  the  heroine  in  Persuasion.  The 
rival realist Maria Edgeworth  correctly singles out three episodes for spe02
cial  praise: 
Don't you see Captain  Wentworth,  or rather don't you  in her place 
feel  him  taking  the  boisterous  child  off her  back  as  she  kneels  by 
the sick boy on the sofa? And  is not the first meeting after their long 
separation  admirably  well  done?  And  the  overheard  conversation 
about  the  nut? 
Overheard  conversations  are  part  of  the  technique  of  Emma,  but 
there  the  inference  is  that  the  evidence  supplied  by  the  dialogue 
approaches  objectivity; it is the  interpretation  placed upon the conversa02
tion  by  its observer which  is liable to be biased and  faulty.  When  Anne 
overhears  Captain  Wentworth's  remarks  to  Louisa  about  the  nut,  the 
two  elements,  the  heroine's  consciousness and  the  hero's  conversation, 
have  precisely the  reverse  connotations.  Captain  Wentworth's  praise of 
the  beauty  of the  nut,  his  symbol  for  hidden  richness,  perfection,  and 
strength,  suggests  an  intelligent,  attractive,  witty  man,  of  high  moral 
aspirations; but  at  the  same  time  a  man  who  is in  the  grip  of a  strongly 
subjective frame  of mind,  a personal  bias which  perverts his  judgement. 
Anne,  the  hidden  listener,  has,  as  we  already  know,  and  he  will  redis02
cover,  all  the  richness  and  secret  strength  he  is  attributing  to  Louisa. 
[ON  PERSUASION] 
227 
Once  again  the  inference  is  that  Anne's  inner  life  has  an  unassailable 
quality  and  truth.  Nothing  like  this  image  of  the  nut―richest  at  the 
kernel,  made  private  by its strong,  defensive  exterior―is even  suggested 
in an  earlier Austen  novel. 
It  is of course  precisely this  'inward  interest'  of Persuasion, 
its access 
to  Anne's  feelings,  that  has  given  it  a  relatively  high  standing  in  the 
twentieth  century.  A very large factor in  securing the  admiration  of pos02
terity must be the subjectivism of later thinking.  We find the book pecu02
liarly  'true,'  that  is to our  current  attitudes,  while  Emma 
is true  only  to 
itself  and  to  Jane  Austen's  so-called  'Augustan'  objectivity.  The  sad 
scenes of autumn  in the  novel,  the desolation  of winter  rain,  are as they 
are because they  are felt by Anne.  The  world  of her  consciousness is so 
all-absorbing  that  it  is  not  clear  whether  the  outer  world  (the  farmer's 
outer  world,  for example) has objective existence or  not. 
And yet, even while she seems to invite the  reader's  emotional  identi02
fication  with  Anne,  Jane Austen  orders  other parts  of her  novel in  terms 
that  imply  her continued  acceptance of the  old ethical certainties. Both 
at  the  beginning  of the  first  volume,  where  she  contrasts  the  values of 
Kellynch  and  Uppercross,  and  at  the  end,  with  the  big  set-piece scene 
at  Lyme,  she  reverts  to  a  form  of presentation  which  is near-objective 
and  presented  to  the  reader  dramatically  rather  than  refracted  through 
Anne's consciousness.  At Lyme we continue to be aware of Anne's emo02
tion.  But the meaning  of the accident on  the Cobb―that Anne  is strong 
while  Louisa  is  only  childishly  wilful―is  directed  at  the  moral  under02
standing  of Captain  Wentworth  and  of the  reader.  The change of focus, 
or  the  dual  focus,  is  awkward,  and  it  points  to  the  weakness  of  Per02
suasion. 
That weakness,  a failure  to integrate the  novel's two planes  of reality, 
becomes  more  acute  when  in  the  second  volume  the  scene  moves  to 
Bath.  In so far as Jane Austen  is writing a novel of subjective experience, 
she continues to do it beautifully.  Anne's nervous  impatience, her  acute 
state of suspense,  is beautifully  countered  within  her own consciousness 
by her mature  knowledge that she and Captain  Wentworth  must  eventu02
ally make their  feelings known.  But enveloping  this  nineteenth-century 
novel  of  the  inner  life  is  an  eighteenth-century  novel  in  search  of  a 
centre.  The cold prudential  world  of Sir Walter and  Elizabeth  properly 
belongs  within  a  two-dimensional  tradition  of social  comedy,  such  as 
Fielding's.  Within  such  terms  they  would  convince: put  in  the  same 
novel  as Anne,  they  seem  out  of focus,  and  for  various  reasons.  One  is 
that  the  pain  they  give Anne,  and  the  spiritual  isolation they  impose  on 
her, are out of scale in comedy. Another is that beside Anne's conscious02
ness  their  very  being  seems  sketchy.  In  no  other  Austen  novel  since 
Sense  and  Sensibility 
is the social group  surrounding  the heroine so thin 
as the  Elliotts' circle at Bath. 
Far more glaringly wrong―and  perhaps  more relevant to the  question 
228 
MARILYN  BUTLER 
of Jane Austen's mastery of her material―is Mr. William Walter Elliott, 
the  alternative  claimant  for  Anne's  hand.  His  entry  into  the  novel  at 
Lyme,  which  serves  no  function,  is  unusually  clumsy  stage-manage02
ment.  In  his  scenes with  Anne  at  Bath he  seems curiously  inexpressive 
and  featureless.  Jane Austen's  unease  in dealing with  him  is reflected  in 
the  inferior  writing  he  inspires.  He  provokes  from  Anne  herself some 
moralistic  reflections which  include  a piece of prudery  as disconcerting 
as  anything  uttered  by  Fanny  Price.  Mrs.  Smith's  history  of his  past, 
that  outworn  cliché of the  eighteenth-century  novel,  is a  device  which 
Jane Austen  otherwise  allows herself only  in  Sense  and  Sensibility.  The 
manoeuvre  by  which  Mr.  Elliott  is  disposed  of,  his  affaire  with  Mrs. 
Clay,  seems decidedly undermotivated  and  inconsistent with the worldly 
wisdom  which  has  hitherto  been  his leading  characteristic. Worse than 
any  of these  things,  perhaps,  is that  Mr.  Elliott has  little or no  place in 
Anne's consciousness. Apparently  she does not  respond  to him  as Eliza02
beth  does  to  Wickham  and  Emma  to  Frank.  He  never  represents  any 
kind  of real temptation  to her.  Belonging as he does to the  usual  Austen 
format,  a novel of moral  choices in  which  each choice is given  external 
bodily  reality,  in  this  novel  he  inevitably  loses  most  of his  substance. 
Failure  to define  the  tempter-figure  is surely  the  most significant of the 
failures  of Persuasion.  For elsewhere in Jane Austen  it is the villain  who 
has  always  in  some  form  or  other  embodied  self-sufficiency,  a  whole 
intellectual  system  of individualism  or  self-interest that  the  more social 
and  outward-turning  ethic of the  novel  was designed  to counter.  Here, 
where Anne's inner world  is implicitly vindicated,  there is very little that 
is significant for William Walter Elliott to  represent. 
Persuasions 
uneasy  compromise  between  old  techniques  and  new  is 
best exemplified by its two alternative endings.  In the original version of 
the  last  two  chapters,  a  strong  comic plot  of a  more  or  less  traditional 
kind  binds  the  events  consequentially  together.  The  characters  around 
Anne  act  in  the  belief  that  she  is  about  to  marry  Mr.  Elliott.  Anne 
herself  is  under  the  immediate  influence  of  Mrs.  Smith's  revelations 
about  him,  which  themselves  came  about  because  Mrs.  Smith  had 
heard  rumours  of an  engagement.  On  her  way  home  from  talking  to 
Mrs.  Smith in Westgate-buildings, Anne encounters Admiral  Croft.  He 
too  has  heard  that  she  is engaged  to  Mr.  Elliott,  and  assumes  that  the 
family  may  want  Kellynch Hall  back so that  the  couple  can  live there. 
He  takes her  into  his  lodgings  and  asks his brother-in-law,  Wentworth, 
to  find  out  from  Anne  if her  father  would  like  Kellynch Hall  vacated. 
Wentworth  has  to account for the  question  by referring  to the  supposed 
engagement;  Anne  replies  by  denying  it;  and  the  éclaircissement1 
is 
made.  In  a  sense,  of course,  Mr.  Elliott's role  is not  great,  even  in  this 
version,  since Anne  never  intended  to  marry  him.  But the  fact that  she 
1.  Clarification. 
[ON  PERSUASION] 
229 
has  just  come  from  hearing  a  story  which  proves  him  unfit  to  marry 
seems to give a moral  colouring,  in the characteristic Austen  fashion,  to 
her acceptance of Wentworth. 
The earlier version differs from the dénouement  as we know it  primar02
ily  because  it  is  an  essentially  objective  account  of  external  events, 
which  follow  one  another  in  a  seemingly  rational  sequence.  Unveiling 
the  truth  about  Mr.  Elliott appears  to  clarify  the  attitudes  of hero  and 
heroine  towards each  other―just  as the  discovery of Frank  Churchill's 
secret  brings  about  the  explanatory  conversation  of  Knightiey  and 
Emma.  The  original  end  of Persuasion  was  to  have  used  the  well-tried 
machinery of Jane Austen's  other  dénouements. 
The  new version  is a marvellous technical adjustment,  in  the  unique 
manner  of Persuasion: 
it  is infinitely  better  in  its access to  the  feelings. 
The  second  volume  has  been  a  nervous  sequence  of  half-articulate 
meetings between  Anne and  Wentworth―as  they shelter  from  the  rain, 
pass  on  opposite  sides  of the  street,  are  separated  by circumstances  and 
by Mr.  Elliott at the concert.  Such occasions are tracked  in Anne's con02
sciousness,  woven  in  with  intensity  among  the  cold  externals  of  the 
Elliotts'  social  life.  The  first  new  element  of  the  revised  ending  is 
another  of these  scenes, a  meeting  which  fails to  bring  about  any clari02
fication  because Wentworth  and  Anne are prevented  by the  crowd  from 
communicating  directly  with  each  other.  The  entirely  new-written 
chapter  ten  brings  the  Musgroves  to  Bath  to  buy  wedding-clothes  for 
Henrietta  and  Louisa.  Shelving her  intention  to  reveal  the  truth  about 
Mr.  Elliott to  Lady  Russell,  Anne  goes  instead  to  visit  the  party  from 
Uppercross  at  the  White  Hart  hotel.  There  she  also  meets  Captain 
Wentworth,  and  attempts  to  set  his  fears  at  rest  about  Mr.  Elliott,  but 
in  the  hurried  circumstances  the  task  of  explaining  herself is  still  left 
incomplete.  The  new  chapter  eleven  again  reverts  to  the  topic  of Mr. 
Elliott―only,  once more,  to shelve it: 
One  day  only  had  passed  since  Anne's  conversation  with  Mrs. 
Smith;  but  a  keener  interest  had  succeeded,  and  she  was  now  so 
little  touched  by  Mr.  Elliott's conduct,  except by  its effects in  one 
quarter,  that  it became a matter of course the  next morning,  still to 
defer  her explanatory  visit in  Rivers Street. 
She  goes instead  to  spend  the  day  pleasurably  with  the  Musgroves  at 
the White Hart, where she finds Mrs. Croft,  Captain  Harville, and  Cap02
tain  Wentworth.  There  follows Anne's  beautifully  conceived and  mov02
ing  conversation  with  Harville  about  the  duration  of  love,  which 
Wentworth  overhears: his turn  to  hear  Anne,  and  to  hear  her  eloquent 
and  unconfined  by the  hurry  and  constraint  of all their  attempted  con02
versations  together.  She  is  gende  with  Harville;  judicious  in  revealing 
her  own  story;  rational  and  general  on  the  subject  at  issue; but  at  the 
end,  when  her deepest feelings are touched,  she speaks straight  from  her 
230 
MARILYN  BUTLER 
own  experience.  '  "All the  privilege  I claim  for  my  own  sex (it is not  a 
very enviable one,  you  need  not covet it) is that  of loving longest,  when 
existence or when  hope  is gone. 
All Anne's characteristics find expression in this conversation: her for02
titude,  gentleness,  modesty,  integrity.  The ideal Wentworth  outlined  in 
the  conversation  she overheard,  when  he  spoke of the hazel-nut,  comes 
vividly to life.  Wentworth  hears,  and  writes his letter of proposal,  so that 
she  receives  it  when  she  is  alone;  for,  in  this  novel  of little  dialogue, 
hardly  any  of  the  protagonists'  utterances  are  directed  openly  to  one 
another.  The  positive  value  of replacing  the  Gay-street  proposal  scene 
with  the  two  chapters  at  the  White  Hart  rests  on  this  change  from  a 
direct confrontation  between  the two (which has never yet occurred suc02
cessfully  throughout  the  course  of  the  novel)  to  an  indirect  one,  in 
which first Anne  speaks her thoughts  as it were in soliloquy, then  Went02
worth  speaks his through  the  medium  of the  pen.  The  effect  is in  keep02
for  it  puts  a 
ing  with  the  other  techniques  original  to  Persuasion, 
premium  on  expression  of the  self,  and  avoids  direct  communication 
between  the  self and  another. 
There  can  be  no  question  that,  of these  two  endings,  the  second  and 
final  version  is  infinitely  more  pleasing―even  though  it  is achieved  at 
the  cost  of Mr.  Elliott's  meaningful  place  in  the  action.  By the  same 
token,  Anne,  though  so out  of scale in  her  social setting,  is many  peo02
ple's  favourite  among  Jane Austen's  heroines.  With  an  inner  life  that  is 
rich  and  feeling,  an  outer  environment  that  is barren,  she looks forward 
to Maggie Tulliver and  Dorothea  Brooke.2  Unfortunately  she also looks 
backward  to  Elinor  and,  more  immediately,  to  Fanny.3  Matching  her 
to her world  is not the  only problem.  Jane Austen  has further  difficulties 
within  the  character―in  reconciling  Anne's  feelings,  which  are  often 
indistinguishable  from  those  of a  victim  of her  environment,  and  her 
exemplary  role,  which  is that  of the  resolute  Christian. 
Like  Fanny,  she  is a  perceptive  bystander,  implicitly the conscience 
and  censor  of her  world.  She  rebukes  the  Elliotts because  she  is above 
worldly  vanity;  the  Musgrove  elders  because  she  is  meditative;  unlike 
Louisa,  she  has  the  real  strength  which  derives  from  reflection,  princi02
ple,  and  a sense of duty.  Anne  comes near to being dangerously  perfect: 
'she  is almost too  good  for  me. ' Although  it is given  less explicit Chris02
tian  colouring  than  Fanny's,  her  intense,  withdrawn  inner  life  would 
suggest the  'Saint' even  without  her  hints  to Captain  Benwick  on  moral 
and  religious  reading,  and  her  sober  distaste  for  Mr.  Elliott's  Sunday 
travelling. 
The  strong  contrast  between  worldly  vanity  on  the  one  hand  and  an 
exemplary train  of thought  on  the  other  is quite  as marked  in  Persuasion 
as in  Mansfield  Park.  Anne's pain  at the vanity,  selfishness, and  inutility 
2.  Central  characters of George  Eliot's Mill  on the Floss (1860) and Middlemarch  (1871-72). 
3.  In Sense  and  Sensibility  and Mansfield Park. 
IN  BETWEEN:  PERSUASION 
231 
of  her  father  and  sister  have  to  be  lightly  touched  upon,  because  a 
daughter's denunciations  would  hardly  be in good taste; but  the  author's 
severe handling  of the  baronet  comes as near  to social criticism as  any02
thing  she  ever  wrote.  The  comparison  Jane Austen  makes  between  an 
idle, useless  gentleman' proud of his rank,  and the eminently useful sail02
ors,  has  been  seen  as a  notable  example  of Jane Austen's  willingness to 
be  radical.  So too  has  her  perception  that  Lady  Russell's wrong  advice 
stemmed from  a refined kind  of worldliness.  On  the contrary, the tone of 
Jane  Austen's  criticism  of  her  novel's  father-  and  mother-figure― 
together with  its  fictional  source, in the conscience of a selfless and  duti02
ful  daughter―belong  to a familiar kind of conservative social comment. 
TONY  TANNER 
In  Between:  Persuasion  t 
Persuasion.  Not  'Persuasion  and  .  .  .'―Resistance, Refusal,  Rebel02
lion,  for instance. Just Persuasion. 
In previous titles using abstract  nouns 
Jane Austen  had  deployed  pairs.  This time the  debate,  the  struggle,  the 
contestation,  the  contrarieties  and  ambiguities  are  all  in  the  one  word. 
As they  are  all  in,  or  concentrated  on,  the  one  girl.  Anne  Elliot is  the 
loneliest  of  Jane  Austen's  heroines.  Persuaded  by  others,  she  has  to 
repersuade  herself. 
Sir  Walter  Elliot,  of Kellynch-hall,  in  Somersetshire,  was  a  man 
who,  for his own  amusement,  never took up  any book but  the  Bar02
onetage; there  he  found  occupation  for  an  idle hour,  and  consola02
tion  in  a  distressed  one;  there  his  faculties  were  roused 
into 
admiration  and  respect,  by  contemplating  the  limited  remnant  of 
earliest  patents;  there  any  unwelcome  sensations,  arising  from 
domestic  affairs,  changed  naturally  into  pity  and  contempt,  as  he 
turned  over  the  almost  endless  creations  of the  last  century―and 
there,  if every  other  leaf  were  powerless,  he  could  read  his  own 
history  with  an  interest  which  never  failed―this  was  the  page  at 
which  the favourite  volume  was always  opened: 
'ELLIOT  OF  KELLYNCH-HALL' 
Jane  Austen  opens  her  book with  the  description  of a  man  looking at  a 
book in which  he  reads the same words as her book opens with―'Elliot, 
*  From Tony Tanner,  Jane  Austen  (Cambridge: Harvard UP,  1986),  208-49.  Copyright 08 1986 
by Tony Tanner.  Reprinted by  permission  of  Harvard  University Press  and  Macmillan Press 
Ltd.  All notes are by the editor of this Norton Critical Edition. 
232 
TONY  TANNER 
of  Kellynch-hall.'  This  is the  kind  of teasing  regression  which  we  have 
become  accustomed  to  in  contemporary  writers but  which  no  one asso 
ciates with  the work  of Jane Austen.  It alerts us to at least two  important 
considerations: the  dangers  involved  in  seeking validation  and self-justi 
fication  in  book  as  opposed  to  life,  in  record  rather  than  in  action,  in 
name  as  opposed  to  function;  and  the  absolutely  negative  vanity'  (her 
key  word  for  Sir Walter)  in  looking  for  and  finding  one's  familial  and 
social position,  one's reality,  in an  inscription  rather than  in a pattern of 
behaviour,  in  a  sign  rather  than  the  range  of responsibilities  which  it 
implicitly signifies. We learn  how fond  Sir Walter is of mirrors and  how 
hopelessly  and  hurtfully  unaware  of the  real  needs  and  feelings  of his 
dependents  he  is.  This  opening  situation  poses  someone  fixed  in  an 
ultimate  solipsism  gazing  with  inexhaustible  pleasure  into  the  textual 
mirror  which  simply  gives  him  back  his  name.  The  opening  of Jane 
Austen's  text―a  title,  a  name,  a  domicile,  a  geographic  location― 
implies  a  whole  series  of  unwritten  obligations  and  responsibilities 
related  to  rank,  family,  society and  the  very  land  itself,  none  of which 
Sir Walter, book-bound  and  self-mesmerised, either keeps or recognises. 
He  is  only  interested  in  himself  and  what  reflects  him―mirrors  or 
daughters.  Thus  he  likes  Elizabeth  because  she  is Very like  himself― 
this  is parenthood  as  narcissism―and  Mary  has  acquired  a  little artifi 
cial  importance'  because  she  has  married  into  a  tolerably  respectable 
family; 'but  Anne,  with  an  elegance of mind  and  sweetness of character, 
which  must  have placed her high with  any people of real understanding, 
was  nobody  with  either  father  or  sister:  her  word  had  no  weight;  her 
convenience  was  always  to  give  way;―she  was  only  Anne.'  Only 
Anne―no  rank,  no effective surname,  no house,  no location; her words 
are  weightless,  and  physically  speaking  she  always  has  to  give  way'― 
that  is, accept perpetual  displacement.  Anne we may call the girl on  the 
threshold,  existing in  that  limboid space between  the house of the  father 
which  has  to  be  left  and  the  house  of the  husband  which  has  yet to  be 
found.  No  longer  a  child  and  not  yet  a  wife,  Anne  is,  precisely,  in 
between,  and  she  lives  in  in-betweenness.  She  is  a  speaker  who  is 
unheard; she  is a  body  who  is a  'nobody.'  I emphasise  this  because  the 
problems of the body who  is, socially speaking,  a nobody were to engage 
many  of the great nineteenth-century  writers.  We might  recall here  that 
in  one  of the  seminal  eighteenth-century  novels, La  Nouvelle  Hélo07se,1 
Julie's  father  refuses  even  to  listen  to  the  idea  of her  marrying  Saint-
Preux,  because  Saint-Preux is what  he  calls  'un  quidam,'  which  means 
an  unnamed 
'Person  (name 
unknown).'  This  is to  say that,  as far  as the  father  is concerned,  Saint-
Preux  exists in  a  state  of 'quidamity. '  As far  as her  father  is concerned, 
individual  or, 
in  dictionary 
terms, 
1.  Published in  1761,  by French  writer Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712-1778). 
IN  BETWEEN:  PERSUASION 
233 
Anne  also  exists  in  that  state  of quidamity―she  was  nobody,  she  was 
only  Anne:  'He  had  never  indulged  much  hope,  he  had  now  none,  of 
ever  reading  her  name  in  any  other  page  of his  favourite  work.'  Until 
she is, as it were,  reborn  in  terms  of writing  in  the  Baronetage, she  does 
not  exist―not to  be  in  the  book is thus  not  to be.  We  may  laugh  at Sir 
Walter  but  Jane  Austen  makes  it  very  clear  what  kind  of perversity  is 
involved  in  such  a  radical  confusion  or  inversion  of  values  whereby 
script and  name take absolute precedence over offspring  and  dependents; 
or,  to put  it another  way,  when  you  cannot  see the  body  for the  book. 
Anne  Elliot,  then,  is  perpetually  displaced,  always  giving  way'  as 
opposed  to having  her  own  way―it  is worth emphasising the  metaphor. 
The  story  of  her  life  consists  precisely  in  having  had  her  own  way 
blocked,  refused,  negated.  One  might  almost think  of the  book as being 
about  dissuasion,  for  she  is  urged  or  forced  not  into  doing  something 
which she does not want  to do,  but  into  not  doing something  which  her 
whole  emotional  self  tells  her  is the  right  thing  (that  is,  marry  Captain 
Wentworth  at  a  time  when  he  had  no  fortune).  Her  words  carry  no 
weight.  The  word  'persuasion'  echoes throughout  the  novel  of that  title 
just  as  it  is constantly  haunting  Anne  Elliot  (it occurs at  least  fourteen 
times).  It is as if she cannot get away from  what she has done  in allowing 
herself  to  be  persuaded  not  to  marry  Frederick  Wentworth―or  dis02
suaded  from  marrying  him.  Yet  'persuasion'  implies  some  sort  and 
source  of 'authority'―preferably  moral  authority;  mere  power  can  work 
by  simple  imperatives  or  prohibitions  backed  up  by  force.  But what  is 
striking  about  the  world  of Persuasion 
is the  absence of any  real  centre 
or  principle  of  authority.  Among  the  possible  traditional  sources  of 
authority  we  might  include  the  family,  parents,  the  clergy,  social  rank 
and  respected names,  familiar and  revered  places, codes of manners  and 
propriety,  codes of duty  and  prudence,  the  care and  concern  of  friend02
ship,  or true love so certain of itself that  it becomes self-authorising.  But 
in  this  novel  all  such  potential  sources  of  authority  have  gone  awry, 
gone  away,  gone  wrong;  they  are  absent,  dispersed  or  impotent;  they 
have  become  ossified,  stagnant  or―worse―totally  unreliable  and  mis02
leading.  Everything  is  in  a  condition  of  change  in  this  novel,  and  as 
often  as not  it is change as deterioration  or diminution.  In such  a  world 
it becomes a  real  question,  what  can  and  should  remain  'constant'? To 
retain an  uncritical allegiance to certain decaying inert social hierarchies 
and  practices  means  dehumanising  the  self  for  the  sake  of  rigidifying 
deathly  formulae;  to  abandon  oneself  to  the  new  might  be  to  opt  for  a 
giddy  dissolution.  Just about  all  the  previous  stabilities of Jane Austen's 
world  are  called into  question  in  this  novel―in  which  things  really  are 
'changed  utterly,'  with  no  terrible  beauty  being  born.2  It  is  a  novel  of 
2.  See  William  Butler  Yeats,  "Easter  1916":  "All  changed,  changed  utterly:/A  terrible beauty 
is bom." 
234 
TONY  TANNER 
great poignancy and  sadness,  as well as one  of real bitterness and  astrin-
gency,  for  it  is  deeply  shadowed  by  the  passing  of  things,  and  the 
remembrance  of things  past. 
It is hardly  surprising,  then,  that  time plays a larger part in  this novel 
than  in any  other  of Jane Austen's works.  It is the only one of her novels 
which  gives a  specific  date for  the  opening  action―'summer  1814'―as 
Emma 
is the  only  novel to use a single name  as a title. The significance 
of  that  date  (the  end  of the  Napoleonic  wars―apart  from  'the  hundred 
days' of Napoleon's abortive return,  concluded  by the battle of Waterloo 
in  1815),  becomes increasingly obvious: it marks a big change in English 
history  and  society.  But in  the  novel  the  crucial passage  of time  is  that 
which  has  elapsed  since  Anne  was  'persuaded'  to  give  up  Wentworth 
and  he  disappeared  into  the  navy―'more  than  seven  years  were  gone 
since this little history of sorrowful  interest had  reached its close.'  Indeed 
Persuasion 
is in effect  a second novel. (Part of its rare autumnal magic― 
not  unlike  that  of one  of Shakespeare's last plays―is that  it satisfies that 
dream  of a 'second chance' which  must  appeal  to anyone who has expe02
rienced  the  sense  of an  irreparably  ruined  life  owing  to an  irrevocable, 
mistaken  decision.) The  'first  novel'  is what  might  be  called  (warily) a 
typical  Jane Austen  novel  and  is told  in  telescopic brevity  in  a few lines 
in  chapter 4: 
He  [Wentworth]  was,  at  that  time,  a  remarkably  fine  young  man, 
with  a great deal  of intelligence,  spirit and  brilliancy; and  Anne  an 
extremely  pretty  girl,  with  gentleness,  modest  taste  and  feeling.― 
Half  the  sum  of  attraction,  on  either  side,  might  have  been 
enough,  for  he  had  nothing  to do,  and  she had  hardly  any body  to 
love;  but  the  encounter  of such  lavish  expectations could  not  fail. 
They  were  gradually  acquainted,  and  when  acquainted,  rapidly 
and  deeply  in  love.  It would  be difficult  to say which  had  seen  the 
highest  perfection  in  the  other,  or  which  had  been  the  happiest; 
she,  in  receiving  his  declarations  and  proposals,  or  he  in  having 
them  accepted. 
End  of story.  To  get  there  could  have  taken  the  younger  Jane  Austen 
some  hundreds  of pages.  But times and  things  have  changed.  That was 
a  happy novel of yesteryear,  here  no  more than  a distant  trace, a radiant 
but  receding,  summarisable  memory  in  this  second  novel.  'More  than 
seven  years  were  gone  since  this  little  history  of sorrowful  interest  had 
reached its close.' The first novel ended  when  the totally vain, egotistical 
anti-father  (he  is  even  described  as  womanly  in  his  vanity)  Sir Walter 
Elliot 'gave it all the negative of great astonishment,  great coldness, great 
silence. '  His  'negative' blocked the  marriage  and  the  novel  alike.  It is a 
'negative'  which  is  against  generational  and  narrative  continuity  and 
renewal  and  it has far-reaching  social implications. 
Here  it is enough  to  point  out  that  it provides  the  starting-point  for a 
IN  BETWEEN:  PERSUASION 
235 
into  repression  and  non-recognition,  has 
new kind  of novel  for Jane Austen; a  novel which  arises precisely out of 
the  thwarting  and  'negating'  of her  first  (earlier  type  of)  novel.  Hence 
the  stress on  time  past.  What  has  happened  in  between  then  and  now? 
And  what  can  happen  next? It  must  be  something  quite  different  from 
the  action  and  resolution  of any  previous  Jane  Austen  novel,  because 
something―history,  society  or  whatever  it  is  that  is  embodied  in  the 
sterile,  life-denying  figure  of Sir Walter―has  given  that  kind  of novel 
all  the  negative.'  What  Jane Austen  does  say  is  this:  'She  [Anne]  had 
been  forced  into  prudence  in  her  youth,  she  learned  romance  as  she 
grew  older―the  natural  sequence  of an  unnatural  beginning. '  Most of 
Jane Austen's  heroines have to learn  some kind  of prudence  (not  Fanny 
Price,  who  has suffered  for her  undeviating  dedication  to  prudentiality). 
Anne,  born 
learn 
romance―a deliberate oxymoron  surely,  for  romance  is associated  with 
spontaneous  feelings.  But  in  Anne's  case  these  had  been  blocked;  her 
father  gave them  all the  negative. To find her own  positive she has,  as it 
were, to diseducate  herself from  the authorities  who,  whether  by silence 
or  disapproval  or  forceful  opposition,  dominated  that  early  part  of  her 
life  when  she  was―in  relation  to  Captain  Wentworth―becoming 
somebody.  Anne  has  to  start  on  a  long  and  arduous  second  life,  which 
is based  on  loss,  denial,  deprivation.  This  is the  'unnatural  beginning' 
to her life,  and  to Jane Austen's novel, which differs quite radically  from 
her previous  works in  that  there,  as I said,  her  heroines tend  to graduate 
from  romance to prudence.  And because of what she has lost and  regret02
ted losing (again an  unusual condition  for the Jane Austen  heroine,  who 
has  usually  not  yet  had  any  significant  romance  when  the  book  opens) 
Anne  undergoes  a  new  kind  of ordeal  and  tribulation,  since  any  refer02
ence  to  Captain  Wentworth  offers  'a  new  sort  of trial  to  Anne's  nerves' 
so that  she has to 'teach  herself to be insensible on  such  points.'  Among 
other things, Anne Elliot has to combine sense and  insensibility―again, 
a marked  change from  Jane Austen's  earlier work. 
to 
The  novel  starts,  then,  with  Sir  Walter  contemplating  'the  limited 
remnants  of the  earliest patents'  in  a volume  which  records  'the  history 
and  rise  of the  ancient  and  respectable  family.'  'Limited  remnants'  are 
indeed  all that  now  remain,  and  this  volume  will complete the  work by 
recording  the  'fall'  and  self-destruction  of  this  'respectable  family'―if 
not  the  traditional  family  in  general.  Around  the  unnaturally  well-pre02
served appearance  of Sir Walter he can only see the  'wreck of good looks 
of everybody  else.'  Did  he  but  realise it,  the  'wreckage' goes a good  deal 
deeper  than  that.  What  is  irremediably  wrecked  and  what  might  yet 
remain  to  generate  new  life  from  among  the  'remnants'  becomes a key 
question  of the  book.  Anne  has  to  live with  the  regret  for  what  she  has 
lost,  while  her  one  friend  and  mother-substitute,  Lady  Russell,  while 
feeling  sorry for Anne,  'never  wishes the  past  undone.'  As a  result  'they 
knew not each other's opinion,  either its constancy or its change.' When 
236 
TONY  TANNER 
Sir  Walter decides  to  move  with  his daughters  out  of the  family  home, 
Kellynch  Hall,  Anne  is  aware  of  'the  general  air  of  oblivion  among 
them.'  It is an  air  which  partially  pervades  the  book.  When  Anne  does 
finally  meet Wentworth  again,  her concern is very much  with  the possi02
ble effects  of time: 
How  absurd  to  be  resuming  the  agitation  which  such  an  interval 
had  banished  into  distance  and  indistinctness!  What  might  not 
eight  years  do?  Events  of every  description―changes,  alienations, 
removals,―all,  all  must  be compromised  in  it; and  oblivion of the 
past―how  natural,  how  certain  too! 
In the event Anne finds that 'to retentive feelings eight years may be little 
more  than  nothing. ' Time can  obviously mean  one thing to a couple in 
love―and  something  quite  different  to  the  society around  them.  Anne 
is a  lonely  figure  of emotional  constancy living in  a society of 'changes, 
alienations,  removals.'  She  hears  that  Wentworth  finds  her  'altered 
beyond  his  knowledge,'  but  his  enlightened  knowledge  will  find  her 
essentially unaltered.  There is of course much  emphasis on the past  and 
the  pastness  of the  past:  'That  was  in  the  year  six'; 'There  had  been  a 
time';  'those  rooms  had  witnessed  former  meetings';  and  so  on.  The 
pluperfect  tense  is poignantly  present.  Even  painful  memories  are  pre02
cious; indeed  even  precious because  painful. 
Scenes  had  passed  at  Uppercross,  which  made  it precious.  It stood 
the  record  of many  sensations  of pain,  once  severe  but  now  soft02
ened;  and  of some  instances  of relenting  feeling,  some  breathings 
of  friendship  and  reconciliation,  which  could  never  be  looked  for 
again,  and  which could never cease to be dear.  She left it all behind 
her; all but  the  recollection that  such  things  had  been. 
The  dominant  mood  before  the  end  is autumnal,  nostalgic,  a  sense 
of  the  most  significant  period  of  experience  being  in  the  past,  recol-
lectable  but  irretrievable  and  unrepeatable.  'One  does  not  love a  place 
the  less for having  suffered  in  it. ' There are  moments  when  Wentworth 
speaks  to  Anne  'which  seemed  almost  restoring  the  past.'  'Restoration' 
on  this  personal  level  does  prove  to  be  joyfully―miraculously―possi02
ble.  But on  the  social and  familial  level no  such  restoration  is possible. 
This  is  made  clear  when  the  heir  to  Kellynch,  Mr  Elliot,  enters  the 
novel  and  is not  only  keen  to  marry  Anne  but  seems  a correct and  suit02
able figure to assist at such  restoration  after the gross and  ruinous derelic02
tions  of  Sir  Walter.  Lady  Russell,  characteristically,  would  like  to 
forward  this  marriage  and  see  Anne  'occupying  your  dear  mother's 
place,  succeeding  to  all  her  rights  .  .  .  presiding  and  blessing  in  the 
same  spot'.  To  Anne  herself  the  idea  of  'being  restored  to  Kellynch, 
calling  it  her  home  again,  her  home  forever,  was  a  charm  which  she 
could  not  immediately  resist.'  But  love  is  stronger  than  even  the  most 
IN  BETWEEN:  PERSUASION 
237 
precious property.  Anne  really has 'left  it all behind  her.'  Whatever else 
it might be, this is not a 'restoration' age. 
The question  of 'what lasts' obviously figures most largely in this novel 
in connection with  human  feelings―even leading to a  recurring  debate 
as  to  whether  man  or  woman  is  capable  of the  greater  constancy,  of 
loving longer.  Captain  Benwick is slightly reproached  by Wentworth  for 
having  put  aside  his  devotion  to  the  dead  Fanny  Harville  (whom  he 
apparentiy  worshipped)  to  marry  Louisa  Musgrove.  'A  man  does  not 
recover from  such  a devotion  of the  heart  to such  a woman!―He  ought 
not―he  does  not. '  Wentworth  obviously has  his  own  motives  for  such 
an  assertion: he  is both  indirectly signalling his own  unbroken  devotion 
to  Anne,  and  questioning  hers.  And  indeed  such  pointed  exchanges 
proliferate  towards  the  end  of the  book: 'You did  not  like to  use  cards; 
but time makes many  changes.' Wentworth's  statement  is of course also 
a  question.  To  which  Anne  replies,  'I am  not  yet so  much  changed'― 
'and  stopped,  fearing  she  hardly  knew  what  misconstruction.'  In  the 
crucial  'recognition'  scene―in  the  revised  chapter  23―the  central 
debate  is between  Captain  Harville and  Anne  while  Wentworth  appar-
endy  writes a  letter.  Harville  argues  that  men  love longer,  that  women 
have  a  legendary  reputation  for  inconstancy.  Anne  maintains  that  'We 
certainly do  not forget you,  so soon  as you  forget  us,' and  'All the  privi02
lege I claim for my own  sex . ..  is that of loving longest, when existence 
or hope  is gone. ' This is all said for the  benefit of the  apparently  preoc02
cupied  but  all-attentive Wentworth.  I shall  return  to  the  indirect  mode 
of  communication  in  this  crucial scene.  Here  the  point  to  note  is  that, 
as  Lady  Russell  says,  'Time  will  explain'―certainly  in  this  novel,  in 
which  time  is so central,  and  'explanations' (making  intelligible, laying 
things  out  clearly)  are  both  crucial  and  difficult  to  come  by.  And  the 
novel  itself  is an  inquiry  into―an  ex-planation  of―the  effects  of time. 
As  I  have  said,  this  is  the  'second'  novel,  made  necessary  by  the  rude 
'negation' of the first one,  which  remains as an  aborted embryo in  chap02
ter 4. 
I shall return to the  relationship between  Anne  and  Wentworth.  First 
we should  consider the general state of society as it is represented  in  this 
book.  The  normal  sources of stability and  order  in  Jane  Austen's  world 
would  include  social  position,  property,  place,  family,  manners  and 
propriety,  as  generating  a  web  of  duties  and  responsibilities  which 
together  should  serve  to  maintain  the  moral  fabric  and  coherence of 
society.  In  this  novel  all these  institutions  and  codes and  related  values 
have  undergone  a  radical  transformation  or devaluation.  There are val02
ues, but many of them  are new; and  they are relocated or resited.  Instead 
of a heedful  regard  for position  and  property  and  family,  we have a  new 
obsession  with  'rank,'  'connexions,'  money  and  private  relationships. 
Lady Russell esteems Sir Walter not as a man  or father (he is a wretched 
example  of both)  but  as  a  baronet:  'she  had  prejudices  on  the  side  of 
238 
TONY  TANNER 
ancestry; she  had  a  value  for  rank  and  consequence.' There  are discus02
sions of'rank,  people of rank,  jealousy of rank.'  Mary, the most  insuffer02
able  snob  (she  is not  comic―she is unbearable),  looks not  at  Mr  Elliot 
but  at  'the  horses  . ..  the  arms  . ..  the  livery';  she  regards  only  the 
insignia  of rank,  empty  signifiers  of another  empty  series  of signifiers. 
For  'rank'  in this book does not betoken a responsible authoritative  posi02
tion  in  society:  it  signifies  only  itself.  It  is  rigidifying  self-reifying  sys02
tem―signifying  nothing.  It  is  symptomatic  of  a  'state  of  stagnation' 
existing in the class which should  be exemplary and active if it is to serve 
as,  and  deserve  to  be,  a  ruling  class.  Mr.  Elliot  at  one  time  of his  life 
despises 'the  honour  of the  family' and  declared  that  'if baronetcies were 
saleable,  anybody  should  have  his  for  fifty  pounds,  arms  and  motto, 
name  and  livery  included.'  'Rank'  is degraded  into  a  mere  commodity. 
On  the  other  hand,  when  it  seems that  it would  be  more  profitable  for 
him  to  become  the  serious  heir  to  baronetcy,  he  speaks  seriously  in 
favour  of 'the  value  of rank  and  connexion.' This  is a  mark  not  of his 
conversion  but  of his  ruthlessly  selfish opportunism  and  hypocrisy.  The 
discourse  and  ideology  of  'rank'  happen  to  be  available  to  disguise  or 
'embellish'  his  crudely  egotistical  aspirations.  The  new  realm  where 
rank  does  have  a  genuine  significance  and  is  related  to  a  hierarchy of 
real  functions  and  obligations is the  navy―but  I shall come back to  the 
navy.  The  emphasis  on  the  'value'  of'connexions,' which  Lady Russell 
upholds  in  an  apparently  rational  way,  as the  unspeakably  foolish  Mary 
does  in  the  crudest  possible way ('It is very unpleasant  having  such  con02
nexions,' she declares of the  respectable Hayters), is a relatively new one 
in  Jane  Austen.  It  emphasises  a  merely  titular  or  'nominal'  and  fortu02
itous  relationship  rather  than  any  true  bonding  or  sense  of reciprocal 
human  relatedness.  An  extreme  example  of the  meaninglessness  and 
folly  of this  stress  on  'rank'  and  'connexions' is  offered  by  Sir Walter's 
and  Elizabeth's  frantic  anxiety  and  eagerness  to  cultivate  the  acquain02
tance  of their titled  cousins,  Lady Dalrymple  and  her daughter.  As peo02
ple  they  are  not  even  'agreeable'; 'they  were  nothing.'  Mr  Elliot  asserts 
that  'rank  is  rank.'  The  book  confirms  this  as  a  meaningless  tautology 
and  counterasserts that  rank  is  'nothing.' 
More  than  one  person  is said  to  be  'nothing'  or  'nobody.'  Anne  'was 
nobody'  because  unmarried;  Mr  Wentworth  (Frederick's brother)  'was 
nobody  .  .  .  quite  unconnected,'  because  he  was  a  curate  and  not  'a 
man  of property';  Charles  Hayter  is 'nothing  but  a country  curate'; Cap02
tain Wentworth,  when  he reappears  as rich 'and  as high  in his profession 
as merit and  activity could place him' was 'no longer nobody. ' These are 
mainly the verdicts of Sir Walter, a 'foolish spendthrift  baronet' who  has 
neither money nor profession  nor merit nor activity.  He is also no longer 
married  and  has  rented  his  property.  If anybody  is  now  'nobody,'  it  is 
he.  It  is  indirectly  Jane Austen's  verdict―through  Anne's  silent assess02
ment―that  the  Dalrymples  'were  nothing. '  But who  then  is somebody 
IN  BETWEEN:  PERSUASION 
239 
and  something―and  by  what  social  criteria?  It  would  seem  that  there 
are no longer any agreed-on  standards,  no authoritative  modes  of assess02
ment,  to discriminate the  somebodies from  the  nobodies,  to tell a some02
thing  from  a nothing.  This in  itself is a symptom  of a crisis of values―a 
chaos if not a total  absence and  loss of'common'  (i.e. communal)  stan02
dards of modes  of identification  and  evaluation.  There  seems  to  be  no 
correlation  or  connection  between  social title  and  social  role,  between 
rank  and  merit. 
The  honorific  term 
'gendeman'―always  somewhat  vague―now 
means  different  things  to  different  people  (Sir Walter  is  'misled'  when 
his  agent  Mr  Shepherd  refers  to  Mr  Wentworth  as a  'gentleman'),  or  it 
is meaningless  (as applied  to Captain  Wallis)  or worse  it conceals heart02
less and  ruthless  anti-social egotism  (Mr  Elliott passes  as  "completely a 
gendeman').  The true 'gentlemen'  are  now to be found  in the  navy,  but 
they are neither  recognised nor addressed  as such.  A whole social system 
of  categorisation  and  terminology  is  slipping  into  meaningless  or  per02
verse misapplication,  dangerously  so when  the  label 'gentleman'  is con02
fidently  affixed  to  a  man  who  is the  complete  opposite  (or inversion) of 
everything  a  true  gentleman  should  be.  Society's  very  taxonomy  seems 
to  have  collapsed,  being  at best misleading  and  at worst  totally  corrupt. 
Names  themselves  seem  to  have  lost  any  social  significance―at  least 
from  the  perverse  and  anachronistic  point  of view  of Sir Walter,  who 
laments  thus:  'One  wonders  how  the  names  of  many  of  our  nobility 
became so common.'  One  explanation  may  involve the  dilution  of aris02
tocratic  families  with  the  wealthier  members  of  other  classes;  another 
could  simply  point  to  the  behaviour  of Sir Walter  himself,  who  effec02
tively does  just about  everything  he  could  to bring  his family  name  into 
disrepute.  It  is he  who,  on  hearing  that  Anne  is going  to  visit her  crip02
pled and  impoverished  friend  Mrs Smith, says disdainfully,  'Mrs Smith, 
such  a  name!'  'Smith'  is  indeed  the  archetypal  anonymous  English 
name,  a  name  which  is in  effect  no  'name'  at all.  But,  here  again,  this 
novel  forces  us  to  question  all  kinds  of social assumptions.  What  really 
is  in  a  name?  In  the  case  of  Sir  Walter  Elliot,  an  impoverished  and 
fatuous  vanity;  in  the  case  of Mrs.  Smith,  a  wealth  of misfortune  and 
misery; in  the  case of Lady  Dalrymple,  'nothing. '  Like  'rank'  and  'con02
nexions,'  names  also no  longer  serve to  facilitate any  kind  of social ori02
entation.  They  now  manifest  themselves  as  truly  arbitrary  signifiers― 
designations  unrelated  to any  coherent social design  or  structure. 
Let us now consider property  and  places, houses and  homes and  fami02
lies.  We  can  note  immediately  that  the  action  of the  novel  is  dispersed 
among  an  unusually  large  number  of different  places (unusual  for Jane 
Austen).  Fanny  Price  visits  her  'home'  in  Portsmouth;  Emma  goes  to 
Box  Hill.  But  Anne  is  variously  'removed'  or  'transplanted'  from  Kel02
lynch  Hall to Uppercross cottage; to the Great House  (of the  Musgroves) 
to  Bath; with  a  glimpse  of Winthrop  and  a  crucial  visit  to  Lyme.  This 
240 
TONY  TANNER 
topographical  diffusion  and  'transplanting'  is itself both  a symptom  and 
a  part  of a  more  far-reaching  social  fragmentation  and  mobility.  One 
important  scene takes place in an  hotel in Bath. 'A morning  of thorough 
confusion  was to be expected. A large party  in an  hotel ensured  a quick-
changing,  unsettled  scene. ' An hotel is the appropriate  edifice for a tran02
sient,  increasingly uprooted  or unrooted  society, and  that  'quick-chang02
ing,  unsettled  scene'  is―in  little―the  scene  of the  whole  book.  The 
'thorough  confusion'  experienced  in  the  hotel  pervades  society at large. 
This  topographical  dispersal  and  social scattering  also  have  their  effect 
on  the  style and  vocabulary  of the  novel.  Of the  incident  on  the  Cobb 
we  are  told  parenthetically  that  '(it was all done  in  rapid  moments).' In 
a  way that  is true  of the  book as a whole,  which  is more episodic,  more 
fragmentary,  and  more marked by quick and sudden changes and  abrupt 
transitions  and  jerks of the  plot than  any  of the previous  novels. Related 
to  that  is  a  perceptibly  new  note  of  emotional  volatility  and  irrup-
tiveness,  even  excess.  After the  incident on the Cobb there is, not a cool 
discussion,  but  an  'interchange  of perplexity  and  terror'―a  significant 
dissolution  of  coherent  speech  in  feeling.  The  word  'burst'  appears  a 
number  of  times  in  relation  to  sudden  mental  and  emotional  erup02
tions―'extraordinary  burst  of mind,'  'bursts  of feeling'; phrases  such  as 
'a thousand  feelings rushed  on Anne, ' 'overpowering  happiness' contrib02
ute to the  increased presence of sudden unanticipated  and  unpredictable 
inward  intensities.  And  such  'bursts,'  'rushes  of  feeling,'  emotional 
'overpowerings'  are  not  always  the  signs of a  potentially  dangerous  and 
disorderly  (or 'improper')  lack of control,  as they  often  are  in  Jane Aus02
ten's earlier work.  On  the contrary,  they can now be the desirable mani02
festations  of  a  capacity  for  authentic  and  spontaneous  feeling.  This 
means  that  there  is a  much  more  ruffled  'choppy'  surface  to  the  narra02
tive.  'Tranquillity'  is  often  'interrupted';  'restraint'  gives way  to  'distur02
bance.'  'Every  moment  rather  brought  fresh  agitation.'  This  refers  to 
Anne  near  the  end,  but  in  a way  it is true of the  novel as a whole. 
There  are  further  lessons to  be  learned  from  Anne's  constant  'trans02
plantation.'  T he following is crucial: 
Anne  had  not  wanted  this  visit  to  Uppercross,  to  learn  that  a 
removal  from  one  set of people  to another,  though  at a distance of 
only three  miles, will often  include a total change of conversation, 
opinion,  and  idea  .  .  .  she  acknowledged  it to  be very  fitting,  that 
every  little social commonwealth  should  dictate  its own  matters of 
discourse; and  hoped,  ere long,  to become a not unworthy  member 
of  the  one  she  was  now  transplanted  to  .  .  .  she believed she  must 
now  submit  to  feel  that  another  lesson,  in  the  art  of knowing  our 
own  nothingness  beyond  our  own  circle,  was  becoming necessary 
for  her. 
This awareness that within  the  one common  language―English―there 
can  be  innumerable  discourses according to group,  place, and  so on,  is 
IN  BETWEEN:  PERSUASION 
241 
a very crucial one.  It is not  the  same thing  as a dialect but  what  Roland 
Barthes calls a 'sociolect'―'the language of a linguistic community,  that 
is of a group of persons  who  all  interpret  in  the  same  way all  linguistic 
statements.'  It  is of course  simply  a  general  truth,  and  one  well  known 
to Jane Austen,  that  people  speaking  the  same  language  can  very  often 
not  'hear'  each  other  because  they  are  operating  within  different  dis02
courses  or  sociolects.  It  is characteristic of many  of Jane Austen's  hero02
ines  that  they  are  aware  when  people  are  operating  within  different 
discourses―an  awareness which  is an  aspect of their sense and  linguistic 
'conscience' and  very often  a consequence of their detachment  and  iso02
lation.  And  Anne  learns  another  lesson; just  as  one  language  is  in  fact 
made  up  of many  discourses, so society is made  up  of many  'circles'  and 
in  many  of these  circles  one  may  be  a  'nothing'  just  as  in  some  dis02
courses one is inaudible.  Anne's 'word'  initially 'had  no weight' precisely 
because  she  was  regarded  as  a  'no-body'  within  the  first  circle  of  her 
family―'negatived' from  the beginning.  Her speech can  only take on  its 
full  value  when  she  is truly  regarded  as a  'some-body'―a  person  in  her 
own  right,  not  according  to  rank  or status,  and  taken  permanently  into 
a new circle―the navy.  In between  she is, well,  in  between.  But notice 
two things.  Anne does not fight this state of affairs  or lament the  plurality 
of  discourses.  On  the  contrary,  she  is  willing  to  try  and  adapt  herself 
(within  the  limits  of  her  unchanging  sense  of  propriety).  Yet  her 
speech―like her  love―is 'constant' in a society apparently  given over to 
change.  Having  to  negotiate  a  plurality  of  partial  discourses,  Anne 
comes  to embody  what  we might  call  the  conscience of language.  She, 
and  she alone,  always speaks truly,  and  truly  speaks.  Indeed,  Jane Aus02
ten  may  well  be  intending  to  depict  Anne  as  in  some  ways  old-fash02
ioned―or,  rather,  out  of fashion  (which  is  by  nature  ephemeral  and 
fickle).  Not  all  change  is regarded  as  unmitigatedly  bad  in  this  book― 
indeed,  given  the  'stagnation'  and  moral  paralysis  (if  not  something 
worse) which  seems to prevail among the upper ruling  clases,  then  some 
change  may  be  not  only  unavoidable  but  positively  necessary and  wel02
come.  But Anne's  'lessons' do  point  to  the  fact  (glimpsed  at  the  end  of 
Emma)  that  society is breaking up  into smaller and  smaller 'circles'  and 
units.  This  implies―indeed  involves―the  loss  of any  sense  of a  true, 
authoritative  'centre,'  and  the  possible disappearance  of any  'common' 
language (and with  that,  a shared  sense of 'common' values). Add to this 
the  fact  that  even  within  the  small  separate  'sociolects'  there  are  people 
who  tend  towards speaking  an  'idiolect' (i.e.,  a language  which  is really 
private  to  themselves  and  not  properly  heard  or  understood  by  anyone 
else).  This could  portend  a society which  is no  longer truly  a society in 
any  meaningful  sense  but  rather  an  aggregate  of contiguous  but  non-
communicating  groups  or  just  families  (or  even  just  individuals),  with 
no  real  connections,  no  overall  coherence,  no  single structure  binding 
them  together.  Separate 'commonwealths' with  neither 'wealth' not any-
242 
TONY  TANNER 
thing  much  else held  in  'common': 'Dictate-orships' perhaps  (Jane Aus02
ten's  words  carry  a weight  of possible irony) of one  kind  or another.  To 
a  large extent this  is our  'society' today.  It is not  'society' as Jane Austen 
had  thought  it  should  or  could  be.  But  she  saw  that  the  change  was 
coming and  was inevitable. To a large extent she could see why.  It is all 
there  in  this unique  novel. 
In  this prevailing  atmosphere  of change  it is not surprising  that  'prop02
erty' no longer plays the assured  and essential role it did in earlier novels. 
Mary,  for  instance,  'had  merely  connected  herself  with  an  old  country 
family  and  respectability and  large fortune.'  That 'merely' is Sir Walter's 
thought,  Jane Austen's  irony.  The  advantage  for  people  'living on  their 
own  property,'  according  to  the  insinuating  Mrs  Clay,  is that  they  'are 
not  obliged to follow any  .  .  . profession'  but  can  just 'follow their  own 
pursuits. ' Just what  Sir Walter likes to hear,  of course,  but not at all what 
Jane  Austen  believed,  since for  her  the  owning  of 'property'  necessarily 
involved  the  recognition  of obigations and  duties  to  the  community.  If 
it  is  merely  an  arena  for  self-indulgence  and  hedonism,  it  is  less  than 
useless  as  a  part  of the  maintained  and  maintaining  order  of society.  It 
is  still  desirable  to  have  property  of course; but  as  a  symbol  of certain 
social  values  it  is  undervalued  as  Mary  undervalues  Charles  Hayter's 
'good,  freehold  property'  because  it  confers  no  rank  (adding,  in  her 
incomparably selfish way,  'it would  be shocking to have Henrietta  marry 
Charles  Hayter; a very bad  thing  for her,  and  a still worse for  me'),  or as 
Sir Walter feels 'no degradation  in his changes,' seeing 'nothing  to regret 
in  the  duties  and  dignity  of the  resident  land-holder'  and  finding  'much 
to be vain  of in  the  littleness of a town.'  His is the quintessential abdica02
tion  and  dereliction  of the  ruling-class landowner.  When  he  rents  Kel02
lynch  Hall  he  causes  a  'break-up  of  the  family,'  and  leaves  behind 
'deserted  grounds'  and  'so altered  a village. ' (There is quite possibly here 
a  barely  ironic allusion  to Goldsmith's  The  Deserted  Village.3)  He  is an 
agent  of 'desolation,'  helping  both  to  precipitate  and  to  accelerate  the 
destruction  of the old order of society.  (Anne will be the first Jane Austen 
heroine  who  will not  found  her  marriage  on  the once-necessary basis of 
'property.')  Society  in  the  form  of  Sir  Walter  Elliot  has  become  all 
empty  self-regarding  form  and  display:  he  has  no  sense of responsibility 
to  his  position,  to  the  land,  and  it  is significant that  he  rents  his  house 
to go and  participate  in  the  meaningless frivolities in Bath. 
This  matter  of renting  his house  is worth  pausing  over for a  moment. 
The  notion  'quit  Kellynch-hall' is  initially  horrendous  to  Sir  Walter. 
But  he  would,  as  he  says,  'sooner  quit  Kellynch-hall' than  undertake 
any economies or constraints on  his unrestricted  pursuit of pleasure.  His 
relation  to  his house  is not  a  responsible one: he  does not  see his  house 
3.  A poem (1770) about rural depopulation by Oliver Goldsmith (1728-1774). 
IN  BETWEEN:  PERSUASION 
243 
as  part  of a  larger  context,  an  interrelated  rural  society,  an  ecology, if 
you  will; it is more  like a  pleasure-dome  or  a  three-dimensional  mirror 
which  flatters  his  vanity.  So he  agrees  to  quit  if he  cannot  have  those 
pleasures.  But note  that  'Sir Walter could  not  have  borne  the  degrada02
tion of being known  to design  letting his house―Mr Shepherd had  once 
mentioned  the  word  "advertise"―but  never  dared  approach  it  again.'  I 
shall  come  back  to  'advertising'  in  the  last  chapter,  but  here  again  we 
note  that  Sir Walter wants  the  profits  of 'renting'  while  still  pretending 
to belong to an  aristocracy which did  not contaminate  itself with contact 
with  any  kind  of  'trade'  or  commerce.  This  is  the  self-deception  of a 
figure no longer sensible of the significance of his social  rank.  When  he 
does consider renting  it he  thinks  of it in  terms  of 'a  prize' for the  fortu02
nate  tenants―'a  prize';  he  has  no  appreciation  of the  real  value  of his 
inherited  house.  And  I  shall  just  note  the  areas  to  which  he  does  not 
really  want  the  new  tenant  to  have  access:  'The  park  would  be  open  to 
him  of course  .  .  .  ,  but  what  restrictions I might  impose  on  the  use of 
the  pleasure-grounds,  is another  thing.  I am  not  fond  of the  idea  of my 
shrubberies  being  always  approachable.'  Funny  of  course―but  again 
there  is no  sense of the  importance  and  significance of the  house  of his 
fathers,  the  house  in  which  he  so  signally  fails  in  his  paternal  duties. 
To  abandon  it  in  exchange for  money,  for  mere  pleasure,  rather  than 
'economise'  is a  very  notable  dereliction  of his  duties.  This  is an  alter02
ation  which  is most  definitely  not  'perhaps  an  improvement'  but  indis02
putably  a  degradation. 
Even  before  Sir Walter decided  to  'quit  Kellynch-hall' we  are  told of 
'the  prosperity  and  the  nothingness' of the  life  there,  with  nothing  to  fill 
'the  vacancies'―'no habits  of utility  abroad,  no  talents  or accomplish02
ments for home.'  Lady Elliot,  the true upholder  of domesticity,  is dead. 
Anne would  carry on  her  work―but  of course is not allowed to.  Rather 
than practise the slightest economy or curtail any of his indulgences, Sir 
Walter  prefers  to  rent  his  landed  house,  which  is  indeed  nothing  of a 
home and  merely parasitic on the community  it should help to  maintain 
and  preserve.  (We  might  note  in  passing  that  we  are  told  that,  if Sir 
Walter  follows Anne's  sensible suggestions,  Lady  Russell estimates  that 
'in  seven years he  will be clear. ' Of course he  cannot deprive  himself  of 
any  of his private  gratifications for  any  length  of time  at  all.  It is Anne, 
who  can  wait  and  economise scrupulously  on  her  emotional  expendi02
ture,  who after  'seven years'―when  Wentworth  returns―will  finally  'be 
clear.'  'Clear,' one  might  say,  of the  whole  rotten  pack of her  family; as 
well  as  'clear'  of  the  obstacles,  negatives  and  dissuasions  which  had 
blocked  the growth  and  consummation  of her true love seven years pre02
viously.)  Seeing the  Crofts  in  Kellynch  Hall  after  they  have  rented  it, 
Anne feels  that  'they  were gone who  deserved  not  to stay,  and  that  Kel02
lynch-hall  had  passed  into  better  hands  than  its  owners.'  Unlike  the 
244 
TONY  TANNER 
'improvements'  suggested  in  Mansfield  Park, 
the  'few  alterations'  the 
Crofts  make  to  Kellynch  Hall  are  'all  very  much  for  the  better.'  It  is 
almost as if Jane Austen was passing a verdict on the defection  of a whole 
class  in  whom  she  had  once  invested  so  much  hope.  Initially Anne  is 
sad  at  the  thought  of 'a  beloved  home  made  over  to  others'―but  that 
home  was  no  longer  home.  Her  loyalties shift  and  are displaced  or rea02
ligned  elsewhere.  For instance: 'how  much  more  interesting  to  her  was 
the home and  the friendship  of the Harvilles and Captain  Benwick, than 
her  own  father's  house  in  Camden  Place.'  The  Harvilles  and  Benwick 
are  naval  officers  of course,  and,  just  as  there  is  a  shift  of significant, 
active  'rank'  from  society to the  navy,  so it is the  navy  who―apparently 
paradoxically―reconstitute a meaningful  domesticity,  re-create the  idea 
of  home,  ultimately  redefine  the  notion  of society itself.  It is Mrs  Croft 
who  asserts that  'Woman  may be as comfortable on board,  as in the best 
house  in  England,'  and  clearly  her  ship  was  more  of  a  'home'  than 
Kellynch  Hall.  But  even  the  house  of the  Harvilles  and  Captain  Ben02
wick―rather  like a  ship  on  shore―in  all  its apparent oddity  and  some02
what  cramped  idiosyncrasy  offers  to  Anne  'the  picture  of  repose  and 
domestic  happiness.'  Note  that  the  rooms  are  extremely  small  and  the 
very  limited  space  is  crowded.  This  was  one  of the  major  deficiencies 
of  Fanny's  home  in  Portsmouth  which  contributed  to  its  'impropriety.' 
Nothing  of that  now.  The  small  space  is turned  into  'the  best possible 
account'  and  instead  of  the  chaos  of  excessive proximity  and  discord 
there  is the  snugness  of hospitable  ease and  intimacy.  The  'hospitality' 
of the navy is emphasised―and  usual  'forms' of etiquette are at the same 
time  devalued.  There was such  a 'bewitching charm  in  a degree of hos02
pitality  so uncommon,  so unlike  the  usual  style of give-and-take  invita02
tions  and  dinners  of formality  and  display. '  A  whole  system  of socially 
prescribed  'formal'  reciprocities is here  effectively displaced  by an  infor02
mal  spontaneity.  It  is  not  prompted  by  custom  but  by  'the  heart'―the 
rooms  are  so small  as none  but  those who  'invite from  the  heart'  would 
think  of asking people  to share  their  living-space. The shift  of emphasis 
from  socially  prescribed  'invitations'  to  those  which  come  from  'the 
heart'  is part of a  larger  change  from  a socially based  to an  emotionally 
justified  code of behaviour.  It has quite  radical  implications. As already 
intimated,  I shall  have  more  to say about  the  navy,  but  I want  to return 
to land  matters. 
There  is an  example of a relatively happy home unrelated  to the  navy: 
the  home  of the  Musgroves, the  Great House.  But it is 'happy' in a new 
way.  For a start,  it is characterised by an  'air of confusion'  owing to  the 
accumulating  objects  belonging  to  the  lively children.  The  originals of 
the  ancestral portraits  would  have been  'astonished' at the general  'over02
throw  of all order  and  neatness.'  So surmises Anne.  But, again,  though 
these  were  characteristics  of  Fanny's  Portsmouth  home,  the  Great 
IN  BETWEEN:  PERSUASION 
245 
House is in no way another version of that horrific non-home.  The  tone 
of the description  is worth  noting with  some care: 
The  Musgroves,  like their  house,  were  in  a state of alteration,  per02
haps  of  improvement.  The  father  and  mother  were  in  the  old 
English  style and  the  young  people  in  the  new.  Mr  and  Mrs  Mus02
grove were  a  very good  sort of people; friendly  and  hospitable,  not 
much  educated,  and  not  at  all  elegant.  Their  children  had  more 
modern  minds  and  manners  .  .  . and  were  now,  like thousands of 
other  young  ladies,  living  to  be  fashionable,  happy,  and  merry. 
Their dress had every advantage,  their faces were rather pretty,  their 
spirits extremely good,  their  manners  unembarrassed  and  pleasant; 
they were of consequence at home,  and  favourites  abroad. 
Alteration,  perhaps  of  improvement: 
the  qualification  is  not  barbed. 
There is no biting irony,  no malice in the text. Jane Austen  is genuinely 
open  and  uncommitted.  The  gay hedonism  of the  children  is not  seen 
as  dangerous  or  disruptive.  The  older  generation  lack  education  and 
elegance.  Once  that  would  have  been  a  serious  defect  in  Jane  Austen's 
eyes.  Now  it  doesn't  matter.  Because  other  values,  such  as  friendship 
and  hospitality,  are  coming to  seem  more  important.  T h e re  is so  litde 
real friendship  in  the  world!'  laments poor  Mrs Smith later in  the  book, 
and  it is now becoming for Jane Austen a cardinal virtue.  The  children's 
'modern  minds  and  manners'  are  not  mocked.  They  may  be  somewhat 
giddy,  perhaps  a  little  shallow  or  frivolous.  They  are  lively  and  good-
spirited  (they  are  not  'stagnant')  and  their  'manners'  are  at  least  'unem02
barrassed  and  pleasant'―quite  unlike  the  ludicrous  snobbery,  chilly 
hauteur,  unpleasant  seeming-politeness,  and  mean-spirited  psuedo-
etiquette of the upper classes.  Jane Austen  cannot whole-heartedly  iden02
tify  with  these  'modern  minds  and  manners,'  just  as  Anne  'would  not 
have  given  up  her  own  more  elegant  and  cultivated  mind  for  all  their 
enjoyments.'  But both Anne and  her author  can recognise their  genuine 
happiness  and  applaud  their  'good-humoured  mutual  affection.'  Soci02
ety―England  itself―is  altering,  perhaps  improving.  Jane Austen  does 
not  take  sides; she  neither  mocks the  old  style  nor  reprobates  the  new. 
Her  stance  is Anne's.  But she  is clearly  undertaking  a  radical  reassess02
ment  and  revision  of  her  system  of  values.  She  can  be  gendy  ironic 
about  the  domestic  arrangements  of the  Great  House,  as  when,  later, 
she  describes a  tolerably  confused  and  noisy  scene there  with  everyone 
doing  something  different  and  contributing  to  a  general  disharmony, 
and  comments,  'It was a  fine  family-piece.' But it is not  Portsmouth.  A 
new  tolerance and  relativism  has  entered  Jane Austen's  tone.  What  for 
Anne is a rather  nerve-racking 'domestic hurricane'  is for Mrs Musgrove 
'a  little  quiet  cheerfulness  at  home.'  Jane  Austen  is  amused  but  not 
censorious: 'Everybody has their tastes in  noises as well as in  other  mat-
246 
TONY  TANNER 
ters;  and  sounds  are  quite  innoxious,  or  most  distressing,  by  their  sort 
rather  than  their quantity. ' (Lady Russell would  hear the  street noises of 
Bath  as  signalling  her  'winter  pleasures'  and  would,  says Jane  Austen, 
have  probably  regarded  them  as part of 'a  little quiet  cheerfulness'  after 
the deprivations  of the  country. ) I do  not believe that Jane Austen  could 
have  written  that  sentence at the  time of Mansfield 
Park. 
Having mentioned  'manners'  I want to point to another major reversal 
or change  in  Jane Austen's  habitual  mode  of assessment.  We have seen 
how  important  manners  were  to  her―as  to  Burke4―and  how  crucial 
she made  it seem to distinguish  (if possible) between Lockean good  man02
ners  and  Chesterfield's  type  of good  manners5  (alternatively,  between 
English  and  'French' manners).  Again,  this careful  distinction―indeed 
the whole  signifying  role of manners―has  become useless if not treach02
erously  misleading.  On  Mr  Elliot's  first  appearance  he  'proves'  by  his 
'propriety'  that  'he  was  a  man  of exceedingly good  manners.'  By con02
trast,  Admiral  Croft's  'manners  were  not  quite  of the  tone  to  suit  Lady 
Russell.'  Mr  Elliot indeed  serves single-handedly  to  undermine  utterly 
any  code  of values  attached  to  manners.  'His  manners  were  so exactly 
what  they  ought  to  be,  so  polished,  so  easy,  so  particularly  agreeable' 
that―as  manners―Anne  herself  finds  them  as  good  as  Wentworth's! 
His conversation  leaves 'no doubt of his being a sensible man.'  And  it is 
not  merely  the  cultivated  appearance  of  manners.  Lady  Russell  finds 
'the  solid  . ..  so fully  supporting the  superficial' that  she perceives  him 
as  an  embodiment  of  all  the  virtues.  'Everything  united  in  him.'  He 
even  seems to  have  'a  value  for  all the  felicities of domestic  life. ' True, 
Anne  begins to  have  her  suspicions  and  reservations,  and  Lady Russell 
is capable of erroneous  judgements.  But nothing  in  Mr  Elliot's manners 
could  have prepared anyone  for the  revelation  of the  'true'  man. 
Mr  Elliot is a  man  without  heart  or conscience; a designing,  wary, 
cold-blooded  being,  who  thinks  only  of himself; who,  for  his  own 
interest  or  ease,  would  be  guilty  of any  cruelty,  or  any  treachery, 
that  could  be  perpetrated  without  risk of his  general  character.  He 
has no  feeling for others.  Those whom  he  has been the  chief cause 
of leading  into  ruin,  he can  neglect and  desert without  the smallest 
compunction.  He  is totally  beyond  the  reach  of any  sentiment of 
justice or compassion.  Oh!  he  is black at heart,  hollow and black! 
Mrs  Smith's  description  of  the  true  Mr  Elliot  is  never  challenged  or 
controverted.  It is the  most  unqualified  summary  of unmitigated  evil in 
all  Jane Austen's  work.  Yet his  manners  are  so perfect  that  even  Anne 
4.  Edmund  Burke  (1729-1797),  statesman and  political  writer,  who  celebrated  conservative 
values. 
5.  An  allusion  to  John  Locke  (1632-1704),  philosopher,  author  of  the  important  treatise  On 
(1693),  and  Philip  Dormer  Stanhope,  fourth  Earl  of  Chesterfield  (1694-1773), 
Education 
whose letters to his illegitimate son constitute elaborate prescriptions for polished behavior. 
IN  BETWEEN:  PERSUASION 
247 
can  scarcely  differentiate  them  from  her  true,  beloved,  Wentworth's. 
Anne's  own  manners  are  'as  consciously  right  as  they  were  invariably 
gende,' but  as usual,  in  her  constancy and  genuine  'invariability,' she is 
an  exception.  With  the  vivid  example  of the  absolute  non-correlation 
between  'manners'  and  character  presented  by  Mr  Elliot  we  have  to 
accept that  'good manners'  in  the  socially accepted and  prescribed  sense 
are simply no longer of any use in estimating or infering the  inner  quali02
ties of anyone.  Perhaps a new code of manners  altogether is necessary― 
manners  which,  however  'incorrect'  or  even  crude  according  to  estab02
lished  social  notions  of decorum  and  propriety,  do  nevertheless  reveal 
the true qualities of the  inner  man,  or woman.  Anne,  and  Jane Austen, 
find them  in the  rougher  but  sincere manners  of the  navy. 
As  I have tried  to  indicate,  the  usual  sources,  strongholds  and  tokens 
of social values have,  in  Persuasion,  dried  up,  collapsed, or been  eroded 
or  travestied  into meaninglessness.  Even the family―which  did  seem  to 
offer  the  possibility  of  a  last  stronghold  in  Emma―is 
at  best  a  good-
humoured  confusion  barely  containing  generational  differences  and  at 
worst a hollow mockery or a claustrophobic prison  of cohabiting egotists 
or  a  dreary  vacancy.  It  may  indeed  have  already  'broken  up'―specifi02
cally  in  Anne's  case,  but  that  might  be  taken  as  a  paradigm  for  a  more 
general  dissolution  of the  institution  of the  family.  Mrs  Smith  seems to 
recognise this when  she gives her  opinion  that  'even  the  smooth  surface 
of  family-union  seems worth  preserving,  though  there  may  be  nothing 
durable  beneath.'  It would  be  idle  to  speculate  whether  or  not  this  was 
Jane Austen's  own  opinion.  It does indicate a felt  apprehension  that  the 
'family'  was  in  danger  of becoming  an  empty  form,  a  mere  name―or 
collective  noun―when  it  should  be the  cornerstone  and  microcosm of 
society.  The  fate  and  future  of  'the  family'  is  an  ongoing  debate  and 
problem  in  our  own  times.  Jane Austen  could  already  see that  it was  at 
a  crisis point.  We  have  very  little  to  add  to  her  diagnosis.  What  Jane 
Austen  does  offer  as  a  potential  source  of new  values,  new  bondings  is 
the  navy.  About which  now a few comments. 
The  specific  dating  of this  novel―1814  and  after―and  its  obvious 
significance  has  been  mentioned.  Britain  has  won  the  wars  against 
Napoleon  and  primarily  through  her  navy.  Many  specific  references  to 
the  war―including  Trafalgar―are  made  in  the  book,  and  indeed  the 
whole  novel  is  not  properly  comprehensible  without  appreciating  the 
importance  of this  background.  As Warren  Roberts rightly  states,  'Per02
suasion  could  only have been  written  by someone whose life was deeply 
affected  by  the  Revolutionary  and  Napoleonic  wars'  (see  Jane  Austen 
for  detailed  evidence  of  the  relationship 
and 
between the novel and  the wars). The 'peace' brings Captain  Wentworth 
back to England; more generally, 'This peace will be turning all our  rich 
Navy Officers  ashore.' That many of them  were  rich―through  capturing 
the  French  Revolution 
248 
TONY  TANNER 
enemy  ships  and  the  like―is important,  since,  for  example,  it enables 
the Crofts to rent  Kellynch Hall and  makes Wentworth  completely inde02
pendent  of any  snobbish  social disapproval  (such  as  had  separated  him 
from  Anne).  Indeed,  it  makes  him  a  'somebody,'  since  money  was 
becoming  a  more  powerful  means  of  gaining  social  acceptance  and 
esteem  than  land  or  even  rank.  But what  is more  important  is that  they 
bring  back with  them  a wholly different  scheme of values,  and  a  poten02
tially new model  of an  alternative society or community,  alive and  func02
tioning  where  the  traditional  land  society seemed  to  be  moribund  and 
largely  'stagnant';  a  new  community  which,  among  other  things, 
accepted  wives as equals.  Thus  Anne  delights  in  seeing the  Crofts  walk 
about  Bath,  meeting  and  warmly  greeting  their  friends,  and  observing 
'their  eagerness  of conversation  when  occasionally forming  into  a  little 
knot  of the  navy,  Mrs  Croft  looking  as  intelligent  and  keen  as  any of 
the  officers  around  her.'  That  admiration  and  respect  for  'a  little  knot 
of  the  navy'  brings Jane Austen  curiously  close to Conrad  and  his sense 
of the  hypocrisies of society on  land  and  the values of fidelity within  the 
ranks  in  the  navy.  (As it happens  he  also uses the  word  'knot':  'the dark 
knot  of seamen  drifted  in  sunshine'―The  Nigger  of  the 
'Narcissus.';6) 
This,  if you like,  is Jane Austen's ultimate displacement or shift of values 
in  the  novel: to  redefine  and  relocate her  vision of a 'possible' society in 
relation  to that  most potentially precarious  of occupations engaged  with 
the  most  unstable  element―an  unlanded  and  unrooted  community of 
people  committed  to  the  sea.  Hardly  a  stable  and  fixed  community, 
since  that  'knot'  could  be  disassembled  and  reassembled,  depleted  and 
augmented,  indeed  'tied'  or  'untied,'  at  any  time  and  in  any  place.  In 
truth,  the extreme of a dispersed  community,  a  floating,  drifting,  chang02
ing,  population  which  would  have  seemed  the  antithesis  of the  kind of 
society  Jane  Austen  was  writing  to  secure  or  maintain.  But  by  1815 
much  had  changed.  For one thing  it was the  navy which―to Jane Aus02
ten's  eyes―had  saved  England,  while  the  ruling  aristocratic  class  had 
done  almost  nothing.  Seen  in  this  light,  the  fact  that  at  Uppercross 
'there  was  a  very  general  ignorance  of all  naval  matters'  is  deplorable, 
while  Sir  Walter  Elliot's  unbelievably  patronising  and  condescending 
attitude  to  naval  officers  is beneath  contempt.  Without  the  navy  there 
quite  possibly  would  no  longer  have  been  any  society left  in  England. 
(Jane Austen  must  have been  aware of the  invasion panics.) Her  transfer 
of  allegiance and  emotional  investment  from  the  English  ruling classes 
(about whom  she  had  clearly been  growing  more  and  more pessimistic) 
to the  navy  (which  not  only appealed  to her  patriotism  but  also embod02
ied new and  welcome alternative values) is doubly  understandable  at this 
point  in  English  history.  Among  other  things,  Persuasion 
is notable for 
some uncharacteristically lyrical passages about the sea, which  also help 
6.  Novel  published  in  1897 by Joseph Conrad  (1857-1924). 
IN  BETWEEN:  PERSUASION 
249 
to  give  the  novel  its  markedly  different  atmosphere.  (Emma,  we  may 
recall,  had  never  seen  the  sea,  and  one  of her  father's  more  significant 
fatuities is, 'I have been long perfectly convinced .  .  . that the sea is very 
rarely of use to any body. ' By this time the sea was 'of use'―of  inestima02
ble  use―simply  to the  whole  of England!) In  the first description  of the 
coast  and  sea  at  Lyme,  so  enchanting  and  beautiful  in  contrast  to  the 
'melancholy  looking rooms' and  undistinguished  buildings  of the  town, 
there  is a curious  sentence referring  to the  group lingering'  on  the  sea02
shore  'as all  must  linger and  gaze  on  a first return  to  the  sea,  who  ever 
deserve  to  look  on  it  at  all.'  Deserve 
to  look  on  the  sea?  Is  this  Jane 
Austen―or  Melville?  Here  is a shift  indeed.  Not  the  awed  and  humble 
approach  to  Pemberley7  or  Mansfield  Park; but  the  privilege,  for  those 
who  deserve  it,  of gazing  at―the  sea.  Jane Austen  seems to be  turning 
her back on  more than  just the  local  inanities of a  Sir Walter  Elliot. 
Of  course  the  navy  is  on  shore  throughout  the  novel,  and  it  is  the 
effect  they have there and the part they play in Jane Austen's  redefinition 
and  relocation of values that  we must  consider.  At one point  the  enthu02
siastic Louisa 
burst  forth  into raptures of admiration  and  delight on  the  character 
of the  navy―their  friendliness,  their  brotherliness,  their  openness, 
their  uprightness;  protesting  that  she  was  convinced of sailors  hav02
ing  more  warmth  than  any  other  set of men  in  England; that  they 
only knew how  to  live,  and  they  only deserved  to be respected  and 
loved. 
Allowing a  littie for  her  youthful  hyperbole,  this  is in  many  ways―and 
with  moderation―the  verdict of the  book.  Anne  finds  Captain  Harville 
'a  perfect  gentleman,  unaffected,  warm  and  obliging'―it  would  seem 
that,  by another  shift,  only sailors can be true 'gentlemen': Mrs  Harville 
is 'a degree less polished' but has the 'same good feelings. ' Above all, this 
naval group (or knot) are sincere, hospitable,  open,  warm  and  genuinely 
friendly.  What  they  might  lack in  'polish'  they  more  than  made  up  for 
in  'heart.'  In any  case,  Jane Austen  never set great store by  mere  'polish' 
and  by  now  she  clearly distrusts  it.  The  older  values  seem  to  have  lost 
much  of their  force and  degenerated  into  snobbish  reflexes.  Where  the 
older  civilities are  somewhat  peremptorily  adhered  to,  it  is often  in  'an 
improper  style. '  Anne  of course  holds  on  to  what  was  best  in  the  older 
practices and  codes.  She believes in  'duties,'  in 'prudence'  in  'propriety.' 
If  she  is somewhat  shy and  reserved,  she  appreciates  the  decent  lack of 
these  potentially  inhibiting  traits  in  others.  Quiet  herself,  she  responds 
to  'heartiness.'  She  suspects  Mr  Elliot  precisely  because  he  seems  too 
controlled  and  good-mannered: 
Mr  Elliot  was  rational,  discreet,  polished―but  he  was  not  open. 
There was never any burst of feeling,  and  warmth of indignation  or 
7.  The splendid estate owned by Darcy  in Pride and  Prejudice. 
250 
TONY  TANNER 
delight,  at the  evil or  good  of others.  This,  to Anne  was a decided 
imperfection.  Her early impressions were incurable.  She prized  the 
frank,  the  open-hearted,  the  eager  character  beyond  all  others. 
Warmth  and  enthusiasm  did  captivate  her  still.  She felt she could 
so  much  more  depend  upon  the  sincerity of those who  sometimes 
looked  or  said  a  careless or  hasty  thing,  than  of those  whose  pres02
ence  of mind  never varied,  whose tongue  never  slipped. 
The  passage speaks for itself; we remember that Emma's most significant 
transgression  occurs  precisely because  her  tongue  slips  and  she  says  'a 
careless and  hasty  thing'  to Miss Bates,  and  to get some idea  of the  kind 
of change in  Jane Austen's values it represents  just think  how a Darcy or 
Knightley  would  appear  if tested  by  these  criteria.  These are  primarily 
the  manners  of feeling,  which  may  dispense  with  manners:  spontaneity 
is  always  likely to  annihilate  etiquette.  If we  want  to  see  a 'Romantic' 
side to Jane Austen,  it would  be in such passages. In a sense Jane Austen 
was fortunate  to have  the  navy to turn  to.  Otherwise it is something of a 
question  whether  she would  not  have  had  to have gone further  afield― 
perhaps into socially 'dangerous'  areas―to find suitable embodiments of 
these preferred  values and characteristics. 
Anne  is  also  always  'useful,'  and  willingly  so,  in  anybody's  home. 
(When  Mary leaves her  sick child in the care of Anne so that  she can go 
to a dinner  party,  her excuse is 'I am  of no use at home―am  I?' It is the 
literal truth.  In fact she  is 'no  use' anywhere.  In this,  she is not alone  in 
the book. ) When  Anne speaks up for the  navy―'The navy,  I think,  who 
have  done  so  much  for  us,  have  at  least an  equal  claim with  any  other 
set  of men,  for  all  the  comforts  and  all  the  privileges which  any  home 
can  give.  Sailors  work  hard  enough  for  their  comforts,  we  must  all 
allow'―Sir  Walter  speaks  disparagingly  of them  as  a  class and  merely 
allows that  'the  profession  has  its utility. ' But 'utility' is becoming a very 
positive word  in this book. When  someone is sick,  Anne is glad to know 
herself  'to be of the first utility.' Whether  or not there  is some  influence 
of  Bentham8  here  it  is  impossible  to  say.  But  it  is  clear  that  for  Jane 
Austen  'utility'  was  becoming  a  word  of approval.  We  must  allow,  for 
instance,  that  Sir Walter and  his ilk have no 'utility' whatsoever. 'Utility' 
is something  which  Anne  has  in  common  with  the  navy.  All the  more 
appropriate  that  she  should  find  her  true  home  here  at  last.  Of course, 
there  is already  an  example of a  'useful'  woman  happily  integrated  into 
the  'little  knot  of the  navy'―Mrs  Croft.  From  the  start  we  gather  that 
she  is no  'lady'  of idleness leaving the  'real' world  to men.  She is in  fact 
better  at  business  than  her  husband. 
'A  very  well-spoken,  genteel, 
shrewd  lady,  she seemed to be .  .  .  [she] asked more questions about  the 
8.  Jeremy  Bentham  (1748-1832)  founded the Utilitarian  movement in philosophy, which made 
usefulness the test of value. 
IN  BETWEEN:  PERSUASION 
251 
house,  the terms,  and  taxes than  the  admiral  himself,  and  seemed  more 
conversant  with  business.' Thus  Mr  Shepherd.  When  Anne  meets  Mrs 
Croft  we  are  given  the  description  of effectively  a  new  kind  of  woman 
in  Jane Austen's  world.  Quite  outside  any  structure  of dominance  and 
deference,  she seems to belong to no class at all.  She is both  inseparable 
from  her  husband―does  all  that  may  become  a  man―sharing  all  his 
travels; and  also strongly independent―and  still very much  a woman.  If 
she  seems  'rougher'  than  many  Jane  Austen  heroines,  she  is  also  in 
many  not  unadmirable  ways tougher.  Anne  is not  (yet!) like Mrs  Croft. 
But she admires  her. 
Mrs  Croft,  though  neither  tall  nor  fat,  had  a  squareness,  upright02
ness and  vigour of form,  which  gave importance to her person.  She 
had  bright dark  eyes, good  teeth,  and  altogether  an  agreeable  face; 
though  her  reddened  and  weather-beaten  complexion,  the  conse02
quence  of her  having  been  almost as  much  at  sea as her  husband, 
made  her  seem  to  have  lived  some  years  longer  in  the  world  than 
her  eight  and  thirty.  Her  manners  were  open,  easy,  and  decided, 
like  one  who  had  no  distrust  of herself,  and  no  doubts  of what  to 
do;  without  any  approach  to  coarseness,  however,  or  any  want  of 
good  humour. 
Anne  is 'pleased' with  her,  and  so are we.  So, obviously, was Jane Aus02
ten―and  in  that  depiction  of Mrs Croft  she  is offering  a  new  model of 
a new kind of woman,  scarcely imaginable in any of her previous novels. 
(One odd  note: she is childless. But then  Jane Austen  never does actually 
show  us a good mother.  I think we must infer from this what we choose. ) 
A  key  area  of  the  debate  concerning  old  and  new  values  concerns 
resolution  and  wilfulness.  A  central  problem  here  hinges  on  Anne's 
early  'yielding'  to the  negative persuasion  of Lady  Russell, which  effec02
tively  involved  her  supressing  the  love she  felt  for  Wentworth  and  pre02
venting a marriage both  of them  desired.  Was she wrong? Did she  show 
insufficient  resolution  and  belief  in  her  own  instinct  and  desires?  We 
shall  leave  a  final  adjudication  until  later,  but  her  behaviour  in  fact 
poses a problem  which  reverberates  through  the  book.  For  instance,  in 
talking  to  Louisa  (who  boasts  that  she  is  not  so  'easily  persuaded'  and 
derides 'nonsensical complaisance') Wentworth  praises her for her  'char02
acter of decision and  firmness'  and  speaks with  understandable  bitterness 
against the  opposite: 'It  is the  worst  evil of too  yielding  and  indecisive a 
character, that no influence over it can be depended  on.  .  .  . Everybody 
may  sway  it; let those  who  would  be  happy  be  firm.'  And  to  emphasise 
his  point  he  picks  up  a  hazel  nut―one  of the  rare  emblematic  aids  to 
discourse in Jane Austen!―praising  its exemplary enduring  strength  and 
hardness,  and  asserting,  rather foolishly, that  its 'happiness'  is a  function 
of  its  unpunctured  'firmness. '  A  'nutty'  happiness  indeed,  but  not  per-
252 
TONY  TANNER 
haps  a very helpful  model  for a young―and  virgin―woman!  Is this fair 
to  Anne?  Was  she  too  easily  'swayed'―too  indecisive  and  lacking  in 
firmness?  It  is  at  least  something  of a  question.  But  Louisa's 'decision 
and  firmness'  reveal themselves most graphically on the Cobb. We have 
been  told  that  Louisa  has  the  habit  of 'doing  as she  liked' and  believed 
in  'the  merit  in  maintaining  her  own  way'  (against  'parental  wishes  or 
advice')  and  is  quick  to  advance  'heedless  schemes.' On  the  Cobb  she 
also  wants  her  own  way:  this  times  it  involves  jumping  from  the  steps 
into  the  arms  of Wentworth.  Enjoying  the  sensation,  she  expresses a 
wish  and  an  intention  to  do  it  again.  Wentworth  'reasoned'  against  it, 
but  'in  vain': she  smiled  and  said,  'I am  determined  I will.' And  'main02
taining  her  own  way'  she  jumps―too  precipitously ('heedlessly'?)―and 
as everyone  knows  she  falls and  suffers  a  dangerous  concussion.  There 
lies the  'nut'  of'decision  and  firmness'!  She indeed  would  not  'yield' to 
any  'persuasion,'  however  'rational'―and  she  will  not  be  'swayed.' But 
how  'meritorious' or  'admirable'  is that  now?  Is such  a character trait of 
determined  wilfulness  a  virtue  or  a  rashness?  Is  it a  real  strength  or  an 
egotistical  rashness  (she  not  only  causes  damage  to  herself  but  great 
anguish  and  a lot of trouble to other people)? Is that  jumping girl a finer 
character  than  the  sedate  and  self-effacing―and  apparently  'persuad02
able'―Anne?  We  might  remember  that  another  of the  Musgrove  chil02
dren  sustains  a 
'bad  fall':  young  Charles  falls  and  dislocates  his 
collarbone  in  chapter  7.  On  that  occasion 'Anne  had  every thing  to  do 
at once,' since Mary retires  into  useless hysterics, and  all the duties  and 
responsibilities  devolve  on  Anne.  As,  of course,  they  do  after  Louisa's 
accident on  the Cobb. There even Wentworth  reveals an  uncharacteris02
tic sense of helplessness: 'Is there no one to help me?' These are unusual 
words  from  a  Jane  Austen  hero.  He  is  not  omni-competent  and  once 
again  all eyes turn  to Anne  for advice and  direction.  She effectively has 
to help and  advise them  all. These modern  youngsters are attractive and 
lively,  and  perhaps  engagingly  adventurous  and  independent  in  their 
wilful  heedlessness  of  external  constraints―or  advice.  The  Musgrove 
girls  are  'wild  for  dancing,'  'wild  to  see  Lyme'―'wild'  is  one  of  their 
favourite words and,  as a word,  harmless enough  as a youthful  hyperbole 
(as for a more recent young generation everything was 'fabulous,' 'fantas02
tic,' and  so on). But are they perhaps in fact too wild? After all, Elizabeth 
Elliot  is also accustomed to  'go her  own  way' and  there  is nothing  at all 
attractive  about  her  ice-cold selfishness.  After  the  Cobb  incident  Anne 
might  well wonder  whether 
it ever  occurred  to  him  [Wentworth] now,  to question  the  justness 
of  his  own  previous  opinion  as to  the  universal  felicity  and  advan02
tage  of  firmness  of character; and  whether  it  might  not  strike  him 
that,  like all  other  qualities of the  mind,  it should  have  its  propor02
tions  and  limits.  She thought  it could  scarcely escape him  to  feel, 
IN  BETWEEN:  PERSUASION 
253 
that  a  persuadable  temper  might  sometimes be  as  much  in  favour 
of  happiness,  as a very resolute character. 
Of  course she is right.  Louisa, in 'jumping'  at will, shows herself to have 
a very 'yielding' character, but she yields to her own whims and caprices. 
At  least Anne thought  that she was 'rationally' persuaded  to yield to Lady 
Russell.  It comes back to the  problem  of authority  in a period  of change 
when  all traditional  sources of authority  are in doubt,  if not  disqualified 
or  defunct.  Whose  persuasion  or  advice  should  one―anyone―listen 
to?  When  Wentworth  cries for  help  he  is articulating  a  larger  need.  In 
the event,  in this novel it is the apparently  yielding but actually  steadfast 
Anne  who  becomes  the  authority  to  whom  others  turn.  Wentworth's 
'nut'  lies sufficiently crushed to make us (and him) realise that she would 
be  in  no  way  an  appropriate  wife  for  him.  He  says he  wants  'A  strong 
mind,  with  sweetness  of manner'  in  any  wife  he  chooses.  There  is of 
course  only  one  candidate.  Anne  is  not  a  'nut'―that  visual  image  for 
the  ideal wife was curiously  infelicitous. For nuts are either totally hard 
or  totally  smashed  (I suppose  they  can  also go  rotten).  Anne's  strength 
of  character  is  peculiarly  human.  Which  means  that  it  must  combine 
flexibility and  firmness,  the  concessionary and  the  adamant,  the  rights 
of self with the obligations of selflessness,  in a complex,  ever-demanding 
way. Wentworth  is right in seeking for an  alliance of strength  and  sweet02
ness  (the  lion  and  the  honeycomb).  He  is only  wrong  temporarily  and 
perhaps understandably―in  not  seeing that  that  ideal  admixture  is only 
to be found  in  one woman  (in this novel). Anne.  Only Anne. 
How  Anne  will  discover Wentworth's  true  state  of feelings,  how  she 
will be able to convey her still 'unyielding' love for him,  raises a problem 
familiar  in  Jane Austen's  work: namely,  that  of private  communication 
in  a  predominantly  public  world  in  which  various  taboos  on  certain 
forms  of direct address  between  the  sexes are  still operative.  It is again  a 
problem  of hermeneutics.  'Now,  how  were  his  sentiments  to  be  read?' 
After  his return they are 'repeatedly  in the same circle,' but that  offers as 
many chances for misreadings (on both sides) as it does opportunities  for 
reliable  interpretation.  People  talk  too  littie  or  too  much.  (As  when 
Anne  finds  herself  the  unwilling  repository  of the  'secrets of the  com02
plaints of each house. ' Regarded as nothing herself, a permanendy  avail02
able  pair  of hands  or  ears,  she  is 'treated  with  too  much  confidence by 
all  parties.'  On  the  other  hand,  the  one  man  she  wants  to  hear  most 
from  says  least.  She  cannot  control  these  asymmetries  and  excesses or 
shortfallings  of communication.) Mary,  inevitably,  provides  a  constant 
example  of lack of all  communicative  tact―as  when  she  asks Anne  to 
tell  their  father  they  have  seen  Mr  Elliot.  To  Anne  'it was  just the  cir02
cumstance which  she considered  as not  merely unnecessary to be com02
municated,  but  as  what  ought  to  be  supressed.'  For  Jane  Austen  the 
imperatives  of verbal  repression  were  as  important  as the  obligations of 
254 
TONY  TANNER 
communication:  social  harmony  depends  on  getting  the  balance  right. 
Needless  to  say,  in  the  world  of Persuasion  most  people  have  lost  that 
tact.  Anne  often  has  to  'smother'  her  own  feelings and  preoccupations, 
realising  that  they  are  of little  or  no  interest  to  her  interlocutors.  She 
knows what  it is to have to  converse' without  'communicating.' She also 
knows what  it is like to talk without  being heard.  'They could  not  listen 
to her description  of him.  They were describing him  themselves.' But of 
course her  main  concern  is somehow to communicate with  Wentworth 
and  this  in  fact  provides  the  climax  of the  book.  At the  concert near  the 
end  she  is sure  of his  feelings and  desperate  to  communicate  hers.  But 
she  cannot  contrive  the  necessary  propinquity.  As  other  Jane  Austen 
women  do,  she  has  recourse  to  the  eye―trying  to  catch  Wentworth's 
when  she is prevented  from  speaking to him: 'she was so surrounded  and 
shut in: but  she would  rather  have caught his eye.' But she is trapped by 
the  unwelcome  attentions  of Mr  Elliot  and  the  general  'nothing-saying 
amongst  the  party.'  How  to  find  or  create  a  place  or  position  which 
would  make 'something-saying' possible is again a recurrent  problem  for 
Jane  Austen's  heroines.  Interestingly,  she  manages  to  choose a  seat  on 
the  bench  with  a  'vacant  space' next to  her.  Wentworth  nearly  takes it, 
but  Mr Elliot breaks in.  Here is a small parabolic tableau  of the  problem 
for  a woman.  She can  create a space for the  man  but  cannot invite  him 
to  take  it.  Man  has  to  initiate,  and  if there  is any  hesitation  the  wrong 
(and  more  assertive) male  may  take  advantage  of that  space.  Mr  Elliot 
does  this―and  a  jealous Wentworth  takes  his departure.  Anne  still  has 
her  problem:  'How  was the truth  to reach  him? How,  in all the  peculiar 
disadvantages  of their  respective situations,  would  he  ever learn  her  real 
sentiments?' 
So  crucial  is this  problem  that  Jane  Austen  revised  her  first―exces02
sively simple―resolution  of it into two longer chapters which  dramatise 
in  detail  the  strategies of indirection  to which  the  lovers have  recourse. 
This  revision  (chapters  22  and  23) is  of great  subtlety  and  importance 
and  is  worth  some  particular  examination  and  comment.  In  the  first 
version Admiral  Croft crudely contrives to leave them  alone in his house 
and  very  quickly  everything  is  cleared  up.  There  is  'a  hand  taken  and 
pressed;  and  "Anne,  my  own  dear  Anne!" bursting  forth  in  the  fulness 
of  exquisite feeling,―and  all  suspense  and  indecision  were  over.  They 
were  re-united.'  This  is summary  to  a  degree  and  a  very  lame  solution 
to  a  problem  which  has  been  growing  in  importance  until  it becomes 
the  main  problem  in  the  book.  The  revised  and  substituted  chapters  do 
not  merely  prolong  the  suspense  and  defer  narrative  gratification 
through  gratuitous  complication  of  plot:  they  comprise  an  infinitely 
richer  and  more  searching  examination  of the  whole  problem  of com02
munication  between  man  and  woman. 
The  revised  chapters  add  much.  We  learn  more  of the  'odious  insin-
IN  BETWEEN:  PERSUASION 
255 
cerity' of Mr  Elliot  and  his dubious  connection with  that  other  plotting 
'hypocrite,' Mrs Clay, whose name  is suggestive enough  of a weak vessel 
and  whose  'freckles'  not  only  indicate a  flawed  and  'spotted'  moral  inte02
rior but  may  indeed  suggest the  remnants  or traces of syphilis.  (In a very 
interesting  letter to The  Times  Literary  Supplement  on  7 October 1983, 
Nora  Crook  points  out  that  'Gowland's  Lotion,' which  Sir Walter  rec02
ommends  to Anne 'on  the strength  of its supposed  benefits to Mrs Clay's 
freckles,'  contained  'corrosive sublimate  of mercury,'  which  'had  a  par02
ticular  connection  with  the  old-fashioned  treatment  of  syphilis.'  Mrs 
Crook  produces  evidence  from  contemporary  journals  such  as  Reece's 
Gazette  of  Health  and,  while  admirably  tentative  in  drawing  any  con02
clusions,  rightly  points  out  that  'so  few  are  references  to  actual  trade02
names  in Austen  that  one feels that  this one  must  have  had  some sort of 
function  other  than  "realism."  '  I  agree  completely and  feel  surer  than 
she does―though  on  no  more evidence―that a hint  of syphilis must  be 
intended.  After all,  Mrs Clay ends  up  in  London  as Mr  Elliot's  mistress 
and  thus with  a status  little better than  that  of a prostitute.  The  fact  that 
she  was  a  welcome  intimate  of Sir Walter's and  Elizabeth's,  in  prefer02
ence  to  Anne,  not  only  confirms  the  worst  we  feel  about  their  utterly 
corrupted  judgement:  it  also  suggests  the  presence  of the  most  ruinous 
sexual  disease among  the  upper  classes.  She is a  fitting  'partner'  for  the 
totally corrupt  Mr  Elliot―who is also the  heir  of Kellynch Hall.  A  fine 
end  to  be  inscribed  in  that  volume  chronicling  the  'history  and  rise of 
the ancient and  respectable family'!) We  learn  that  Louisa is 'recovered' 
but  'altered'  (perhaps  improved?).  There  is  no  'running  or  jumping 
about,  no  laughing  or dancing. ' Her  newly acquired  'stillness' is not  the 
result of achieved moral  poise and  undistractability―the  stillness which 
Jane Austen  admired―but  the  timorous  cowering of a nervous  wreck. 
But centrally there is the extended problem of how Anne can  commu02
nicate with Wentworth.  It is he now who  is acting under an  'unfortunate 
persuasion':  namely,  that  she  loves  Mr  Elliot.  In  the  crowded  hotel 
scene  'he  did  not  seem  to want  to be near  enough  for  conversation'  and 
the  'circumstances'  only  expose  them  to  'inadvertencies  and  miscon02
structions  of the  most  mischievous  kind.'  Eyes  and  glances―surrepti02
tious,  anxious,  inquiring―are  again  active.  More  venturesomely  (or 
desperately) Anne  speaks words  to others which  are  meant  obliquely for 
Wentworth―as when  she loudly proclaims her complete lack of interest 
in  a  party  being  organised  for  the  theatre  which  would  include  Mr 
Elliot.  She  trembles  as  she  speaks,  'conscious that  her  words  were  lis02
tened  to,  and  daring  not  even  to try  to  observe their  effect. ' When  they 
do  have  to exchange social conversation,  Anne  has  recourse to  another 
strategy.  Referring to trivia―whether  she still enjoys card  games―Anne 
uses  the  occasion  to  transmit  a  second  meta-message  by  emphasising 
that  'I  am  not  yet  so  much  changed,'  hoping  that  the  generalising 
256 
TONY  TANNER 
response  will  not  be  lost  on  Wentworth―though  she  still  fears  'she 
hardly  knew what  misconstructions.' It is indeed  a tricky and  dangerous 
game  when  a  lifetime's  happiness  depends  on  the  outcome.  We  may 
wonder  at  the  need  for  all  these  tormenting  ploys  of indirection.  Why 
cannot Anne be open  and  direct―qualities she admires  in other people? 
The  contrast  is indeed  made  in  the  next chapter when  Mrs Musgrove is 
talking.  Her  talk  is  marked  by  'open-hearted  communication,'  but  it is 
all  concerned  with  personal  'minutiae'  and  Anne  feels  that  'she did  not 
belong  to  the  conversation.' The obstacle―effectively a  double-bind― 
seems  to  be  that  you  cannot  speak  'openly'  and  'directly'  about  such 
important  matters  as your  feelings of love,  to the  person  you  love,  until 
you  have  achieved  a  certain  intimacy  (tantamount  to  engagement) 
which  then  permits  such  open  talk.  But how  do you  ever manage  to get 
intimate  enough  to  be  intimate,  as  it  were?  I  don't  think  this  is  just a 
matter  of tiresome,  overdelicate etiquette  or the  repressive  interdictions 
of  propriety.  It  certainly  has  something  to  do  with  true  modesty.  More 
generally  I think  it  dramatises  the  delicacy and  difficulty  of  identifying 
and  establishing  the  right  sexual  partner.  That  social  conditions  and 
codes  made  this  particularly  difficult  in  Jane  Austen's  period  we  can 
hardly  doubt.  But  one  feels  that  there  is  some  deeper  correlation 
between  the  delicacy of the  approach  and  the  value  and  quality  of the 
ensuing  union.  We  have  gained  much  by  our  less  inhibited  and  less 
formalised  ways  of achieving sexual and  marital  rapprochements.  Argu02
ably our  loss has been  no  less great. 
Be  that  as  it  may,  we  now  approach  the  actual  moment  of full  com02
munication.  How  it  is  achieved―the  context,  the  method―could 
hardly  be more  interesting.  The general talk has become meaningless to 
Anne―'only  a  buzz  of words  in  her  ear. '  She must  look for  (and  send) 
the  right  signal  in  the  noise.  Then  Captain  Harville  approaches  Anne 
with  a  'small  miniature  painting.'  It  is  a  portrait  of Captain  Benwick 
which  was  commissioned  for  Captain  Harville's  dead  sister,  Fanny. 
Benwick  now  wants  it  reset  to  give  to  Louisa,  whom  he  is  to  marry. 
Harville  finds  the  commission too painful  and  Wentworth  has gallantly 
agreed  to take care of it.  He  is seated  nearby―'writing  about  it now, ' as 
Harville  explains.  Harville  almost  tearfully  muses  that  'Fanny  .  .  . 
would  not  have  forgotten  him  so  soon'  and  there  ensues  that  debate 
about  the  relative  constancy  of  men  and  women  in  their  love.  Anne 
argues  that  women  do  not  forget  so  soon.  'We  cannot  help  ourselves. 
We  live at  home,  quiet,  confined,  and  our  feelings prey  upon  us.  You 
are  forced  upon  exertion  .  .  .  continual  occupation  and  change  soon 
weaken  impressions.'  Then  follows  a  famous  exchange  in  which  Har02
ville has recourse to the  evidence and  authority  of  literature―writing: 
But  let  me  observe  that  all  histories  are  against  you,  all  stories, 
prose and  verse.  If I had  such  a memory  as Benwick, I could  bring 
IN  BETWEEN:  PERSUASION 
257 
you  fifty  quotations  in  a  moment  on  my  side the  argument,  and  I 
do  not  think  I ever opened  a book in  my  life  which  had  not  some02
thing  to say upon  women's  inconstancy.  .  .  . But perhaps you will 
say,  these are all written  by  men. 
Anne replies, 
'Perhaps  I  shall.―Yes,  if you  please,  no  reference  to  examples 
in  books.  Men  have  had  every advantage  of us  in  telling their  own 
story.  Education  has  been  theirs  in  so  much  higher  a  degree;  the 
pen  has  been  in  their  hands.  I  will  not  allow  books  to  prove  any 
thing. ' 
'But how shall we prove any thing?' 
'We  never shall.' 
Painting,  writing,  speech.  The portrait  is a fixed representation  or  'quo02
tation' of the  man  which  he  can  dispatch  to different  women.  The  man 
changes  in  his  affections;  the  portrait  remains  'constant.'  In  this  it  is 
precisely  a  misrepresentation―an  ideal  image  of the  man  which  leaves 
all  his  emotional  changeableness out.  However  accurate  as to  physiog02
nomy,  it  is  untrue  to  life.  It  is  a  detached  token  which  can  be  sent 
through  intermediaries―Harville,  Wentworth―to  now  this  woman, 
now that.  And  potentially  any  other.  It is in  all  respects the  opposite of 
an  unmediated  confrontation  of,  and  communication  between,  a living 
man  and  a  living  woman.  In  this  the  portrait  comes dangerously  close 
to  being  like a  piece of money,  a  coin  of  fixed,  arbitrary  'value'  which 
can  circulate  through  different  hands  and  purchase  any  object  to  be 
obtained  at  the  price  on  the  coin.  There  need  be  no  relationship 
between the purchaser  and  the object.  Indeed,  the whole mode  of trans02
action  is  marked  by  separation  and  im-personality.  The  model  for  this 
kind  of  'relationship'  is  ultimately  the  open  market.  This  is  not  to 
impugn  the  feelings of reciprocity which  may  have  gone  into  the  'rela02
tionship' of Benwick, but only to point out that it is excessively  mediated. 
Benwick  is a man  who  lives in  and  by books.  He woos and  wins Louisa 
by quotations  and  a  portrait  (as he  did  Fanny  and,  we feel,  would  have 
tried  to do with  Anne). They are signs which  are precisely not  his  own, 
not himself.  They are substitutions  for an  essential absence―emotional 
if not  ontological. Anne  has  no  access to totally unmediated  communi02
cation,  but  she  must  avoid  the  kind  of mediation  briefly  but  tellingly 
here  alluded  to.  And  so  must  Wentworth.  Benwick's books  and  Har-
ville's allusion to his 'quotations'  might remind  us that at the start of  this 
book  Anne  was  effectively  written  out  of meaningful  life  because  she 
was not written  in to  Sir Walter's 'book of books.'  She has suffered  from 
male  'writing'  since  indeed  'the  pen  has  been  in  their  hands'―starting 
with  the  originating  male  authority,  the  father.  Her  argument  has  of 
258 
TONY  TANNER 
course  a  general  and  very  important  validity,  relevant  to  the  condition 
of  all  women  in  her―and  our―society.  But one  crucial  little  incident 
gives it a vividly local  and  specific  point. 
As she  is arguing  with  Harville―and  of course her words  have a  dou02
ble  target  and  dual  purpose,  as  she  hopes  that  the  nearby  Wentworth, 
seated  and  writing,  will hear them  and  detect the personal  message con02
tained  in the general statements―a  'slight noise' draws  their attention  to 
Wentworth.  'It  was  nothing  more  than  that  his  pen  had  fallen  down.' 
Nothing  more―in  many ways it is the  most quietly dramatic and  loaded 
incident  on  the  book.  The  pen  may,  generally  speaking,  be  in  'their 
hands';  but  at  this  crucial  moment  the  pen―a  specific  one―had 
dropped  from  his―specific―hand.  However  unintentionally,  however 
momentarily,  he  is disproving  the generalisation  which Anne is enunci02
ating.  He  is, perhaps  by a 'slip,' excepting himself from―revealing  him02
self  as an  exception  to―the  rule.  We  tend  to  read  a  lot  of significance 
into 'slips' now,  but,  at no matter what level of conscious or unconscious 
intention,  Wentworth's  'slip' in dropping the pen  at that  moment  is per02
haps  the  most  important  signal―or  unvoiced  communication―in  his 
entire relationship with  Anne.  I am  not  concerned with  possible phallic 
interpretations  of'the  pen': literalness is quite powerful  enough  here.  No 
single definitive reading  of the incident is either possible or desirable. But 
we can  say at least this: Wentworth  at this critical moment  has,  however 
inadvertently,  dropped (let go of,  lost his grip on) that  instrument  which 
is  at  once  a  tool  and  a  symbol  of men's  dominance  over  women;  the 
means  by  which  they  rule  women's  destinies,  literally  write  (through 
inscription,  prescription,  proscription) their lives. It is as if he is open  to 
a more equal (unscripted) relationship in which the old patterns  of domi02
nance and  deference are abandoned,  deleted―dropped.  Benwick quotes 
from  already written  books; Sir Walter wrote in  his book according to an 
ancient  and  now  non-functional  scriptural  tradition  (his 'book of books' 
is only a bible for himself―a  mere  mirror  instead of the authorising  and 
authoritative  sacred  text).  Wentworth  was  writing  a  commission  for 
another person―he  drops the pen  and,  after that crucial lacuna or inter02
ruption,  when  he  picks  it  up  again  it  is to  'speak'  to  Anne.  Under  the 
'public' letter he writes for Harville and  Benwick he now writes a 'private' 
letter―like a sub-text―to Anne,  which  he  hides  under scattered  paper. 
He  goes  out―formally―with  Harville,  and  returning  under  false  pre02
tences  (left  gloves),  furtively  delivers  the  hidden―but  'true'―letter  to 
Anne.  Significantly the  writing  is 'hardly  legible': we may guess that  the 
impersonal  'public'  letter  was  in  a  perfect  hand.  The  hidden  letter  was 
indeed  not  really written,  but  rather  'spoken.' As he writes  in  it,  'I  must 
speak  to  you  by such  means  as are  within  my  reach. '  It is the  desperate 
calligraphy  of the  heart―written  under  pressure  and  social constraints. 
No  wonder  it  is  'hardly  legible.'  For  this  speechwriting  is  not  done 
according  to  prescribed  formulae  or  convention:  it  is  an  'exceptional' 
IN  BETWEEN:  PERSUASION 
259 
writing  which  seeks to  find  a way through  all the  restraining  and  silenc02
ing  rules  and  codes  to  communicate  directly  to  the  chosen  woman.  It 
attempts  the  apparently  impossible―mediated  im-mediacy.  Like  love. 
There is no need here to reproduce  the contents of that  letter-under-the-
letter.  With  its delivery and  reading  the  'union'  is assured.  But two  final 
points about  it.  Anne  realises that,  'while supposed  to be writing  only to 
Captain  Benwick, he  had  been  also addressing  her. '  No  doubt  some of 
this  final  drama  (or  game)  can  be  traced  to  the  specific  difficulties  of 
intersexual  communication  in  Jane  Austen's  society.  But  the  episode 
points  up  and  dramatises  a  larger truth.  All 'writing'  or  communication 
is potentially double (at least exoteric and  esoteric, to go no further:  there 
may always be another  message in―under―the  ostensible message); we 
can  'address'  more  than  one  person  at  the  same  time,  and  likewise  be 
'addressed'  by messages not  apparently  meant  for us.  Indeed,  one  might 
say  that  the  addresser  and  the  addressee  of the  letter―all  'letters'―are 
potentially  indeterminate  and  plural.  There  is  ultimately  no  single, 
definitively  correct 'address.'  The problems  and  difficulties  which  Anne 
and  Wentworth  have to negotiate are not a function  of early  nineteenth-
century English society. They are inherent in language and  communica02
tion  itself.  How  important  is  this  rather  singular  little  parlour  'game'? 
Well―'On  the  contents  of  that  letter  depended  all  which  this  world 
could do for her!'  Life,  and  all that  it might offer,  can  indeed  depend  on 
'the  letter.'  It  is a  final  joke  that  informs  us  that,  as Wentworth  is  now 
rich  enough  to  be  'accepted'  as  a  husband  for  Anne  by  her  father,  it 
'enabled  Sir Walter at  last to prepare  his pen  with  a very good  grace for 
the  insertion  of the  marriage  in  the  volume  of honour. '  It is of course a 
dead  volume  by now  and  the  paternal  pen  is as irrelevant as it is power02
less.  Anne and  Wentworth  will 'write' their own  marriage  elsewhere,  in 
a  new book,  in  their  own  hands.  Of course they  will  never  'prove'  any02
thing  by the  book,  any  book.  When  it  comes to  matters  of love we  can 
never  prove  anything―by  writing,  or  speaking,  or  painting.  And  we 
never  shall.  When  Othello  asks  Iago for  'ocular  proof  of Desdemona's 
infidelity,  he  is lost.  Her honour  is 'an  essence that's  not seen.' You may 
fake  'proof  of infidelity  (nothing  easier  for  an  Iago)  and  misread  signs 
(and books) as evidence of inconstancy.  But you cannot prove  love―any 
more  than  you  can  'see'  honour  or  constancy.  You  must  finally  trust 
beyond  the  available  evidence.  The  proof of the  loving  can  only  be  in 
the living. 
Before  leaving  the  matter  of  language  and  communication  in  this 
novel,  I want to draw attention  to a  rather  surprising  notion  which Jane 
Austen  inserts  into  Anne's  thoughts  while  she  is  listening  to  another 
social  conversation  which  combines  the  vacuous  and  the  hyperbolic. 
'Allowances,  large allowances, she knew,  must  be made  for the  ideas of 
those who spoke. She heard  it all under embellishment. All that  sounded 
extravagant or irrational  in  the  progress of the  reconciliation might  have 
260 
TONY  TANNER 
no  origin  but  in  the language  of  the  relators'  (emphasis added).  Of course 
social  conversation  can  lie  and  fabricate―nothing  unusual  in  such  an 
observation.  But Anne's  thought  is potentially  more  radical.  Allow that 
language  'embellishes'; but  what  if all that  people talk about  has 'no ori02
gin but  in the language  of the relators'? Put it another way: language may 
be  the  origin  of all that  people  relate.  It is perhaps  not  such  a  new  idea 
for us,  but,  coming out of the context in which Jane Austen was writing, 
the hint  (it is perhaps  no more) that language  itself might be the origin of 
what  we talk about―i.e.,  that  language  is the origin of what we think of 
as reality―is here  startling.  Language thus becomes capable of creating 
its own referents and  referends―an  awesomely autonomous,  generative, 
and  'originating' power.  If in fact we live primarily in the world we speak, 
then  we  should  be  careful  indeed  about  the  words  we  use.  Jane Austen 
herself exemplifies  that  indispensable vigilance and  scrupulousness. 
What  follows the  final  achieving of clarification and  communication 
between Anne and Wentworth  is characteristically summary.  They stroll 
along a 'retired  gravel-walk' and  there  can  indulge  their  'private  rapture' 
in  'public  view. '  As usual  Jane Austen  does  not  pursue them  into  their 
private  passional  discourse.  Whether  we  ascribe  this  to  ignorance, 
repression  or delicacy hardly  matters.  Jane Austen  has shown  us all  that 
is essential to her novel; now she maintains a tactful  distance. 
There  they  exchanged  again  those  feelings  and  those  promises 
which  had  once  before  seemed  to  secure  every  thing,  but  which 
had  been  followed  by  so  many,  many  years  of  division  and 
estrangement.  There they  returned  again  into the past more exqui02
sitely  happy,  perhaps,  in  their  re-union,  than  when  it  had  been 
first projected.  .  .  . 
And  so on.  There they  are  oblivious of the  passing  groups―'sauntering 
politicians,  bustling house-keepers, flirting girls, nursery-maids  and  chil02
dren.' The  'world'  is temporarily  lost,  and  well lost.  They have made  'a 
separate peace. ' But we should add a few words about Anne and her mar02
riage.  In some respects she is like Fanny Price, with her 'still' virtues,  her 
essential loneliness, her general desire 'not to be in the way of any body'; 
her  pleasure  is only  to  be  'unobserved,'  her  plight  to be generally over02
looked.  She is glad  just to do her duty and  to be 'useful,'  however  unap02
preciated.  In her apparent  weakness she is the real source of strength.  But 
there  is a crucial difference,  related  to the  larger difference  between  the 
two  worlds  of the  novels.  At one  point  in  the  confusion  of Uppercross, 
we  are  told  of an  insuperable  problem:  'How  was Anne  to  set all  these 
matters  to  rights?'  Fanny  Price  does  effectively  'set  to  rights'  all  the 
wrongs,  neglects,  and  partial  deteriorations  of Mansfield  Park―which 
becomes something  of a microcosm of society as it should  be and  might 
be.  Anne's  healing  efforts  are  necessarily more  local  and  limited  in  the 
IN  BETWEEN:  PERSUASION 
261 
scattered  and  diffused  world  of  Persuasion.  She  would  have  put  her 
father's  house  'to rights' but  is not allowed to.  She can  nurse  a sick child 
here,  tend  a wounded  girl there,  sympathise with  a grieving bereft lover, 
provide concrete help when  Wentworth  cries out for it (a hint  of a possi02
ble  new equality there). But society is too far gone  in  disarray  to be  'put 
to  rights' by an  exemplary  heroine.  Fanny  Price's marriage  to  Edmund 
symbolises and  seals the  restoration  and  renewal  of a whole  social order 
and  structure.  Anne's  marriage  to  Wentworth  signifies  nothing  larger 
than  their  own  refound  and  reconstituted  happiness  in  love.  Their  're02
union'  is not a sign of any larger re-established harmony.  To borrow  that 
enigmatic and  resonant  phrase  of Jay  Gatsby's,9 it is 'just  personal.' 
Their  marriage  is not  grounded  in  property―as  all the  previous  con02
cluding  marriages  in  Jane  Austen  are.  Mary―of  course―gloats  that 
Anne 'had  no  Uppercross-hall before her,  no landed  estate, no  headship 
of  a  family.'  And  indeed  it  is  one  of Anne's  regrets  that  she  has  'no 
relations  to  bestow'  on  Wentworth,  'no  family  to  receive and  estimate 
him  properly.'  In  fact  it  is  he  who  offers  a  family―the  new  'family' of 
the  navy.  She  brings  to  him  only  her  'undistracted  heart,'  in  Henry 
James's memorable phrase.  The marriage  itself does not portend  an  end02
less stability: there  will always be 'the  dread  of a future  war.'  She has  to 
'pay'  for  her  marital  happiness  in  a way  unknown  to  any  previous  Jane 
Austen  heroine.  Thus  the  conclusion:  'She  gloried  in  being  a  sailor's 
wife,  but  she  must  pay  the  tax  of  quick  alarm  for  belonging  to  that 
profession  which  is,  if possible,  more  distinguished  in  its domestic  vir02
tues than  in its national  importance.' (Contrast the conclusion of M<ms-
field  Park  and  Fanny's return to the 'paternal  abode' of Mansfield,  which 
formerly  'Fanny  had  been  unable  to  approach  but  with  some  painful 
sensation  of  restraint  and  alarm'  but  which  'soon  grew  as  dear  to  her 
heart,  and  as  thoroughly  perfect  in  her  eyes as  every  thing  else  within 
the  view and  patronage  of Mansfield  Park,  had  long  been.'  Her  'alarm' 
was definite but  is in the past,  replaced by an  extended  future  of assured 
happiness  and  'perfection.'  Anne's  'alarm'  is  indefinite  and  in  the 
future―an  integral part of her happy  marriage,  out of an  old society and 
into  a  new  one,  far  away  from  the  abandoned  'paternal  abode,'  with 
nothing assured  except her  joy in her reciprocated love.) The  final  words 
of Persuasion  effectively point  to that  radical  redefinition  and  relocation 
of values which  marks  the  whole novel.  Established society and  domes02
ticity are now,  as we say,  'all at sea'―metaphorically (they are  in  a state 
of chronic confusion,  chaotic flux) but  also literally.  For the  new social 
and  domestic  virtues  are  now  to  be  found,  indeed,  'at  sea'―for  those 
'who  ever deserve to look on  it at all.' 
(To  base  a  marriage  almost  exclusively on  feelings,  no  matter  how 
9.  Protagonist of The  Great  Gatsby  (1925) by F.  Scott Fitzgerald  (1896-1940). 
262 
TONY  TANNER 
tested  and  proved  those feelings may be,  inevitably entails a new kind of 
'risk. ' It is more than  apt that this new kind  of model  for a more  personal 
society,  in  which  actions  come  'from  the  heart,'  is situated  both  meta02
phorically  and  actually  on  the  sea―traditionally  regarded  as 'the  unsta02
ble  element.'  Even  though  Anne  and  Wentworth  are  models  of 
emotional stability and  constancy, the emotions are by nature  inherently 
potentially  unstable,  and,  without  the  reinforcement  of some  forms― 
formalities―and  conventions,  any  society  based  on  feelings  must  be 
precarious  and  in  danger  of ensuring  its own  impermanence.  In  found02
ing a possible new  society on  the  sea,  even  metaphorically,  Jane  Austen 
was  engaging  deliberately  in  what  is almost  a  contradiction  of terms.  It 
is  some  measure  of  her  disenchantment  with  'landed'  society  that  she 
felt  prepared,  or compelled,  to take that  risk.) 
Was  Anne  right  to  give  in  to  the  'persuasion'  of Lady  Russell?  There 
is  rich  ambiguity  or  hesitation  here,  and  phrases  such  as 'the  fair  inter02
ference  of  friendship'  in  their  poised  ambivalence  indicate  that  Jane 
Austen  knew  all  about  the  multiple  motivations  which  are  at  work  in 
the  impulse  to  exert  some  apparently  beneficent  control  over  a  person 
in  a  weaker  position.  There  is,  perhaps,  no  point  at  which  you  can 
clearly  distinguish  persuasion  from  constraint  or  constraint  from  coer02
cion.  It  is  something  of a  blur,  a  confusion  if you  will―and  it  is  out 
of  just  that  confusion  that  Anne  the  nobody  has  somehow  to  come  to 
clarification  and  remake  her  life.  In  discussing  the  point  with  Went02
worth  at  the  end  of the  book,  when  they  are  privately  conversing  while 
'apparently  occupied  in  admiring  a fine display  of green-house  plants' (a 
somewhat  more  auspicious  adjunct  to a discussion  of love than  'nuts'!), 
Anne  defends  her  decision  without  wholly exculpating  Lady Russell: 
I  must  believe  that  I  was  right,  much  as  I  suffered  from  it,  that  I 
was  perfectly  right  in  being  guided  by  the  friend  whom  you  will 
love  better  than  you  do  now.  To  me,  she  was  in  the  place  of a 
parent.  Do  not  mistake  me,  however.  I am  not  saying  that  she  did 
not  err  in  her  advice.  It was,  perhaps,  one  of those  cases in  which 
advice  is  good  or  bad  only  as  the  event  decided;  and  for  myself,  I 
certainly  never  should,  in  any  circumstance of tolerable similarity, 
give such  advice. 
Lady Russell is by no  means one  of Jane Austen's  malign  characters.  On 
the  contrary  she  is a  'benevolent,  charitable,  good  woman,  and  capable 
of strong  attachments.'  She is genuinely  fond  of Anne and  truly  appreci02
ates all her qualities and  virtues.  Anne loves her to the end.  She is indeed 
regarded  by all who  know  her  as a person  of 'the  greatest  influence  with 
every body,'  and  that  'influence' is often  wisely employed  and  invariably 
with  disinterested  concern for what  is right or best.  If she has a fault,  it is 
not  a  kind  of masked  will-to-power  masquerading  as  good  advice.  But 
IN  BETWEEN:  PERSUASION 
263 
'she had  prejudices on  the side of ancestry  . ..  a value for rank and  con02
sequence,  which  blinded  her  a little to the  faults  of those who possessed 
them.'  In  a word,  she favours  the old  order  of society and  cannot always 
see  its  derelictions  and  delinquencies.  She  is  not―as  she  insists―a 
'match-maker,' though we can see her as a 'match-marrer' when  it comes 
to not appreciating the reality and  value of Anne's and  Wentworth's  love 
for  each  other.  But  her  real  importance  and  significance  is  that,  for 
Anne, 'she was in the place of a parent'―a  surrogate mother.  This brings 
me back to the central problem  of the lack of any reliable properly consti02
tuted authority  in the book. Effectively  Lady Russell fills―and is allowed 
to  fill―an  authority  vacuum.  As far as my  memory  and  my  notes  go,  I 
think  I am  right  in  saying that  that  key word  is only  once applied  to  any 
character  in  the  book,  and  that  is  Lady  Russell.  When  Wentworth  is 
explaining  to  Anne  that  he  could  only  think  of her  as  'one  who  had 
yielded,'  who  had  been  'influenced  by  any  one  rathert:han  by  me,'  he 
is referring  to his apprehensions  about the  persuasive  power which  Lady 
Russell  might still be exerting over Anne: 'I had  no  reason  to believe her 
of less authority  now'  (emphasis added).  As Anne  explains, she  thought 
she was yielding to 'duty,' and,  while she now admits she was wrong,  she 
makes the  point  that  she was yielding  to  'persuasion  exerted on  the  side 
of  safety,  not  of risk. '  Perhaps  she  was  too  cautious,  but  she  learnt  her 
lesson  and  she  is justified,  in  the  event,  when  Wentworth  comes to see 
where  'risk'  can  lead  to―as  in  Louisa's  foolish  jump.  (Emma,  in  her 
capricious wilfulness,  often  abuses  her  powers  of 'persuasion':  for exam02
ple,  in  relation  to  Harriet's  'rejection'  of the  perfectly  suitable  Robert 
Martin―as  Knightley angrily accuses her,  'You persuaded  her  to  refuse 
him'; and  in  relation  to herself,  as when  she excuses herself for her  'de02
ficiency'  in  not  visiting  the  Bateses  by  'the  persuasion  of its  being  very 
disagreeable―a waste  of time―tiresome women'―a  perverse act of self-
persuasion  which,  at 'heart,'  she herself knows to be a culpable rationali02
sation  for  a  more  selfishly  and  snobbishly  motivated  disinclination  and 
neglect.) 
Wentworth  had  to  learn  his  own  lesson,  'to  distinguish  between  the 
steadiness of principle and  the obstinacy of self-will,  between the  darings 
of  heedlessness  and  the  resolution  of a  collected mind.'  The  old  order 
was  wrong;  but  Louisa's  reaction  is  not  the  right  one―self-destructive 
rather  than  reconstructive.  Lady  Russell's  'authority'  was  capable  of 
error,  but  with  no  other  reliable authority  available in  this society-with-
out-a-centre  (as in Anne's  family-without-parental-guidance),  it seemed 
to Anne―as  to others―the  only  reliable substitute.  But it was a  substi02
tute.  Lady  Russell  is  not  Anne's  mother  and  she  is  not  a  true  central 
authority  in  society.  And  it  is the  lesson  that  she has  to  learn  that  is as 
important  as any in the book. It is a lesson which centres on her radically 
incorrect appraisals of the  respective worth of Mr Elliot and  Wentworth: 
264 
TONY  TANNER 
She  must  learn  to  feel  that  she  had  been  mistaken  with  regard  to 
both; that she had been  unfairly  influenced by appearances  in each; 
that because Captain  Wentworth's  manners  had  not suited her own 
ideas,  she  had  been  too  quick  in  suspecting  them  to  indicate  a 
character  of dangerous  impetuosity;  and  that  because  Mr  Elliot's 
manners  had  precisely  pleased  her  in  their  propriety  and  correct02
ness,  their  general  politeness  and  suavity,  she  had  been  too  quick 
in  receiving them  as the  certain  result of the  most correct opinions 
and  well  regulated  mind.  There was  nothing  less for  Lady Russell 
to do,  than to admit  that she had  been pretty completely wrong  and 
to take up  a new set of opinions  and  of hopes.  [Emphasis added] 
There  is  no  more  important  passage  in  the  novel.  We  remember  that 
Anne  had  been  'prudent'  (an  old  and  basic Jane Austen  value) but  had 
had  to  learn  'romance.'  Similarly Lady  Russell will  have  to learn  to  re02
educate  her  'feelings' when  judging  people  and  not  rely  on  the  once-
reliable  signs of'propriety'  and  'correctness,' 'manners'  and  'politeness.' 
In  a  changing  society  a  more  emotional,  'romantic'  personal  code  is 
emerging as both  desirable and  necessary―with a proper  appreciation of 
the  difference  between  'spontaneity'  and  'impetuousness,'  between  the 
mere  rashness  of 'risk' and  the  securely grounded  independence  of indi02
vidual  feelings,  whether  or  not  these  seem  to  be  approved  and  ratified 
by the  old  standards and  codes of society.  The  lesson that  Lady Russell 
has to learn  is not  in  itself revolutionary  or subversive, but  it does  repre02
sent  a  radical  assessment―and  turning  away  from―many  of the  old 
values.  I  have  said  that  Anne  was  initially  'in  between,'  an  uncertain 
status  both  socially  and  ontologically.  The  novel  shows  that  English 
society  is  similarly  'in  between':  in  between  an  old  social  order  in  a 
state of decline and  desuetude,  and  some new  'modern'  society of as yet 
uncertain  values,  hierarchies and  principles.  It may precipitately  'jump' 
to  its own  destruction  and  wreckage (like  Louisa).  It may,  though  it is a 
slim hope,  reconstitute  itself and  its values as Anne―and  'only Anne'― 
has  learnt  to  do  with  Wentworth.  Meanwhile  the  message  within  the 
message  of  the  book,  the  not-so-hidden  'letter'  under  the  text  of  the 
story,  reads  like this: 'There  was  nothing  less for  English  society to  do, 
than  to  admit  that  it had  been  pretty  completely wrong,  and  to take  up 
a  new set of opinions  and  hopes.' 
MORAL  LUCK  AND  JUDGMENT  IN  JANE  AUSTEN'S  PERSUASION 
2 65 
ROBERT  HOPKINS 
Moral  Luck  and Judgment  in  Jane Austen's 
Persuasion t 
Prospero. they prepared 
A  rotten carcass of a butt,  not rigged, 
Nor  tackle, sail,  nor mast; the very rats 
Instinctively  have quit it.  There they hoist us, 
To  cry to th  sea that roared to us. 
Miranda.  How came we ashore? 
Prospero. By providence  divine. 
―The  Tempest 
" . ..  and  here  was  another  instance  of  luck.  We  had  not  been  six 
hours in the Sound,  when a gale came on,  which  lasted four days and 
nights,  and which  would have done for poor old Asp,  in  half the time; 
.  .  .  Four-and-twenty hours later,  and  I should  only  have been  a gal02
lant  Captain  Wentworth,  in  a  small  paragraph at  one  corner  of  the 
newspapers; and being lost in only a sloop,  nobody would have thought 
about me." 
―Persuasion 
I  shall  begin  with  a  hypothetical  case  involving  a  moral  judgment: 
Anne,  a  nineteen-year-old  woman  with  "elegance of mind  and  sweet02
ness  of character,"  is  living  in  England  in  1 8 0 6. Her  mother  had  died 
five years  earlier.  Anne's  father  is a  self-centered  baronet  with  no  male 
heir  who  is  living  well  beyond  his  means,  and  her  unmarried  oldest 
sister is equally vain.  She also has a younger sister. An aristocratic widow 
lives nearby who  was a close friend  of the deceased  mother  and  who  is a 
trusted  moral  advisor  of Anne.  A handsome,  dynamic  naval  captain  on 
shore  leave  meets  Anne,  and  they  fall  "rapidly  and  deeply  in  love." 
Although  having  "been  lucky  in  his profession," the  captain  has  no  for02
tune  and  faces  a  dangerous  future  in  naval  combat.  He  proposes  to 
Anne.  The  father  does  not  overtly  oppose  the  marriage  but  thinks  it  a 
"degrading  alliance." Anne's moral  advisor discourages her and  finds  the 
marriage  proposal  "unfortunate."  What  is Anne to do? (One  stipulation: 
there  can  be no  long engagement. ) 
The  moral  judgment  occurs,  of  course,  in  Jane  Austen's  last  great 
novel  Persuasion 
( 1 8 1 6,  publ.  1 8 1 7 ).  Anne  Elliot turns  down  Captain 
Frederick  Wentworth  on  the  advice  of Lady  Russell  who  "persuaded" 
her  to  believe  the  engagement  "a  wrong  thing―indiscreet,  improper, 
hardly  capable  of success,  and  not  deserving  it. "  Why  else  does  Anne 
turn  down  the  proposal?  Not  for  a  "merely  selfish  caution"  but  in  a 
t  Robert Hopkins,  "Moral Luck and Judgment in Jane Austen's Persuasion,"  Nineteenth-Century 
Literature  42(1987):  143-58.  Reprinted with  the permission of the author.  All notes are by the 
editor of this Norton Critical Edition. The author's notes have been  deleted. 
266 
ROBERT  HOPKINS 
"belief  of  being  prudent,  and  self-denying  principally  for  [Captain 
Wentworth's]  advantage"  as  well.  Dismayed,  hurt,  and  angered,  the 
Captain  returns  to  the  sea  to  assume  his  first  command  of a  sloop,  the 
Asp,  to  succeed  wonderfully  in  capturing  prizes  of war,  and  eight years 
later  to  return  to  Anne's  neighborhood  with  a  fortune  of over  twenty 
thousand  pounds.  Persuasion  gives Anne  Elliot a second chance at  hap02
piness  with  Wentworth  after  he  overcomes  his  pride  and  diffidence  to 
propose  to  her  again  at  the  end  of the  narrative  in  Jane Austen's  most 
memorable  love  scene.  This  time  Anne  accepts  but,  reflecting  on  her 
earlier  moral  judgment,  she  believes that  because  Lady  Russell was  "in 
the  place of a parent"  she was  right  to take her  advice.  "Perhaps,"  Anne 
rationalizes to Wentworth,  this was "one of those  cases  in  which  advice  is 
good  or bad  only  as the event  decides"  (italics mine). 
This is an extraordinary  statement! How can a subsequent event be the 
determinant  of whether  a moral decision is right or wrong? Suppose,  for 
example,  that  Captain  Wentworth  had  married  Anne,  returned  to sea, 
been severely wounded  in battle and then  returned  to Anne, like Roches02
ter  in  ]ane  Eyre,  blinded,  and,  in  addition,  destitute?  Would  this 
scenario have  proved  Lady Russell morally  right? Or  suppose  Anne  had 
married  and  had  a daughter,  and  Wentworth  had  died at sea but had  not 
yet  earned  his  fortune?  This  scenario will  immediately  remind  Austen-
ites of Jane Fairfax's origins in Emma:  "The marriage of Lieut. Fairfax, of 
the 
regiment  of  infantry,  and  Miss Jane  Bates,  had  had  its  day  of 
fame  and  pleasure,  hope  and  interest; but  nothing  now  remained  of it, 
save the melancholy remembrance of him dying in action abroad―of his 
widow  sinking  under  consumption  and  grief  soon  afterwards―and  this 
girl." 
Is Anne Elliot merely assuming a providential  universe in which  what02
ever happens  is right? Is she  intuitively  recognizing what  twentieth-cen02
tury  moral  philosophy  calls  "consequentialism"?  And  is  Jane  Austen 
projecting  into her last novel a reconsideration  of the moral  implications 
of  her  earlier prudential  plots  that,  in  spite  of her  hard-boiled,  no-non02
sense vision,  reward  her  heroines with  marriage  and  with  fortune?  Leo02
pold  Damrosch,  Jr.,  who  has  studied  Puritan  and  eighteenth-century 
"providential  fiction"  metaphysically  modelling  itself  on  "God's  plan" 
believes that after  Fielding English novelists bid "farewell to  providential 
fiction"  (with  some exceptions) and  that  "Jane Austen  based  her  fictions 
firmly  in  the  contemporary  social  order"  with  heroines  "learning  to 
accommodate  [themselves] to  the  world  as  it  is." Austen's  fiction  might 
be  viewed  as  prudential  fiction  because  of  its  emphasis  on  individual 
moral  judgments  being  made  in  the  context  of a  secular  problematic 
social  world.  Anne  Elliot's  rationalization  that  "the  event"  may  decide 
the goodness or badness of moral  judgment  suggests consequentialism― 
defined  by Alan  Donagan  as actions "judged  morally solely according to 
MORAL  LUCK  AND  JUDGMENT  IN  JANE  AUSTEN'S  PERSUASION 
267 
the  nature  of their  consequences  per  se"―or,  more  specifically,  "act-
consequentialism," described  by  Michael  Slote  as  "a  theory  that  judges 
the  Tightness of actions  in  terms  of whether  those  actions have  optimal 
consequences." 
Although  consequentialism  is an  outgrowth  in  twentieth-century  eth02
ics of utilitarianism,  the  moral  problem  it reflects, whether  we  judge  an 
action's  Tightness  or  wrongness  by  its  effects  or  by  the  purity  of  the 
agent's  motive  (as Kant  had  insisted),  had  been  wrestled  with  by  Adam 
Smith  in  The  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments 
(1759): 
But  how  well  soever we  may  seem  to  be  persuaded  of the  truth of 
this  equitable  maxim  [that a  moral  action  should  not  be  judged  by 
it unintended  consequences], when  we consider  i t . ..  in  abstract, 
yet  when  we  come  to  particular  cases,  the  actual  consequences 
which  happen  to  proceed  from  any  action,  have  a very great  effect 
upon  our  sentiments  concerning its merit or  demerit. 
It is precisely the "particular  cases" and  "actual consequences" of a novel 
like  Henry  Fielding's Tom  Jones  (1749)  that  can  best spotlight  the  diffi02
culties of judging  moral  actions solely by motives.  Squire Allworthy is a 
well-intentioned,  morally  obtuse  magistrate/patriarch  whose  moral 
judgments  in  the  first  third  of the  narrative  are  well-nigh  catastrophic. 
Martin  C.  Battestin has  shown  how  the  narrator's  thesis that  "Goodness 
of  Heart,  and  Openness  of Temper" are  not  enough  to  do  "Business in 
the  World," that  "Prudence  and  Circumspection  are  necessary  even  to 
the  best of Men," relates to  Fielding's focus  on  Christian  practical wis02
dom,  to  Prudentia,  one  of the  four  cardinal  virtues.  Allworthy,  then, 
means  well  but  lacks  prudence  when  he  is  emotionally  involved.  He 
judges that Jenny Jones is Tom's mother  because Jenny tells him  so,  not 
realizing  that  Jenny  is covering  up  for  Tom's  real  mother  Miss Bridget 
Allworthy.  Next  he  judges  Partridge  to  be  Tom's  father  on  the  basis of 
Mrs.  Partridge's  perjury.  (Partridge  is  condemned  by  the  community, 
his wife dies,  he  loses his  annuity  and  his  school,  is forced  to  leave  the 
area,  and  is  eventually  sent  to  prison.)  Black  George  is  judged  falsely 
for  wiring  hares  because  of BlifiTs  lying.  Allworthy  almost  sends  Molly 
Seagram to Bridewell prison  for bastardy  until  Tom  intercedes.  Eventu02
ally  Tom  himself  is exiled  from  Paradise  Hall  when  Blifil  again  lies  to 
Allworthy.  R.  S.  Crane  grossly  understated  the  case  when  he  wrote 
of Allworthy  that  "in  spite  of his excellent principles,  it is hard  for  us  to 
maintain  entire  respect"  for  him,  particularly  when  he  could  "dispose 
so precipitously"  of Jenny Jones and  Partridge.  Though  the  comic tone 
of  the  work  tends  to  suspend  our  moral  judgment,  we  are  horrified  by 
the  failures  of All worthy's  moral  judgment,  particularly  on  subsequent 
readings  of the  novel when  we no longer share his ignorance. We  could 
argue  that  judged  purely  on  motive  Allworthy  is  intrinsically good  but 
268 
ROBERT  HOPKINS 
that  judged  solely on  the  consequences of his  judgments  he  has  much 
to  answer  for.  The  problem  of Allworthy  is the  ethical dilemma  raised 
by consequentialism. 
Bernard Williams and  Thomas Nagel, two well-known  contemporary 
philosophers,  have  dealt  with  the  complexities of this  dilemma  in  two 
essays  entitled  "Moral  Luck." Williams, writing  in  the  Humean  tradi02
tion  of skepticism,  coined the  provocatively shocking term  "moral  luck" 
to  show  that  no  matter  how  far  back  "in  the  "direction  of motive  and 
intention"  we  place  "the  dispositions  of morality," they  are  "as  'condi02
tioned'  as  anything  else."  Williams'  fictitious  case  study  is  that  of  a 
would-be  painter  named  Gauguin  who deserts his wife and five children 
in  order  to  dedicate  himself  to  the  vocation  of artist.  Should  Gauguin 
drown  while  crossing the  English Channel,  his decision  will be  judged 
as  immoral.  Should  he  succeed  in  his  vocation  and  become  a  world 
famous  painter,  his  decision  will  be  judged  consequentially.  Since  his 
paintings  will  benefit  mankind  his  decision  would  be  a  right  one. 
Thomas  Nagel  cites  the  case  of  Chamberlain  signing  the  Munich 
agreement.  Suppose Hitler had  died of a heart attack after occupying the 
Sudetenland,  and  then  Germany had  not overrun  Europe  exterminating 
millions?  Since Chamberlain's  motives and  intentions were  presumably 
moral,  to prevent  war,  his action at Munich  while betraying the Czechs 
would  "not  be the  great moral  disaster that  has  made  his name  a  house02
hold  word."  Nagel  defines  moral  luck as occurring where  "a significant 
aspect of what  someone does depends on  factors beyond  his control, yet 
we continue to treat him  in that respect as an object of moral  judgment." 
He oudines  "four  ways in which the natural objects  of moral assessment 
are disturbingly  subject to luck": 
One  is  the  phenomenon  of constitutive  luck―the  kind  of person 
you  are,  where  this  is not  just a  question  of what  you  deliberately 
do,  but  of your inclinations, capacities, and temperament.  Another 
category  is luck  in  one's  circumstances―the kind  of problems  and 
situations  one  faces.  .  .  .  [Then there  is] luck in  how  one  is deter02
mined  by  antecedent  circumstances,  and  luck  in  the  way  one's 
actions  and  projects turn  out. 
"However  jewel-like the  good  will  may be  in  its own  right," Nagel  con02
tinues,  "there  is a morally significant difference between  rescuing some02
one  from  a  burning  building  and  dropping  him  from  a  twelfth-storey 
window  while trying  to  rescue him." (Were I that  someone,  needless to 
say,  I or my estate's attorney  would  take a consequentialist rather than a 
Kantian  point  of view  stressing  intention.)  Not  himself  a  consequen02
tialist,  Nagel agrees with Williams that there  is a genuine  "philosophical 
problem"  involved  with  any  attempt  to  insist  on  the  purity  of  moral 
judgments  isolated from  events: "The view that moral luck is paradoxical 
is  not  a  mistake,  ethical  or  logical,  but  a perception  of one  of the  ways 
MORAL  LUCK  AND  JUDGMENT  IN  JANE  AUSTEN'S  PERSUASION 
2 69 
in  which  the  intuitively  acceptable  conditions  of  moral 
threaten  to undermine  it all." 
judgment 
In  the  context  of  moral  luck  so  formidably  presented  by  Williams 
and  Nagel  how  are  we  to  interpret  Anne  Elliot's  event-governed  moral 
judgments? And  what  does Jane Austen  mean  us  to think?  In  Pride  and 
Prejudice  Charlotte  Lucas  had  claimed  that  "Happiness  in  marriage  is 
entirely  a  matter  of chance," and  Elizabeth  Bennet  had  replied,  "You 
make me laugh,  Charlotte; but it is not sound.  You know it is not  sound, 
and  that  you  would  never act in  this way yourself." (Charlotte does "act 
in  this way" when  she  marries  Mr.  Collins. ) All of Austen's  heroines  in 
her earlier novels seem clearly to argue for not  relying on  chance or luck 
in marital  matters.  Not only do these heroines judge prudently, but  they 
are  rewarded  with  marriage  to  like-minded  men  who  are  comfortably 
situated.  Their  judgments  are  based  on  what  David  A.  J.  Richards  (a 
twentieth-century  Kantian philosopher) defines as a "principle of mutual 
love  requiring  that  people  should  not  show  personal  affection  and  love 
to  others  on  the  basis  of  arbitrary  physical  characteristics  alone,  but 
rather  on  the  basis of traits of personality and  character related  to acting 
on  moral  principles." 
Bernard Williams refers to this position as "righteous absurdity."  Why 
do Austen's admiring  readers―and  I count myself among  them―experi02
ence a similar reaction to some of the too prudish moral judgments  of the 
two problem  novels Sense  and  Sensibility  and  Mansfield  Park?  Williams 
objects to Kantian  moral  philosophy  for its tendency  to treat "persons  in 
abstraction  from  character," for  abstracting  "moral  thought"  from  "par02
ticular  circumstances  and  particular  characteristics  of  the  parties" 
involved, and for failing to recognize that "love, even love based on 'arbi02
trary physical characteristics,' is something which  has enough  power  and 
even  authority  to  conflict  badly  with  morality."  This  conflict  between 
truth and  morality poised by Williams is what we surely must  feel  when 
Austen  marries  off Marianne  Dashwood  to Colonel Brandon  before  she 
falls  in  love with  him.1  We  know  that  Edward  Ferrars  is too  indecisive 
for  Elinor  Dashwood  and  that  it  is  Elinor  who  should  have  married 
Brandon. We resent a plot ending  morally at the expense of truth. 
Barbara  Hardy  has  noted  how  even  in  Persuasion 
the  conventions of 
the  romantic  novel  save  Anne  Elliot  from  the  "consequences  of  her 
choice." She has also noted the emphasis  in Persuasion  on "human luck 
or  chance" but  disapprovingly,  as  if Austen  were  using  it to  resolve  the 
plot at the  expense of genuine  artistry.  As Paul  N.  Ziedow  showed  over 
twenty  years  ago,  however,  Austen's  emphasis  on  luck  in  the  novel  is 
intentional  and  not  to  be taken  lightly.  Since  Zietiow's  1 9 65  essay,  the 
important  new insights in ethical philosophy  on "moral luck" and conse-
quentialism  now  enable  us  to  see that  Jane Austen  is struggling  with  a 
1.  The situations alluded to in this and the next sentence belong to Sense  and  Sensibility. 
270 
ROBERT  HOPKINS 
major  dilemma  of moral  judgment  by placing that  judgment  in the con02
text  of  moral  luck  where  a  providential  universe  is  invisible  to  the 
moral  agent. 
How  radical this is can  be illustrated  by a little-known  episode involv02
ing  Samuel  Johnson's  friend,  the  editor  of the  Adventurer  paper,  John 
Hawkesworth.  In  1773  Hawkesworth's  edition  of  the  Voyages 
to  the 
South  Seas was published,  an  edition  containing the first publication of 
Captain  Cook's  first  voyage  to  Tahiti,  New  Zealand,  and  Australia. 
Eagerly  awaited  by  the  public,  this  authorized  edition  shocked  readers 
not  only  by  its  salacious  descriptions  of  Tahitian  mores,  but  by 
Hawkesworth's  "Providential  heresy" in  his general  introduction.  When 
Cook's  ship,  the  Endeavour,  risks being  sunk  on  a  reef  but  is saved  by 
the  wind  subsiding,  Hawkesworth  refuses  to see providence  at work  but 
merely  a  "natural  event."  For  the  next  five  months  until  his  death  in 
November,  1773, Hawkesworth  was  hounded  by  reviews  and  letters  in 
the  major  periodicals  attacking  his  rejection  of  particular  providence. 
The  episode  resurfaces  in  Boswell's Life  of  Johnson.  On  their tour  of the 
Hebrides,  Boswell  and  Johnson  are  caught  in  rough  seas off the  Isle of 
Skye.  Johnson  is below deck while  Boswell  is above.  Terrified,  Boswell 
claims  to  have  remembered  Hawkesworth's  objection against a  particu02
lar  providence  and  the  "arguments  of those  who  maintain  that  it  is  in 
vain  to  hope  that  the  petitions  of the  individual,  or  even  of congrega02
tions,  can  have any  influence with  the  Deity. " Boswell  regains his equi02
librium,  however,  when  he  remembers  "Dr.  Ogden's  excellent doctrine 
on  the  efficacy  of intercession." 
Providence has been  traditionally  a tacit frame  for mariners' discourse 
as  evidenced  by  Robinson  Crusoe,  Boswell,  or  by Cowper's  "The Cast02
away"  illustrating  religious  despair.  It  should  have  come  as  a  bit  of a 
shock  to  Jane  Austen's  readers,  then,  when  Captain  Wentworth,  just 
before  his first proposal,  is described as follows: 
Captain  Wentworth  had  no fortune.  He had  been  lucky in his pro02
fession,  but  spending  freely,  what  had  come  freely,  had  realized 
nothing.  But,  he  was  confident  that  he  should  soon  be  rich;―full 
of  life  and  ardour,  he  knew  that  he  should  soon  have  a  ship,  and 
soon  be  on  a  station  that  would  lead  to every thing  he  wanted.  He 
had  always been  lucky; he  knew  he  should  be so still. 
This  description  has an  insouciant  ring to  it,  capturing  perhaps  the  atti02
tude  of Jane  Austen's  own  two  brothers  who  were  naval  officers  con02
fronted  with  the  random  nature  of naval  warfare  and  of storms  at  sea. 
Even  Lady  Russell, who  earlier  had  been  so cautious,  tries to  persuade 
Anne  to consider the  attentions  of Mr.  Elliot,  but first explains that  she 
is "no  match-maker  .  .  .  being  much  too well aware  of the  uncertainty 
of all human  events and  calculations." "Uncertainty" indeed!  Had  Lady 
Russell  genuinely  recognized  that  many  moral  actions  involve  "judg-
MORAL  LUCK  AND  JUDGMENT  IN  JANE  AUSTEN'S  PERSUASION 
2 71 
ment  under  uncertainty,"  that  risk and  moral  luck are  especially inher02
ent  in  match-making,  she  would  not  have  discouraged  Anne  from 
marrying  Wentworth. 
Anne  suffers  throughout  Persuasion 
for  her  earlier  moral  failure  to 
take  risks for  love.  Admiral  and  Mrs.  Croft  did  take  such  risks.  When 
the  Crofts  speculate  about  Wentworth  proposing  to  one  of  the  Miss 
Musgroves,  the  Admiral  exclaims,  "If  it were war,  now,  he  would  have 
settled it long ago.―We sailors, Miss Elliot,  cannot afford  to make  long 
courtships  in time  of war.  How  many  days was it,  my dear,  between  the 
first time of my seeing you,  and  our sitting down  together in our  lodgings 
at  North  Yarmouth?" Mrs.  Croft  replies,  "We had  better  not  talk  about 
it,  my dear,  . ..  for if Miss Elliot were to hear how soon we came to  an 
understanding,  she  would  never  be  persuaded  that  we  could  be  happy 
together.  I had  known  you  by character,  however,  long  before." A  long 
engagement would  clearly not  have  been  an  alternative  action for  Anne 
Elliot  and  Wentworth,  and  the  Crofts'  discussion  is  extremely  painful 
for  Anne.  Mrs. Croft  later repeats  her  objection  to long engagements  to 
Mrs.  Musgrove  while  Anne  and  Wentworth  overhear:  "I  would  rather 
have young people settle on a small income at once,  and have to struggle 
with a few difficulties together,  than  be involved in a long  engagement." 
And  what  of Wentworth's  own  sense  of providence,  divine  interces02
sion,  or  moral  luck when  at  sea? When  Admiral  Croft  and  Wentworth 
reminisce―Anne  and  the  Musgroves  are  listening―Wentworth  jests 
about  the  admiralty  "now  and  then  .  .  .  sending  a few hundred  men  to 
sea,  in  a  ship  not  fit  to  be  employed"  because they  "have  a great  many 
to provide  for; and  among  the  thousands  that  may  just as well go to  the 
bottom  as  not,  it  is impossible for  them  to  distinguish  the  very  set  who 
may be least missed." The Admiral  counters twice with  "Lucky fellow," 
reminding  Wentworth  that  there  were at least "twenty  better men"  who 
had  applied  for  command  of the  Asp.  "I felt  my  luck,  admiral,"  replies 
Wentworth.  The  emphasis  on  moral  luck  continues  with  Wentworth 
never  having  "two  days  of  foul  weather  all  the  time  he  was  at  sea," 
having "the good  luck" then  to capture  a  French  frigate,  and,  finally,  as 
"another  instance of luck," bringing  his vessel into Plymouth  just before 
a four-day  gale which  would  have almost certainly sent it to the  bottom: 
"Four-and-twenty  hours  later,  and  I  should  only  have  been  a  gallant 
Captain  Wentworth,  in  a small paragraph  at one  corner  of the  newspa02
pers." No wonder  that  Anne  shudders to herself. 
The  supreme  irony  of all  this  occurs when  Anne  learns  that  Captain 
Benwick was engaged  to Captain  Harville's sister, that  he had  been  wait02
ing two years for a promotion  and  fortune  before  marrying,  only  to dis02
cover tragically that  his  fiancée  had  died  the  previous  summer  while  he 
was at sea.  Suppose in another  scenario that Anne had  insisted on  a pru02
dent  long  engagement,  that  Wentworth  had  returned  to  sea  to  seek  his 
fortune,  and  that  Anne  had  died!  At  numerous  places  in  the  narrative 
272 
ROBERT  HOPKINS 
Anne  is reminded  of moral  luck: to try to avoid  in  marriage  "the  uncer02
tainty of all  human  events and  calculations" is to avoid living itself. 
Clearly  Jane  Austen  is struggling  in  Persuasion  with  the  problem  of 
moral  judgment  under  uncertainty.  I  believe that  she  is also  reconsid02
ering  the  ethical  implications  of  her  earlier  plots  which  too  readily 
reward  prudential  moral  judgments  with  fortunate  resolutions.  Autho02
rial  ambivalence seems to me  to be unmistakably  articulated  in  the first 
three  sentences of the  final  chapter  of the  novel: 
Who  can  be in  doubt  of what  followed? When  any two young peo02
ple take it into their heads to marry,  they are pretty sure by persever02
ance  to  carry  their  point,  be  they  ever  so  poor,  or  ever  so 
imprudent,  or  ever  so  little  likely  to  be  necessary  to  each  other's 
ultimate  comfort.  This  may  be bad  morality 
to conclude  with,  but 
I  believe  it  to be truth,  [italics mine] 
Had  Anne  and  Wentworth  married  eight years sooner,  they would  have 
been  poor,  imprudent,―and  very  much  in  love.  All the  weight  of the 
narrative―the  Crofts,  Captain  and  Mrs. Harville, Captain  Benwick and 
his deceased  fiancée―argues  in favor of Anne and  Wentworth  marrying 
earlier.  Given  a  choice  between  prudential  morality  and  the  truth  of 
love,  Persuasion  argues for love. 
Alasdair  Maclntyre  has  called Jane Austen  "the  last great  representa02
tive  of the  classical tradition  of the  virtues."  By doing  so he  joins other 
Austenites,  notably Wayne Booth, Lionel Trilling, and  Martin  Price, in 
recognizing  the  importance  of moral  judgment  in  Austen's  works,  but 
he  has not had  the benefit of Mary Poovey's more  recent radical  reading 
of  Persuasion. 
Brilliantly  applying  feminist  theory  and  Marxist assumptions  to  Per02
suasion,  Poovey finds at the  heart  of the  novel an  "epistemological rela02
tivism," a "mortal  vertigo," from  which  it follows that "ethical  judgment 
will  be based at  least initially on  appearances  and  that  all moral  evalua02
tion  will be  at  least implicitly subjective": "Anne's  intuitions  are  meant 
to  be  morally  responsible  and  hence  authoritative."  Poovey  finds  that 
"the centralizing narrative  authority  taken  for granted  in the earlier nov02
els  has almost completely disappeared  from  Persuasion"  so that the "sub02
jectivity of the heroine" dominates "at nearly every level." Poovey clearly 
recognizes that  the truly  radical nature  of Persuasion 
losophy. 
is in  its ethical phi02
Where  I disagree strongly with  Poovey is in  her  linking this  supposed 
"epistemological  relativity" with  a  supposed  "state  of total  collapse" of a 
"social  and  ethical  hierarchy  superintended  by  the  landed  gentry"  as 
symbolized  by  the  "fiscal  and  moral  bankruptcy  of Sir Walter Elliot." 
Such  a  reading  gives  Sir Walter far  more  social significance than  Jane 
Austen  intended.  Such  interpretations―and  they  are  numerous―have 
been  thoroughly  demolished  by the  historian  David  Spring whose essay 
MORAL  LUCK  AND  JUDGMENT  IN  JANE  AUSTEN'S  PERSUASION 
273 
"Interpreters  of Jane  Austen's  Social  World"  is  surely  one  of the  most 
significant  contributions  to  Austen  scholarship  in  the  last twenty  years. 
What  Spring shows  is that  "landed  society" was  not  losing power  in  the 
Regency period,  that the use of the word "bourgeois" to apply to Austen's 
world is woefully  inadequate,  and  that  Sir Walter's renting  out his coun02
try  house  while  living elsewhere  more  cheaply  "was  an  ancient  expedi02
ent  for  debt-ridden  landowners"  and  not  "a  portent  of  the  imminent 
downfall  of landed  society." Without  denying  the  French  Revolution, 
the  Industrial  Revolution,  or  Jane Austen's  interest  in  the  meritocracy 
of the British Navy,  Spring reminds  us what we knew all along from  our 
reading  of Trollope's  fiction,  our viewing of nineteenth-century  English 
country  houses,  and  our  reading  of  Winston  Churchill  biographies: 
English  landed  society continued  to  be  enormously  powerful.  (In  fact, 
in  a  published  version  of his  1981 Tawney  Memorial  Lecture,  David 
Spring  says  that  it  was  not  until  after  1870 that  an  "erosion  of  landed 
society" gathered  force and  that only after World War I was the "English 
aristocracy's  sense  of purpose"  for  the  first  time  "seriously  shaken.")  In 
response  to  Frederic  Jameson's admirable  exhortation  in  The  Political 
Unconscious 
(1981)  always  to  historicize,  and  in  response  to  radical 
political  interpretations  of  Persuasion  by  literary  critics,  David  Spring 
would  seem  to  be  replying,  "Fine,  but  you  have  not  historicized 
enough."  The crisis in  Persuasion, 
I believe, is not  a  socio-economical-
political  crisis, but  a  moral  one. 
In  all  fairness  to  Poovey,  however,  I  must  grant  that  she  recognizes 
Jane Austen's essential conservatism that gives "individual  feeling  moral 
authority"  and  places  it  in  a  private  sphere  "qualitatively  different  from 
the public spheres" (by Marxist analysis corrupt).  Poovey also argues  that 
only  in  this  private  sphere  can  "the  premises  and  promises  of romantic 
love," "one of the  fundamental  myths  of bourgeois society," be  perpetu02
ated.  The  problem  with  this  thesis  is that,  as Hannah  Arendt,  Michael 
Walzer,  and  numerous  other  political theorists  have  observed,  the  pri02
vate  sphere  has  been  shown  again  and  again  to  be  the  last  bastion  of 
moral value and  personal  integrity against the totalitarian  (authoritarian) 
pressures  of regimes of both  the  left and  the  right.  A commitment to  the 
private  sphere  or to  romantic  love, particularly  when  it is earned  as it is 
in Persuasion,  can be moral.  Precisely because Persuasion  places a heavy 
burden  on  individual  choice, on  personal  judgment  by  an  agent  when 
confronted  with the complexities of consequentialism and  the context of 
moral  luck,  it has become my favorite Jane Austen  novel.  In this work I 
also find Austen's  position  to be essentially liberal and  acutely  prescient 
by  showing the enormous  burden that the modern  Western world places 
on  individual  moral choice. 
In  Persuasion  Jane Austen  has transcended  the  limitations of a  poten02
tially too-calculating,  closed system  of communitarian  morality  present 
in  her  earlier  novels,  where  male  suitors  are  either  too  obviously 
274 
ROBERT  HOPKINS 
immoral  or  too  priggishly  moral.  (Mr.  Elliot  is  never  a  real  threat  to 
Anne as a suitor in  Persuasion.)  Captain  Wentworth,  in contrast to such 
clerical  suitors  in  Austen's  other  novels  as  Henry  Tilney  or  Edmund 
Bertram,2  presents  a  thoroughly  admirable  secular  character.  His  mar02
riage to Anne  seems based less on  moral  calculus and  more on  the mys02
terious  biology  of  desire, 
love,  and  psychological  compatibility. 
Courtship  becomes  the  arena  in  which  choices may  not  be  obviously 
right  or wrong,  good  or bad,  until  proved  out  consequentially in a con02
text of moral  luck.  This is not  to say that  any  choice is equally plausible 
because of a context of "epistemological relativism," but  rather that each 
individual  cannot  fall back on  an  external checklist or on  an  authoritar02
ian  moral  adviser  to  evade  personal  choice.  The  burden  of  choice 
henceforth  is on  the  self and  on  character. 
Finding  this  burden  of choice  endemic  to  a  "classic liberal  theory" 
rooted  in  an  "ontology of individual  freedom,"  Charles Fried argues  that 
such  theory  has  "trouble"  accounting  for  "love  and  friendship"  while 
offering  a "stringent  code of moral  constraint and  of obligation": 
The  theory  of  classical  liberalism  locates  man's  nobility  and  the 
source of his moral  worth  in  his capacity of judgment  (his rational02
ity) and  his  capacity to  conform  his  conduct  to the  deliverances of 
that  judgment  (his  freedom).  This  power  of judgment  and  choice 
distinguishes  all men,  and  entitles all men  to our  equal  respect. 
This definition  seems to  me  to apply  perfectly to Anne  Elliot in  Persua02
sion.  (No "righteous  absurdity"  here!) "If  I was wrong  in  yielding to  per02
suasion  once,  remember  that  it was to persuasion  exerted on  the  side of 
safety,  not  of  risk,"  explains  Anne  to  Wentworth.  By  the  end  of  the 
novel  she  is willing to opt for risk. 
Although  Austen's  last  known  surviving  letter  referring  to  her  immi02
nent  death  as "the  appointment  of God,  however  secondary  causes may 
have  operated"  affirms  her  Christian  courage  and  belief  in  a  particular 
providence,  it reveals also her awareness of an alternative view suggested 
by  "secondary  causes." Is  it  possible  that  while  writing  Persuasion,  her 
health  already  deteriorating  from  the  fatal  effects  of Addison's Disease, 
Jane  Austen  is  reconsidering  her  earlier  plot  resolutions  and  projecting 
a  deep  sense  of anxiety  about  a  universe  governed  providentially  (what 
ought  to be) versus  a  universe  governed  by moral  luck (what  is)? Such a 
very human  anxiety throws  more  of an  existential choice back onto  the 
individual.  Like  it  or  not,  Jane  Austen's  men  and  women―especially 
women―must  make  moral  judgments  on  their  own  and  be prepared― 
as  Anne  Elliot is  admirably  willing  to  do  even  when  she  is wrong  the 
first time―to live with  the  consequences of those  judgments.  Above all, 
not  to  judge,  or  to  let  others  judge  for  you,  is  to  fail  in  the  conduct 
of  life. 
2.  From  Northanger Abbey  and Mansfield  Park. 
ANNE  ELLIOT'S  EDUCATION 
275 
ANN  W.  ASTELL 
Anne  Elliot's  Education: The  Learning of  Romance  in 
Persuasion t 
Most readers  will agree with  Richard Simpson (Review),  C.  S. Lewis, 
("A Note"), Karl Kroeber (Styles),  D.  D.  Devlin  (]ane Austen)  and  oth02
ers  that  the  Austen  literary  corpus  reveals  an  overriding  concern  with 
the educational  process in character formation―a  process which,  in  the 
case of most of Austen's heroines, leads through love from self-deception 
to  self-knowledge.  Critics,  however,  have  always  had  difficulty  in 
approaching  Austen's Persuasion  from  a pedagogical perspective. As Syl02
via  Sieferman  recently  observed,  they  usually  argue  that  Anne  Elliot's 
education  has  been  completed  before  the  novel  begins; that  she  main02
tains  a  clear-sighted,  morally  elevated,  central  but  static  position 
throughout,  while  Captain  Wentworth's  gradual  learning  of  love  and 
truth  defines  the  forward  movement  of the  plot.  In  him  the  reader  sees 
the educational  process; in  her,  only the  product. 
This  interpretation  of the  novel  is,  it seems  to  me,  unsatisfactory  for 
a  variety  of  reasons.  First  of  all,  it  identifies  the  educational  process 
exclusively  with  what  C.  S.  Lewis  calls  the  "pattern  of  undeception" 
without  making  provision  for a  broader  understanding of learning.  Sec02
ondly,  it  assumes  that  the  process  of  education  ceases,  in  Austen's 
understanding,  after  a  person  has  achieved  a  fundamental  self-knowl02
edge.  Third,  it fails to take into  account the  explicit and  repeated  refer02
ences  in  Persuasion 
itself  to  Anne's  on-going  self-education.  Fourth,  it 
provides  an  aesthetic  model  of interpretation  that  is frankly  at  variance 
with  our  reading  experience of the  novel.  It is Anne's  mental processes, 
her  perceptions,  actions,  and  modulations  of  feeling―not  Went02
worth's―that  absorb  our  attention.  As  John  Wiltshire  observes,  "The 
process  of [Wentworth's] unblinding  is so lightly charted  that  it  is  plain 
that  Jane  Austen  is  not  deeply  interested  in  it."  Persuasion  cannot,  I 
think,  be said to be about Wentworth's education  when  it is so obviously 
Anne's story. 
The  narrator  defines  the  object  of  Anne's  instruction  in  the  fourth 
chapter:  "She had  been  forced  into  prudence  in  her  youth,  she  learned 
romance  as  she  grew  older―the  natural  sequence  of  an  unnatural 
beginning."  Critics,  it  seems  to  me,  have  been  too  quick  to  assign 
Anne's learning of romance exclusively to the past―in  particular,  to her 
eight  years  of separation  from  Wentworth―when  her  romantic  experi02
ence so clearly belongs to the  present  action  of the  novel which  unfolds 
t  Ann  W.  Astell,  "Anne  Elliot's Education: The  Learning  of  Romance  in  Persuasion,"  Renas02
cence  40  (1987):  2 - 1 4.  Reprinted by  permission  of  the  publisher.  The  author's  notes  have 
been deleted. 
276 
ANN  W.  ASTELL 
in  time  as  the  "natural  sequence" of prior  events.  Anne's  knowledge of 
romance  does  not  stop  short  with  a  clear  cognition  of what  might  or 
could or should  have been; it becomes an  experiential knowledge,  medi02
ated  through  the  emotions,  which  tests her  moral  maturity,  her psychic 
stamina,  to the  utmost.  Anne's feelings for Wentworth  are not  new; but 
the  ethical  context  in  which  she  must  deal  with  them  is.  The  intense 
interiority  of the  novel,  which  draws us  into  the  world  of Anne's  think02
ing,  feeling,  and  willing,  invites  us  to  participate  in  a  learning  of 
romance that  is colored by the  passions without  being blinded  by  them, 
that  is both  intellectually and  emotionally true,  and  that  is increasingly 
independent  of surrounding circumstance.  In the end Anne's  happiness 
depends less on Wentworth's  loving her than  on  her  loving him,  freely, 
unconditionally,  and  eternally.  Indeed,  there  is  something  silently 
Augustinian  in  Austen's transformation  of a youthful  romance, which is 
simply  defined  by  strong,  mutual  attraction,  into  a  mature  romance 
which  derives  its spiritual  splendor  from  selfless intentionality,  and  the 
ordering  power  of a directed will. 
If the  object  of Anne's education  is romance, then  it must also be said 
that  the  pedagogical  process  involved  in  her  instruction  is a  Romantic 
one.  The  Romantic features  of the  novel―its celebration  of nature,  its 
revolutionary  impulse,  its affirmation  of emotion,  its focus on  the  indi02
vidual,  its  ranging  homelessness,  its  poignant  emphasis  on  remem02
brance―have  often  been  noted  (see  Wiesenfarth,  Spence),  but  the 
relationship between  Romantic theories of composition and Anne's own 
method  of self-education  has  not  been  sufficiently  explored.  Persuasion 
presents  a  series of incidents,  each  of which  trigger  a  strong  emotional 
response  in  Anne,  who  first  withdraws  to  recollect herself,  testing  her 
perception  of the present against her memory of the past,  and then exerts 
herself  to  virtuous  action,  drawing on  the  strength  of those  same  emo02
tions.  As Wiltshire  has  said,  "Her  goal,  and  the  goal  of the  novel,  is a 
harmonizing  of her agitation that shall involve no giving in,  no compro02
mise,  no  suppression  of  one  part  of the  personality  by  another."  The 
gradual process of Anne's psychic integration  in  Persuasion  parallels  the 
process William Wordsworth  describes in the  Preface to Lyrical  Ballads: 
our  continued  influxes  of feeling are  modified  and  directed  by  our 
thoughts,  which  are  indeed  the  representatives  of all  our  past  feel02
ings; and,  as  by  contemplating  the  relation  of these  general  repre02
sentatives  to  each  other  we  discover  what  is  really  important  to 
men,  so, by the  repetition  and  continuance of this act, our feelings 
will be connected with  important  subjects. 
The  Romantic view  of the  educational  process,  then,  as outlined  by 
Wordsworth  and  imitated  by Austen,  involves the  conversion  of essen02
tially  passive  and  spontaneous  reactions 
to  the  world  of sensory  experi02
ence―that  is,  our  "continued  influxes  of  feeling"―into  freely-willed 
ANNE  ELLIOT'S  EDUCATION 
277 
and  energetic responses―that 
is, the  purposeful  connection  of our  feel02
ings with  important  subjects―through  the habitual  exercise of the intel02
lect  in  the  close  examination,  modification,  and  direction  of  our 
emotions.  The  feelings,  then,  are  an  essential factor  in  the  educational 
process―not only because, properly  understood,  they enable one to dis02
cover  what  is  essential  to  human  nature,  "what  is  really  important  to 
men,"  what  is timeless  and  universal  in  the  individual  life-experience; 
but  also because  the  emotions  impel  one  to  act.  As Wordsworth  notes 
in  his  1815 "Essay Supplementary  to  the  Preface," "To be  moved  .  .  . 
by  a  passion  is  to  be  excited,  often  to  external,  but  always  to  internal, 
effort;  whether  for the  continuance  and  strengthening  of the  passion,  or 
for  its  suppression." 
If  Wordsworth's  discussion  of the  effect  of the  passions  on  poet  and 
reader  alike  looks  forward  to  Thomas  de  Quincey's  "Literature  of 
power,"  it also looks backward  to  Lockean treatments  in  the  eighteenth 
century.  As Devlin  has  shown,  John  Locke clearly understood  the  end 
of  education  to  be  the  acquiring  of virtues,  an  attainment  dependent 
both  on  the  clear,  rational  discernment  of right  and  wrong,  and  on  the 
ability  to  act  in  accord  with  that  recognition.  Locke  realized  that, 
because  the  passions  can  impair  our  reasoning  powers  and  deprive  us 
of  inner  freedom,  the  art  of controlling  the  emotions  is  central  to  the 
educational  enterprise.  In  On  the  Conduct  of  the  Understanding  Locke 
writes: 
When  the  fancy  is  bound  by  passion,  I  know  no  way  to  set  the 
mind free and  at liberty to prosecute what  thoughts  the  man  would 
make choice of,  but  to allay the present passion,  or  counterbalance 
it with another; which  is an  art to be got by study  and  acquaintance 
with  the passions. 
In  Some  Thoughts  on  Education 
(1693) Locke urges the early practice 
of the  agere  contra1  as a way of achieving "the principle of all virtue  and 
excellency" which  "lies in  a power  of denying  ourselves the  satisfaction 
of our  own  desires where  reason  does  not  authorize  them."  In  the  same 
treatise  Locke affirms  that  "the  great  principle  of all  virtue  and  worth" 
consists  in  the  mind's  ability to  "endure  hardships"  and  "purely  follow 
what  reason  directs  as  best,  though  the  appetite  lean  the  other  way." 
This  is clearly a life-long educational  objective that  can  only be  learned 
by being practiced. 
If Locke's discussion of vigorous and  virtuous  resolve as a counterforce 
to emotional  impulse  seems far-removed  from  Austen's  Persuasion,  one 
only needs to recall how Anne  Elliot's "strong sense of duty" defines  her 
peculiar  heroism,  and  determines  her  actions  from  beginning  to  end. 
When  the  nineteen-year-old  Anne  submits  to  Lady  Russell,  a  woman 
1.  Literally,  "to  act  against." Locke  is  recommending acting  against  the  grain,  against  one's 
immediate desires [Editor]. 
278 
ANN  W.  ASTELL 
who has taken  "the place of a parent" for her,  she follows her conscience 
and  yields  "to  duty,"  renouncing  her  desire  to  marry  Wentworth.  She 
considers  herself  to  be "consulting  his good,  even  more than  her  own," 
and  this  conviction  empowers  her  to  give  him  up  at  a  time  when  she 
feels  exceedingly drawn to him.  When  Wentworth  returns after  years of 
separation,  Anne's  long-dormant  feelings  of  attraction  for  him  are 
aroused  with  all  their  former  intensity; at  the  same  time,  however,  her 
breaking  of their  engagement  has  changed  their  relationship  in  such  a 
way that those feelings have virtually no outlet,  no direct and  immediate 
means  of outward  expression.  Anne  and  Wentworth  are  "repeatedly  in 
the  same circle" but they can allow themselves "no intercourse but  what 
the  commonest  civility"  requires.  "Once  so  much  to  each  other"  they 
are  "nothing"  now,  existing  in  "perpetual  estrangement."  Before  Anne 
lived apart from  Wentworth  without  him; his return forces her to endure 
an  existential separation  from  him  in  his physical presence. 
The  same  "strong  sense  of duty"  which  moved  Anne  to  break  their 
engagement initially now challenges her to allow Wentworth  to exercise 
the freedom  she has given him.  She understands that he wishes "to avoid 
seeing  her";  that  he  is  "actually  looking  around,  ready  to  fall  in  love" 
with  anyone  else  but  her.  She  silently  witnesses  him  "accepting  the 
attentions" of both the  Musgrove girls, and  sees his intimacy with Louisa 
advance  to  such  a  point  that  others  consider  him  "an  engaged  man." 
The  accident at  Lyme calls  upon  Anne  in  a dramatic  way to fulfill  "the 
office  of a  friend"  toward  the  young  woman  who  is  her  chief  rival  for 
Wentworth's  affection,  and  we  are  told  that  "she  would  have  attended 
on  Louisa with  a zeal above the common  claims of regard,  for his sake," 
directing the  strength  of her  love for Wentworth  into the  charitable ser02
vice  of  another.  Event  after  event  stirs  painful  emotions  with  which 
Anne  must  deal  within  an  objective  frame  of conduct dictated  by social 
norms  and  her  own  fine  conscience. 
Anne's heroic struggle to master her own  emotions, to deal with  what 
Wordsworth  calls  "continued  influxes  of feeling," defines  her  program 
of  self-education.  Her  success  is  measured  in  two  ways: first of all,  by 
her  unfailing  usefulness  to  others  in  the  performance  of duty; secondly, 
by  her  free  decision  to  bind  her  affection  finally  and  irrevocably  to 
Wentworth,  whether  or  not  he  returns  her  love,  whether  or  not  she 
receives  any  other  proposal  of marriage.  If Anne's  resolute  sublimation 
of  emotion  in  socially  consequent  action  recalls Locke,  her  affirmation 
of  a  single,  radical  affection  as the  well-spring  of that  virtuous  behavior 
recalls  Wordsworth  who  maintains  that  poetry,  imitating  life,  finds  its 
first origin  in  "the spontaneous  overflow of powerful  emotions." Indeed, 
Austen's summary  phrase―"the  resolution  of a collected  mind"―unites 
the  polar  focuses  of Locke  and  Wordsworth  in  a description  of the  per02
sonal  integrity Anne  strives to attain  through  a  rigorous and  uncompro02
mising  self-education. 
ANNE  ELLIOT'S  EDUCATION 
279 
Austen  emphasizes Anne's need  to educate  herself by pointing  out  the 
inadequacy  of  the  would-be  mentor  figures  who  surround  her.  Lady 
Elliot,  long  dead,  is only  a  shadowy  presence  in  the  novel.  Sir Walter, 
foolish,  vain,  and  indifferent  to  Anne,  is  morally  incapable  of  offering 
his  daughter  guidance.  Lady  Russell  is  good,  well-mannered,  well-
intended,  and  genuinely  attached  to  Anne.  She  has,  however,  "preju02
dices  on  the  side  of ancestry"  and  a  "value  for  rank  and  consequence" 
which  tend  to  blind  her  to  the  faults  of the  gentry.  She  is always  quick 
to  find  reasons  to  approve  her  own  liking,  even  if,  as  in  advocating  the 
Elliots'  move  to  Bath,  she  has  to  "oppose  her  dear  Anne's  known 
wishes."  When  Lady  Russell  exerted  her  influence  over  Anne,  urging 
her  to  break  off  her  engagement  with  young  Wentworth,  she  did  so 
because,  in  her  opinion,  he  "had  nothing  but  himself  to  recommend 
him,  and  no  hopes  of attaining  affluence."  Unlike Anne,  Lady Russell 
finds  "nothing  suspicious  or  inconsistent,  nothing  to  require  more 
motives  than  appeared"  in  William  Elliot's renewed  cordiality;  indeed, 
she delights  in  the  prospect  of Anne's  assuming  her  mother's  position  in 
Kellynch  Hall as the  heir's wife.  Anne's disapproval  of her  "overanxious 
caution  which  seems to insult exertion and  distrust  Providence" suggests 
that  Lady  Russell's errors  in  judgment―both  in  opposing  Wentworth's 
suit  and  in  favoring  Elliot's―stem  from  a  way  of thinking  that  is  too 
naturalistic  and  worldly,  too  little founded  on  the  faith  in  God  which, 
according to  Locke,  must  be  the  very basis of education.  The  reference 
to trust in  Providence,  in  a literary context saturated  with  the  imagery of 
flowering  and  bloom,  recalls the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  and  the  scrip02
tural  discourse  on  the  lilies  of  the  field,  thus  providing  an  implicit 
counter-text  to Lady  Russell's pattern  of counsel. 
Anne's  mother,  "an  excellent  woman,  sensible  and  amiable,"  had 
turned  in  her  final  illness to  Lady Russell, hoping  that  her  friend  would 
support  and  maintain  "the  good  principles  and  instruction  which  she 
had  been anxiously giving her daughters."  Anne was only fourteen  when 
her  mother  died,  but  her sensitive, docile nature must  have been  partic02
ularly  receptive to her  mother's  early influence,  for Lady Russell fancies 
"the  mother  to  revive  again"  in  her.  The  assimilation  between  mother 
and  daughter―which  might  have  gained  fictive  expression  in  their 
warm  intimacy,  shared  principles,  and  parallel  judgments―becomes  a 
fusion  in  Austen's  novel.  We  do  not  see  Anne's  mother;  we  only  see 
Anne―the  daughter  who bears her  name,  and  whose "elegance of mind 
and  sweetness  of  character"  reflects  her  mother's  own  "superior  char02
acter. " 
As  D.  D.  Devlin  has  pointed  out,  Austen's  handling  of the  mentor 
figure  clearly  demonstrates  the  relation  of her  individual  talent  to  the 
tradition  of the  eighteenth  century  novel.  According  to  Devlin,  how02
ever, Anne  Elliot functions  directly as a mentor  for Captain  Wentworth, 
and  indirectly  as  the  reader's  mentor,  while  she  herself  has  nothing  to 
280 
ANN  W.  ASTELL 
learn.  What  Devlin  and  other  critics  have  failed  to  recognize  is  that 
Anne  only  instructs  others  in  the  process  of  instructing  herself.  The 
world  of appearances,  which  exerts so great an  influence  in  Persuasion 
on  Anne's  tender  sensibility,  is continually  tested  by  her  in  her  search 
for  truth,  a  search  which  leads  her  from  the  present  into  the  past  to 
discover  what  is real  and  unchanging,  the  only fit foundation  for  futu02
rity.  If Anne Elliot has suffered,  and continues to suffer,  without becom02
ing embittered,  it is because she has found  a way to supply  the  need  for 
a  mentor  within  her  own  consciousness. Throughout  the  novel Anne is 
depicted  as a composite figure who  is simultaneously  mother and  child, 
teacher  and  learner,  and  who  carries on  the  dialogic, didactic discourse 
within  her  own  mind. 
When  Anne  is called upon  to advise others,  she  only teaches lessons 
she  is  learning  herself.  At  Uppercross,  for  instance,  she  finds  herself 
"being  treated  with  too  much  confidence  by all  parties." After  listening 
to all  the  complaints,  she can  only  "soften  every grievance,  and  excuse 
each  to  the  other," giving "hints  of the  forebearance  necessary between 
such  near  neighbors." Anne  herself exercises "perseverance  in patience, 
and  forced  cheerfulness" in  Mary's company.  Her "pleasure" at the  hap02
piness of the  Musgroves over their daughters'  musical performance  over02
rides  her  own  feelings  of "mortification"  at  the  keyboard.  Her  conduct 
consistently  exemplifies the  forebearance she urges others  to practice. 
That,  however,  is an  achievement that  involves considerable  self-sac02
rifice  on  Anne's  part.  When  she  arrives  at  Uppercross  she  tells  herself 
"that  another  lesson,  in  the  art of knowing  our  own  nothingness  beyond 
our  own  circle,  was  become  necessary for  her."  When  she  is  surprised 
by  the  Musgroves' lack of interest  in  the  Elliots'  affairs,  she  resolves "to 
avoid such  self-delusion  in future"  and  put  aside any  notions of her  own 
importance.  Indeed,  she  takes  it as  her  aim  to detach  herself  from  Kel02
lynch  Hall,  and  "clothe her  imagination,  her  memory,  and all her  ideas 
in  as  much  of Uppercross as possible." If Anne  masters  this lesson,  it is 
because she submits to the discipline of her own sense for what is fitting. 
At  Lyme  Anne  converses  with  Captain  Benwick, a  man  afflicted  by 
his  fiancee's  recent  death.  Once  again  the  narrative  emphasizes  that 
Anne identifies with  the one she instructs.  She tells herself that his  heart 
is not  "more  sorrowing" than  hers; she compares  his loss and  "blighted" 
prospects  with  her  own.  After  preaching  "patience  and  resignation"  to 
him,  she  admits  to  herself  the  fear  that  she  has  been  "eloquent  on  a 
point  in which  her  own  conduct  would  ill bear examination." She only 
tells Benwick what  she must  tell herself over and  over again  as she strug02
gles to maintain  an  inner  equilibrium. 
Anne's  conversation  with  Benwick  reveals that  she  herself  attaches a 
great  importance  to  books  as  a  means  of self-education.  She  has  cer02
tainly read the "works of our best moralists, " the letters, and the memoirs 
she  recommends  to  Benwick  as  a  way  of fortifying  her  own  mind  "by 
ANNE  ELLIOT'S  EDUCATION 
281 
the  highest  precepts,  and  the  strongest  examples of moral  and  religious 
endurances." On  the  other  hand,  she  is clearly familiar with  the  poetry 
Benwick  discusses  and  recites,  including  "all  the  tenderest  songs  .  .  . 
and all the impassioned descriptions of hopeless agony. " Anne's sophisti02
cated  understanding  of the  psychology  of reading  affirms  the  value  of 
the  lyrical expression  of sentiment  as  a  way  to  grow  in  self-knowledge 
and  understanding  for  others.  At  the  same  time,  however,  she clearly 
understands the  dangers  it entails.  She urges  Benwick  to  include  in  his 
daily study "a larger allowance of prose," and  cautions him  against  read02
ing too much  poetry,  observing that  the  "strong feelings" which  make a 
person  capable of really appreciating  poetry  also expose him  to  poetry's 
dangers,  and  require him  in  prudence  "to taste it but  sparingly. " 
Anne's  counsel  reveals  much  about  her  own  reaction  to  poetry,  her 
own  need  to  practice temperance.  The  reader  recalls that  Anne  "occu02
pied  her  mind"  with  snatches of poetry  during the  walk to  Winthrop― 
an  occupation  which  increased  her  susceptibility  to  the  influence  of 
autumn  at  a  time  when  Wentworth's  attentions  to  Louisa  Musgrove 
were renewing her own  painful  sense of loss.  Indeed,  she endeavored  at 
that time to avoid overhearing them  by reciting to herself tender  autum02
nal  sonnets  "fraught  with  . ..  the  images  of  youth,  and  hope,  and 
spring,  all gone together. " 
The  advice  Anne  gives  to  Benwick  indicates  that  she  regulates  her 
own  emotional response to poetry, first of all,  by limiting her  reading of 
it,  and  secondly, by submitting the strong emotions aroused by poetry  to 
the order of reason reflected in expository writing on moral and  religious 
themes.  Anne,  in  short,  is the  mature  reader  of poetry that  Wordsworth 
celebrates  in  his  1815 "Essay Supplementary  to  the  Preface" of  Lyrical 
Ballads.  Wordsworth  begins by affirming  that 
The  appropriate  business  of poetry,  .  .  .  her  appropriate  employ02
ment,  her  privilege and  her  duty,  is to  treat  of things  not  as  they 
are,  but  as they  appear;  not as they exist in  themselves, but  as they 
seem  to exist to the  senses,  and  to the  passions. 
He  goes  on  to  admit  that  the  poetic  "world  of  delusion"  necessarily 
entails  dangers  for  the  young  and  inexperienced,  whose  feelings  are 
flammable  and  "little disciplined by the understanding. " After differenti02
ating various classes of readers by age and interest, Wordsworth describes 
the  one group whose judgment  can be trusted  in the  criticism of poetry: 
"those and  those only who,  never having  suffered  their youthful  love of 
poetry  to  remit  much  of its force,  have  applied  . ..  the  best  power of 
their  understanding"  to a study  of poetry's laws within  a broader literary 
context.  Such readers  possess "a  mind  at  once poetical and  philosophi02
cal,"  and  "a  natural  sensibility  that  has  been  tutored  into  correctness 
without  losing  anything  of its  quickness." Like  Anne  Elliot  they  have 
the  "strong  feelings" that  respond  to  poetry's  passionate  appeal;  at  the 
282 
ANN  W.  ASTELL 
same  time,  they  possess  the  mental  discipline  to  examine  those  same 
emotions,  and  the  cause  of their  arousal,  within  a larger frame  of refer02
ence.  Like  her,  they  are  both  young  and  old;  they  are  able  to  guide 
others because they  first instruct themselves. 
Anne's way of dealing  with  the  passions stirred  by poetry  parallels her 
method  of mastering  the  emotions aroused  by  life.  Indeed,  her  practice 
conforms  to  the  stages  outlined  in  Wordsworth's  theoretical  discussion 
of  lyrical composition.  Again  and  again  she  withdraws and  struggles  to 
recollect  in  tranquillity  the  powerful  feelings  which  agitate  her.  She 
thinks  about  what  she feels―and  finds  enough  calm  in that  contempla02
tion to mobilize the  inner strength  needed to act, to re-engage the world, 
to  give  herself  in  the  performance  of her  duties.  The  "sublimation  of 
grief  merges  with  the  fulfillment  of her  love and  makes  it  possible for 
Wentworth,  in  turn,  to  find  himself  in  love with  her. 
Austen  consistently describes Anne's struggle with  her emotions as an 
educational  process  that  is  triggered  by  the  events  she  experiences. 
Those  events  belong  to  a  narrative  order  that  is  often  so  colored  by 
Anne's  emotional  perception  of  things  that  the  ordinary  distinction 
between  first  and  third  person  narrators  no  longer applies.  The  impres02
sionistic,  fragmentary  account  of  the  Musgroves'  discussion  of  Went02
worth,  for instance,  is clearly an  instance of free  indirect discourse: 
To  hear  them  talking  so  much  of Captain  Wentworth,  repeating 
his name  so often,  puzzling  over past years, and  at last ascertaining 
that  it  might,  that  it probably  would,  turn  out  to be  the  very  same 
Captain  Wentworth  whom  they  recollected  meeting,  once  or 
twice,  after  their  coming  back  from  Clifton;―a  very  fine  young 
man;  but  they  could  not  say  whether  it  was  seven  or  eight  years 
ago,―was  a new  sort of trial  to Anne's  nerves. 
The  "so  much"  and  "so  often,"  and  the  selection  of  details  reflects 
Anne's  inner  experience of the  talk that  evening.  She is clearly agitated, 
and  she  responds  to  her  own  emotional  turmoil  with  the  resolution  to 
"teach  herself  to  be  insensible." As an  inhabitant  of Uppercross,  Anne 
feels  she  cannot  allow her  personal  distress  to  mar  the  "comfort" of the 
Musgroves,  who  are grateful  to Wentworth,  and  eager to meet  him. 
Anne's  own  first  meeting  with  Wentworth  after  years of separation  is 
narrated  in  a fragmented  style that  suggests the  rush of "a thousand  feel02
ings." When  he  leaves she begins "to reason  with  herself,  and  tries to be 
feeling  less"―only to discover "that  to  retentive feelings eight years may 
be  little  more  than  nothing. "  She asks herself  about  Wentworth's  senti02
ments,  and  then  hates  herself  "for  the  folly  which  asked  the  question." 
After  seeing him  she acknowledges to herself that  she has definitely seen 
"the  same  Frederick Wentworth"―whether  or  not  he  sees the  same,  or 
an  altered,  Anne.  The dialogue  she carries on within  herself affirms  that 
ANNE  ELLIOT'S  EDUCATION 
283 
her  present  feelings  match  her  remembered  ones,  and  she  knows  that 
she still loves him. 
The  first  kindness  Wentworth  shows  to  Anne―in  carrying  off little 
Walter,  who  had  bound  himself  to her back and  neck―produces  "such 
a  confusion  of varying,  but  very  painful  agitation"  in  Anne  that  she  is 
forced  to  leave the  room.  She  is "ashamed  of herself," honestly  admits 
her  own  weakness,  and  grants  herself  the  "long  application  of solitude 
and  reflection" which  is necessary for her recovery. 
During the  walk to Winthrop  Anne  inadvertently  overhears a conver02
sation  between  Wentworth  and  Louisa  that  reveals  his  opinion  of  her 
character.  Once  again  she  experiences "extreme  agitation."  As  long  as 
her  emotions  hold  her  "fixed," she  cannot  move; she takes the  time  she 
needs to recover. Later that  same day,  when  her fatigue  becomes appar02
ent to Wentworth  and  he  assists her  into the  Crofts' carriage, Anne  is so 
distracted  by this  unexpected  kindness  that  she does  not  even  hear  what 
the Crofts  are saying.  Through  the  use  of free  indirect discourse  Austen 
lets  us  overhear  Anne  as  she  contemplates  the  act and  its significance, 
and  reflects on  her  own  emotions "compounded  of pleasure  and  pain." 
Anne's  affections  increase,  rather  than  limit,  her  powers  of percep02
tion,  even  as  her  memories  give  her  insight  into  present  happenings. 
"From  her  knowledge  of [Wentworth's]  mind"  Anne  feels  assured  that 
he  cannot  speak  about  "former  times"  without  recalling  their  engage02
ment.  She  dares  to  judge  from  her  "observations" based  on  "memory 
and  experience" that  Wentworth  is not  really  in  love with  either  of the 
Musgrove daughters,  nor  they  with  him.  Because she  loves (and  there02
fore  knows) Wentworth,  she  can  interpret  the  "momentary  expression" 
on  his  face,  and  know  the  meaning  of  his  "contemptuous  glance." 
Because  she connects the  "little circumstance" of the  carriage ride  with 
"all that had gone before," she is suddenly  able to understand that Went02
worth still feels for her without  being able to forgive her.  Her own  suffer02
ing  consistently increases her  empathy  for  others,  her  insight  into  their 
character. 
Nor  do  Anne's  painful  emotions  keep  her  from  virtuous  action; they 
rather  strengthen  her to exert herself.  Like her  mother,  whose  unhappi-
ness in  marriage led her to devote herself to "her duties,  her friends,  and 
her children," Anne directs the energy of her passions into useful  deeds. 
Sad  about leaving Kellynch Hall,  and  dreading the  move to Bath, Anne 
goes to  Uppercross to help  Mary,  feeling "glad to have anything  marked 
out  as a duty."  Distressed at  Wentworth's  return,  she  devotes  herself  to 
little Charles,  knowing  herself  "to be of first utility to the  child." When 
dancing  is proposed  at the  Musgroves' party,  Anne  offers her  services at 
the  keyboard.  Her  eyes  fill with  tears  as she plays,  but  she  is "extremely 
glad  to  be  employed."  She accepts the  invitation  to  go  on  the  walk  "as 
she might be useful" in  lessening Mary's interference  in the  plans  of the 
284 
ANN  W.  ASTELL 
Musgrove  girls.  At  Lyme  she  keeps  Benwick company,  and  thus  per02
forms  "a good deed."  Her  greatest  service there,  of course,  is the  leader02
ship  she provides  when  Louisa injures  herself severely in  her  jump  from 
the  stiles. There  is, as Wentworth  says, "no  one so proper,  so capable as 
Anne."  During  the  last  days  of Anne's  stay  at  Uppercross  she  has  "the 
satisfaction  of knowing  herself  extremely  useful  there" as a  companion, 
counsellor,  and  practical assistant to the  Musgroves. 
Anne's  ability  to  compose  her  emotions,  and  channel  their  forceful 
flow  into  service,  has  two  results.  First  of  all,  it  provides  a  series  of 
lessons  which  teach  Anne  her  own  value.  She  who  had  felt  herself 
"rejected  as no good at all" comes to know herself as someone "extremely 
useful."  The gratitude  of Benwick and  the  Musgroves,  and  Wentworth's 
words  of praise  at  Lyme,  awaken  in  her  "a  second  spring  of youth  and 
beauty."  Secondly,  Anne's  resourcefulness  and  kindness  teach  others 
her true worth.  Wentworth  sees her  nursing  little Charles and  caring for 
Louisa,  and  learns  to  appreciate  her  anew.  Benwick  praises  her  "ele02
gance,  sweetness,  beauty."  William  Elliot  is  delighted  by  her  visits  to 
her old schoolfellow, and  considers her  "a model  of female excellence. " 
While  Anne  disciplines  her  feelings and  directs  their  energy  into  vir02
tuous  action,  she  never  denies  them.  She  remains  true  to  herself,  and 
that  truth  becomes  a  standard  by  which  she  assesses  the  character  of 
others.  She  instinctively distrusts  William  Elliot,  in  particular,  because 
he  is "not  open,"  because  he  never  has  a "burst  of feeling" which  leads 
him  to reveal his true sentiments.  He is, she thinks,  "too generally agree02
able," too polished  in his manner,  too skilled in the art of pleasing every02
one.  His pliability  suggests  a lack of principle.  Anne  realizes from  pass02
ing remarks  that  he  has been,  and  perhaps still is, "careless on  all serious 
matters,"  including  religious  obligations.  She  notes  that  Elliot's "value 
for  rank  and  connexion"―which leads him,  like her father,  to pay  court 
to  the  Dalrymples―is  greater  than  hers.  Finally,  when  she  compares 
Elliot  with  Wentworth,  she  discovers  that  she  continues  to  prize  "the 
frank,  the  open-hearted,  the  eager  character  beyond  all  others."  Her 
early  impressions  inform  her  present  ones,  even  as  her  own  principles 
test those  of others. 
Anne's "continued  influxes of feeling" at Bath serve to teach her  about 
her  own  unchanging  sentiments.  Agitated  by  the  news  of Louisa  Mus02
grove's  engagement  to Captain  Benwick, she  withdraws  to  her  room  in 
an  attempt  "to  comprehend  it."  She  discovers  that  she  is "ashamed  to 
investigate"  her  feelings  because  they  are  "too  much  like  joy, senseless 
joy. "  Her  chance  meeting  with  Wentworth  at  Molland's  produces  "agi02
tation,  pain,  pleasure,  a  something  between  delight  and  misery."  She 
confesses  to  herself  that  she  is  not  yet  "wise  and  reasonable"  for  she 
cannot  "be  quite  herself  without  knowing  his  sentiments  toward  her. 
She  must  continue  to  educate  herself.  The  conversation  with  Went02
worth  at the  concert,  which  reveals so much  to her,  leaves her  "in  need 
ANNE  ELLIOT'S  EDUCATION 
285 
of a  little interval  for recollection." She recalls his every word,  his  tone, 
his  look,  and  her  observations  lead  her  to  believe  that  he  "must  love 
her." 
In  the  final  movement  of  Persuasion  Anne  becomes  reconciled  to 
herself.  Through  the  repeated  contemplation  of her  own  emotions  she 
learns  that  she  has  always  loved  Wentworth,  and  becomes  convinced 
that  she always will: 
be  the conclusion of the present suspense good or bad,  her affection 
would  be  his  forever.  Their  union,  she believed,  could  not  divide 
her  more from  other  men,  than  their  final  separation. 
The  inner  peace which  attends  this "yes" to her own  unconditional  love 
for  Wentworth  marks an  atmospheric change in Anne's soul which  sym02
bolically  affects the  world  around  her:  "It was almost enough  to  spread 
purification  and  perfume  all  the  way."  At  this  point  in  the  narrative, 
before  Wentworth  declares his love, Anne  discovers the  meaning  of her 
life―past,  present,  and  future―in  her unchanging love for him―a  love 
that  has  strengthened  her  and  empowered  her  endurance.  As  she  tells 
Captain  Harville,  a woman's  privilege consists in  "loving longest,  when 
existence or when  hope  is gone." If the  ending  of Persuasion 
cally  satisfying,  even  haunting  (and  it  is), that  is because it  is a  story of 
love  without  end,  a  love that  has  been  tested  and  become increasingly 
independent  of  outward  circumstance―be  it  physical  separation,  the 
passage of time,  the  interference  of others,  or the outbreak  of a  Napole02
onic War. 
is aestheti02
Even  the  marriage  of  Anne  and  Wentworth  is  secondary  to  the 
achievement of Anne's  inner  freedom  to love,  "the  harmonizing  of her 
agitation."  Their  mature,  mutual  "recollection in  tranquillity"  of their 
youthful  love for one another  mirrors Anne's independent  achievement, 
and  leaves  them  both  "more  equal  to  act,  more  justified  in  acting." 
Indeed,  their marriage becomes an outward sign, a symbol, of the  integ02
rity Anne has achieved within  herself.  Anne,  like Mrs. Smith, possesses 
an  "elasticity  of mind"  which  disposes  her  "to  be  comforted,"  to  turn 
"from  evil  to  good,"  to  find  "employment  which  [carries]  her  out  of 
herself."  Austen's  novel  shows  that  this  spiritual  capacity,  which  is 
simultaneously  a  gift  "from  Nature  alone"  and  "the  choicest  gift  of 
Heaven,"  is also a  talent  to  be developed,  a  task  to be  undertaken  will02
fully  and  freely.  Because  Anne  dares  to  let  herself  be  educated  by  life 
with  all  its tempests  and  trials,  and  does  not  shrink  from  the  challenge 
posed  by  her  own  passionate  reactions  to  persons  and  events,  she  suc02
ceeds  in  learning  a  romance  that  is  all  the  more  wonderful  because  it 
represents  an  ordered  synthesis,  an  integration  of elements initially cha02
otic and  potentially destructive.  Persuasion  moves us to believe that  such 
transcendent  lessons can be learned―at  least by minds  which possess an 
elasticity comparable to Anne's  own. 
286 
CLAUDIA  L. 
JOHNSON 
CLAUDIA  L.  JOHNSON 
Persuasion:  The  "Unfeudal  Tone  of the  Present Day" t 
Persuasion  has always signified  more than  what  it singly comprises: its 
two  slender  volumes  have  been  made  to  bear  the  imprint  of  Austen's 
entire  career.  Whereas Pride  and  Prejudice  and  Emma  can be and  most 
often  are discussed without  reference to Austen's other works,  Persuasion 
is above all else the  last novel,  the  apparent  conclusion that  determines 
the  shape  of everything  that  has  come before.  The  critical tradition  has 
designated  Persuasion 
the  "autumnal"  novel,  and  this  adjective  brings 
with  it  a  parcel  of value-laden  and  often  quite  pedestrian  assumptions 
about both  the course of Austen's career and the course of literary history 
in  general.  Wistful  and  romantically  unfulfilled  in  the  twilight  of her 
life,  so the  argument  goes, the  author  grows tenderer  on  romantic  sub02
jects  she  had  disparaged  in  the  confidence  and  severity  of  her  youth; 
with  her  own  opening  out  onto  a  new  world  of emotion,  eighteenth-
century  "objectivity"  yields  to  nineteenth-century  "subjectivity";  the 
assured,  not  to  say  simple-minded,  gives  way  to  the  ambiguous  and 
complex.  The  underlying  assumption  that  Anne's autumn  and  Austen's 
are complementary―in  other words,  that Persuasion, 
like the other nov02
els,  indeed  like  all  novels  by  women,  is  the  author's  own  love  story, 
composed with  little or no aesthetic distance―is of course teeming  with 
fallacies,  not  the  least glaring  of which  in  this  particular  case are  those 
which  result  from  the  imposition  of specious teleology.  Persuasion  will 
not look so unequivocally like Austen's last and  most mature  word  about 
love and  the changing world before death  stopped  her lips if we recollect 
that  Sanditon,  which  recapitulates  the  raucous  energy  and  renews  the 
literary  debates  characteristic  of  Austen's  earliest  work,  followed  so 
closely  on  its heels.  Austen,  unlike  her  latter-day  readers,  did  not  have 
the  benefit  of knowing  that  her  impending  death  would  be  imparting  a 
gently  resigned,  autumnal  melancholy  to  all  her  observations.  Many 
prominent,  yet seldom-discussed,  elements of Persuasion  call the  youth02
ful  Sense  and  Sensibility 
to  mind―the  apparently  unfeeling  allusion  to 
Mrs.  Musgrove's "fat sighings," the conventionalized villainy of William 
Elliot  and  the  conspicuously  artificial  means  of disclosing it,  the  overt-
ness  of its  sarcasms  at  the  expense  of silly and  uninformed  people.  To 
judge  them  in  terms  of the  autumnal  paradigm,  with  which  they  are 
at  odds,  these  features  can  only  be  dismissed  as  unfortunate  lapses  in 
morbid  foresight. 
This  of course  is not  to say that  Persuasion  gives us  nothing  new,  but 
*  From  Claudia  L. Johnson,  Jane  Austen:  Women,  Politics,  and  the Novel (Chicago:  U of Chi02
cago  P,  1988),  144-66,  181-82.  Reprinted by permission of The  University of Chicago Press. 
All notes are by the editor of this Norton Critical  Edition. The author's notes have been deleted. 
PERSUASION:  T HE  "UNFEUDAL  TONE  OF  THE  PRESENT  D A Y" 
287 
only  that  it should  be  considered  without  using  the  benefit  of hindsight 
to  beg  so  many  important  questions.  Most  readers  note,  for  example, 
that  Persuasion 
ridicules  the  ruling  class.  This  fact  appears  distinctive, 
however,  only  when  we  assume  that  it  is a  departure  from  the  practice 
of  the  earlier  novels.  But  surely  nothing  said  in  Persuasion  about  the 
Musgroves or Elliots surpasses the satire to which the Middletons,  Palm02
ers,  and  John  Dashwoods  are  treated  in  Sense  and  Sensibility.  What 
is  different  about  Persuasion 
is  not  that  it  shows  how  the  improvident 
landowners,  proving  themselves  unworthy  of  their  station,  have  left 
England  poised  on  the  brink  of a  new  world  dominated  by the  best  and 
the  brightest,  the  Royal  Navy.  As  one  historian  has  observed,  foolish 
and  financially  embarrassed  landowners  are  nothing  new  to  English 
social  history  or  to  Austen's  fiction.  Eventually,  Sir  Walter  will  réas02
sume Kellynch, and yield it in the time-honored  way to his heir William 
Elliot,  a man  who,  knowing  how  to serve "his own  interest and  his  own 
enjoyment,"  will  doubtless  not,  as  Sir Thomas  had,  lose  his  hold  on 
"the  situation  in which  Providence has placed  him." 
But  if in  Persuasion 
the  landed  classes have  not  lost their  power,  they 
have  lost  their  prestige  and  their  moral  authority  for  the  heroine. 
Whereas  Pride  and  Prejudice  could,  with  elaborately wrought  qualifica02
tions and  finely  modulated  discriminations,  finally  vindicate  the  highly 
controversial  practice  of "prejudice,"  Lady  Russell's "prejudices  on  the 
side  of  ancestry"  and  "value  for  rank  and  consequence"  are  never 
allowed  to  be  anything  more  than  amiable  but  groundless  articulations 
of  self-interest.  Like  her  idea  of what  constitutes  a  "little  quiet  cheer02
fulness"  or,  for  that  matter,  Admiral  Croft's  idea  of proper  decor,  Lady 
Russell's  "prejudices  on  the  side  of ancestry"  are  not  favored  with  any 
corroborative  footing  in  "objective"  reality.  As  Admiral  Croft  puts  it, 
"Ay,  so  it  always  is,  I  believe.  One  man's  ways  may  be  as  good  as 
another's,  but  we  all  like  our  own  best.  And  so  you  must  judge  for 
yourself  . . ."  Sense  and  Sensibility  makes it hard to believe that  Austen 
ever shared  Lady Russell's prejudices,  yet even there she evinces a  heart02
ier tolerance for booby squires than  what  she somewhat  wearily  musters 
here.  For  all  his  absurdity,  Sir John  Middleton's  bluff  generosity  com02
mands  some  respect.  But  whether  darting  eagerly  after  weasels, 
defending  the  claims  of  eldest  sons,  or  extolling  the  virtues  of "good, 
freehold  property,"  Charles  Musgrove has  little to  recommend  himself. 
His ideas, like his activities, are tediously predictable, and  his "old  coun02
try family of respectability and  large fortune"  has no charm: Anne  never 
regrets her refusal  to attach  herself to this inoffensive, but  unredeemably 
mediocre  gentleman  and  the  long-established  kind  of domestic  life  he 
represents. 
Persuasion, 
then,  distinctively minimizes problems which  had  before 
been  so  momentous  to  the  heroines.  By  centering  her  novel  on  a 
maturer  heroine,  of course,  Austen  is  free  to  explore  female  indepen-
288 
CLAUDIA  L.  JOHNSON 
dence  without  being  obliged  to  explore  the  concomitant  impertinence 
which  always  seems  to  accompany  the  self-assurance  of younger  hero02
ines.  The  duty  of  filial  piety,  for  example―Fanny Price's "great  rule  to 
apply  to"―is  nowhere  dignified  with  the  status  of being  at  issue  here. 
Even though  her "word" has "no weight" within  her family circle,  Anne, 
like  Emma,  is an  autonomous  heroine.  For this  reason,  to conceptual02
ize Persuasion,  as readers so often  do,  as a debate between  individualism 
and  propriety  is  not  only  to  employ  an  opposition  already  curiously 
loaded  in favor of conservative arguments,  but  it is also to  underestimate 
the  degree  of Anne's  independence  from  traditional,  paternal  authority 
and  to misplace the  emphasis  of the  plot.  Starting as early as the second 
chapter,  for example, when  we learn  that  she  regards paying  one's debts 
as an  "indispensable  duty," Anne  distances  herself from  an  impropriety 
that  is specifically paternal.  General Tilney's wrath  with Catherine is the 
catastrophe  of Northanger  Abbey.  But the  crisis in  Persuasion―Anne's 
decision  to break  off her  engagement―has  little to do with  Sir Walter's 
paternal  displeasure.  On  the  contrary,  it  has  everything  to do  with  the 
advice,  not  the  authority,  of a  trusted  friend,  Lady  Russell,  to  whom 
Anne  does  not  owe  the  comparable  duty  of obedience.  Such  is Anne's 
filial  disposition  at  nineteen.  At twenty-eight  she  pays  Sir Walter  even 
less  mind.  While  Sir  Walter  pursues  Lady  Dalrymple,  Anne  visits  a 
"nobody"―Mrs.  Smith―without  as much  as  informing  him,  let alone 
seeking  his  permission,  and  once  his  disapproval  is  expressed,  it  is 
ignored  without  fuss.  For  Anne,  no  hard  conflict  between  duty  and 
inclination  is implied  by defying  or simply  ignoring  her  father.  Indeed, 
it is all too easy: "Anne  kept her  appointment;  the others  kept theirs. " 
Although  Anne's  indifference  to  filial  propriety  can  show  us  the  dis02
tance  Austen  has  come  since Northanger  Abbey,  Austen's  earlier novel 
is  nevertheless  tied  up  with  Persuasion.  Published  together  posthu02
mously  in  1817, they  seem  unlikely companions,  but  in Austen's  mind 
their  partnership  was  deeper  than  the  accident  of their  copublication. 
Persuasion 
itself  speaks  to  problems  that  to  all  appearances  pressed  on 
Austen  while  she  was  reviewing,  perhaps  even  revising,  Northanger 
Abbey  for  publication.  The  "hand  of time" may  have  been  "lenient" to 
Catherine  Morland's  feelings,  but  Austen  considered  it  harsh  to  her 
novel.  In  the  "Advertisement"  to  Northanger  Abbey  she  dwells  on  the 
"thirteen  years"  during  which  "places,  manners,  books,  and  opinions 
have  undergone  considerable  changes," changes  which  render  parts of 
her  novel  "comparatively  obsolete." The  "thirteen  years" marked  here, 
of  course,  are  the  same  thirteen  years  that  cause  such  dislocation  in 
Persuasion.  This novel  is constantly calling attention  to a temporal  gap, 
to the  time  unwritten,  but  everywhere  felt,  to the  missing third  volume, 
as  it  were.  Austen's  handling  of  time  in  her  plots  is  famously  exact, 
carefully  coordinated  with  reference to almanacs.  But for all her  exacti02
tude,  once  Austen  forges  the  temporal  schemata  of her  narratives,  she 
PERSUASION:  T HE  "UNFEUDAL  TONE  OF  THE  PRESENT  D A Y" 
2 89 
generally proceeds  to submerge  them,  and  only the  most determined  of 
students would  wish to note down references to years and  dates and  then 
arrange them  sequentially.  But Persuasion 
is a calculated tangle of years 
and  dates,  and  the  passage of time  itself is foregrounded.  Here,  as in  no 
other  novel,  we  are  constantly  being  pointed  backwards―to  the  knell02
like  repetition  of "thirteen  years" that  have  left  Elizabeth  husbandless, 
to the heavy "eight years" that  have changed  everything  but  Anne's  feel02
ings  for  Wentworth,  to  the  tolled  "twelve  years" that  have  transformed 
the smart  young  Miss Hamilton  into the  poor and  crippled  Mrs.  Smith; 
in short,  to the  inconjurable difference time  makes. 
The years alluded  to in the "Advertisement" to Northanger  Abbey  and 
throughout  Persuasion  as  the  occasion of so  much  change  are  not  just 
any  years  which  would  work  changes  at  any  time.  With  the  benefit of 
hindsight,  we  look back upon  those  thirteen  years as  having  sealed  the 
reaction,1  but  as they  appear  in  Persuasion 
they do  not  present  a  repres02
sive and  politically monolithic  aspect.  Sir Walter  himself  seems  firmly 
enough  entrenched,  to be  sure,  but  he  is not  all there  is.  In  his  related 
capacities as general, pamphleteer,  and  stern paterfamilias,  General Til-
ney  is the  obstacle in  Northanger  Abbey  whose  authority  must  be  con02
fronted  and  in  some ways,  however  limited,  overcome. But now,  some 
two decades later,  defenders  of the  nation  appear  under a different  guise 
and  are  envisioned  as alternatives to,  rather  than  representatives  of,  the 
establishment.  Admiral  and  Mrs.  Croft  are not  gentry.  Far from  presid02
ing  over  a  neighborhood,  they  live  most  contentedly  at  sea,  uncon02
cerned  with  the  production  of heirs or the  reproduction  of ideologically 
correct values through  the  cultivation  of local  attachments.  From  some 
points  of view,  the  differences between  Admiral  Croft  and  General Til-
ney  may  be  minimal.  The  former,  to  be  sure,  nowhere  expresses  or 
implies  progressive  opinion.  But to  Anne,  the  difference  is great.  The 
years  which  bring  the  Admiral  into  prominence  are  those  which  mark 
off the disparity between the "old English style" of the senior Musgroves, 
and  the  "new"  English  style  of  their  "accomplished"  daughters,  and 
which  have  brought  changes  with  them  accounting  for  what  William 
Elliot calls the "unfeudal  tone of the  present  day" (emphasis added).  But 
the  causes and  the  processes of such  transformation  are  not  themselves 
Instead they are the pervasive backdrop  Austen 
the subject of Persuasion. 
establishes throughout Persuasion 
in  order to consider the psychological 
impact that social arrangements  have on  women  and  the apparent possi02
bilities  which  the  "unfeudal  tone  of the  present  day"  may  hold  out  for 
them. 
Of  all Austen's  novels,  Persuasion 
is,  in  point  of mere  years,  the  far02
thest  removed  from  the  pressures  of political  controversy  that  animate 
the  fiction  of her  time.  And  yet,  though  it is often  viewed  as a  forward-
1.  This was a period of political  reaction and repression, in  response to fears of radicalism raised 
by the French Revolution. 
290 
CLAUDIA  L. 
JOHNSON 
looking novel,  it makes a concerted effort to embrace a  prerevolutionary 
context as well.  Many of the  most basic terms  in the  novel have a decid02
edly Johnsonian2  ring to them,  and  this should  not surprise  us,  not only 
because Johnson  is so sympathetic  a figure to Austen  generally, but also 
because  he  is  probably  foremost  among  the  "best  moralists" Anne  rec02
ommends  to  the  stylishly  melancholy  Benwick. Persuasion  continually 
contrasts  the  merits  of fortitude,  which  can  be "headstrong"  or  daringly 
heedless,  with  the  merits of prudence,  which  can  be "over-anxious cau02
tion  which  seems to insult exertion and  distrust Providence." The  oppo02
sition  itself,  of course,  is Johnson's trademark.  He frequently  juxtaposes 
"heartless  pusillanimity"  to  "heady  confidence"  (Rambler 
25)  and 
opposes  the  "presumption  and  arrogance"  of expecting  sure  success to 
the  "weakness  and  cowardice" of anticipating  sure  defeat  (Rambler  43). 
Although  neither  Johnson  nor  Austen  definitively  resolve  this  opposi02
tion,  both  writers  are  self-consciously  unconventional  in  refusing  the 
moral  authority  of prudential maxims. 
Writing  when  she  does,  however,  Austen  cannot  treat  temerity  and 
timidity  as  neutral  poles  in  a  disinterested  debate,  nor  can  she  omit 
scrutinizing  their  tacit reference to  sexual difference.  For Lady Russell, 
they are political attitudes.  Lady Russell does not share the  mindlessness 
typical of the  squires,  ladies,  and  baronets  in this novel.  Much  to  Eliza02
beth's  irritation,  in fact,  she is always reading  "the  new poems and  states 
of  the  nation  that  come  out,"  and  as  we  might  expect,  her  opinions 
about  Anne's  suitors  bespeak  her  absorption  in  and  sympathies  for con02
servative  apologetics.  She aims  her  approval  of William  Elliot  at  Anne 
in  such  a way as to show Wentworth's  boldness in what  she considers to 
be the  worst possible light: 
He  [William Elliot] was steady  observant,  moderate,  candid;  never 
run  away with by spirits or by selfishness, which fancied  itself strong 
feeling;  and  yet  with  a  sensibility to  what  was  amiable and  lovely, 
and  a  value  for  all  the  felicities  of domestic  life,  which  characters 
of fancied  enthusiasm,  and  violent agitation  seldom  really possess. 
Lady  Russell's argument  is a manifestly sentimental  one whose object is 
to  establish  the  priority  of that  most  basic  unit  of the  social  structure, 
the patriarchal  family.  She awards the prize for true,  as opposed  to "fan02
cied,"  feeling  to  the  man  whose  sensibility  evinces  the  most  respon02
siveness  to  women―the  "amiable  and  lovely"  being  of  course  their 
province―and  dismisses Wentworthian  impetuosity  as only  fitful  in  its 
loyalties and  subversive  in  its  effects. 
Of  course  Lady  Russell  is drastically  wrong  about  Sir Walter's  heir. 
Like  all  the  villainous  gentlemen  and  peers  of progressive  fiction  who 
manipulate  other  people's  domestic  lives  in  order  to  secure  their  own 
2.  A  reference  to their  similarity to the terminology of Samuel Johnson (1709-1784),  the great 
moralist. 
PERSUASION:  T HE  "UNFEUDAL  TONE  OF  THE  PRESENT  DAY" 
2 91 
power,  he  is out  for himself,  and  if a semblance of sensibility to the  fair 
sex  is  needed  to  acquire  prestige,  then  so  be  it.  Lady  Russell  is  wrong 
about  Wentworth  as  well,  although  in  this  case  her  error  is  plausible, 
since  Wentworth  is  a  complex  figure  whose  own  sensibility  bears  the 
deep marks of ideological contradiction.  The action of Persuasion  begins 
eight  years  before  the  opening  of the  novel,  when  Wentworth  angrily 
spurns young  Anne  Elliot because he believes she showed "feebleness of 
character"  in  relinquishing 
their  engagement.  Wentworth's  anger 
deserves  particular  attention,  because  it  is  anything  but  customary  to 
fault  women  for diffidence.  In  another  kind  of novel by another  kind of 
novelist,  Anne's  initial  hesitation  would  strike Wentworth  and  us  alike 
as exemplary and  he,  like the  enthusiastic  Henry  Crawford3  glorying  in 
his  chains,  would,  rather  than  take  umbrage  at  her  maidenly  doubt, 
manfully  seize an  occasion to prove  his worth.  But Wentworth  does  not 
appear  to  believe that  the  inconvenient  modesty  of the  maiden  will  be 
redeemed  by the  submission  of the  wife,  or to value  the  "feebleness" so 
often  held to be part of woman's duty as well as her charm.  Conservative 
fiction  and  conduct  literature  tirelessly preach  to women  about  the duty 
of  submission.  In  her  avowedly  counterrevolutionary  Letters  Addressed 
to  a  Young  Man,  Jane  West  assures  young  men  of the  kingdom  that 
they  have  every  right  to  expect  their  wives  to  give  way,  whatever  the 
"pestiferous  doctrines" of revolutionaries  urge to the contrary.  The "wise 
and  beautiful  subordination  which  Providence  has  instituted  to  avoid 
domestic  contention"  dictates  precisely  the  kind  of persuadableness  in 
women  that  Wentworth  scorns: "submission  is the  prescribed  duty of the 
female; peace must  be preserved,  and  she  must  yield." 
Maria  Edgeworth  was,  as  we  shall  see,  a  careful  reader  of the  very 
passages of Persuasion  which  specifically address  how the different social 
conditioning of men  and  women  creates differences  in  their psychologi02
cal  makeup.  The  political  agenda  of  her  Practical  Education, 
co-
authored  with  her  progressive  father,  is  not  so  unashamedly  clear  as 
West's.  Here  Edgeworth  disclaims―though  she  does  not  outright  dis02
miss―any  progressive  concern  for  the  condition  of women,  illuminat02
ing  their  problems,  but  disavowing  any  intention  to  solve them:  "Their 
happiness  is of more consequence than  their speculative rights." Accord02
ingly,  she recommends  that  female children  should  be taught  restraint, 
sweetness,  and  submission,  because  these,  like  it  or  not,  are  to  be 
expected  from  them  throughout  their  lives as adults.  Women,  she  con02
tinues,  "must  trust to the  experience of others; they  cannot  always  have 
recourse  to  what  ought  to  be,  they  must  adapt  themselves  to  what  is. 
.  .  .  Timidity,  a  certain  tardiness  of decision,  and  reluctance  to  act  in 
public situations,  are not  considered as defects in  a woman's  character." 
Edgeworth's statement,  of course,  is already a stunning  piece of intertex-
3.  In Mansfield  Park. 
292 
CLAUDIA  L.  JOHNSON 
tuality,  imbedded  as  it  is  with  a  number  of conservative  truisms:  it  is 
wiser  to  trust  to  the  accumulated  experience of others  than  to  advance 
and  pursue one's  own  ideals,  to submit  to what  "is" rather  than quixoti02
cally  striving  for  what  "ought  to  be," and  to  habituate  male,  but  espe02
cially  female,  children  to  what  Edgeworth  a  little  later  terms  dutiful 
"forebearance"  rather  than  self-willed  "precipitation." 
Wentworth's  contempt  for  what  he  perceives as  Anne's  failure  to  be 
decided,  forward,  and  strong  thus  implicates  and  dissents  from  an 
already  firmly  established  and  widely available tradition  of debate  about 
women's  manners.  To Wentworth,  a woman  is guilty  of "weakness  and 
timidity"  when  she  evinces  a  readiness  "to  oblige  others,"  and  when, 
deferring  to the  judgment  of family  or friends,  she credits  fearful  rather 
than  hopeful  predictions  about  her  betrothed.  A  strong  man  himself, 
Wentworth  knows,  or  at  least thinks  he  knows,  that  he  wants  the  same 
qualities  in  a  woman.  He  "seriously  described  the  woman  he  should 
wish  to  meet  with.  'A  strong  mind,  with  sweetness  of manner,'  made 
the first and  the last of the description." Wentworth's description  appears 
straightforward  enough.  But  as  his  subsequent  remarks  attest,  he  is  in 
fact caught within  highly charged tensions about women's manners,  and 
his  description  of  the  ideal  woman  is  oxymoronic,  because  however 
much  he  may  desire  "strength"  in  women,  he  considers  it  essentially 
inconsistent  with  the  sweetness  he  also  exacts.  The  narrator's  remarks 
on  the  "large fat  sighings" of Mrs.  Musgrove "over the  destiny  of a  son, 
whom  alive  nobody  had  cared  for" are  relevant  here.  They will  appear 
less like the gratuitous  and  tasteless cruelties which the subversive school 
has  so relished  when  we  consider them  in  light  of Wentworth's  contra02
dictory  assumptions  about  women.  The  narrator  in  fact  brings  up  the 
grotesqueness  of Mrs.  Musgrove's  grief  only  to  ponder  the  irrationality 
of our  response to it: "Personal size and  mental  sorrow have certainly no 
necessary  proportions.  A  large  bulky  figure  has  as good  a  right  to  be  in 
deep  affliction,  as the  most  graceful  set of limbs  in  the  world.  But,  fair 
or  not  fair,  there  are  unbecoming  conjunctions,  which  reason  will 
patronize  in  vain,―which  taste  cannot  tolerate,―which  ridicule  will 
seize" (emphasis  added). 
The  tendency  of  Persuasion  as  a  whole  is  to  consider  conjunctions 
which  perhaps  have  even  less basis  in  reason,  but  which  are  so  much 
more  pervasive that  their arbitrariness  is not  even  noticed. This discred02
ited  association  of  physical  size  with  emotional  delicacy  prefaces  a 
debate  between  Wentworth  and  Mrs.  Croft  about  female  manners,  in 
which Wentworth  takes a position  very different  from  what  Lady Russell 
would  expect.  If a  large,  bulky  figure  has  a  "right"  to  affliction,  then 
conversely  perhaps  a  "graceful  set  of  limbs"  has  a  "right"  to  venture-
someness as well. To Wentworth,  however,  the very idea seems as  ludi02
crously  incongruous,  if not  indeed  as repellent,  as fat grief may be to us, 
and  this despite  his declared  wish  to find "a strong mind,  with  sweetness 
PERSUASION:  T HE  "UNFEUDAL  TONE  OF  THE  PRESENT  DAY"  2 93 
of  manner"  in  a woman.  With  the  haughtiness  typical  of him,  Captain 
Wentworth  announces  his principled  opposition  to  carrying  women  on 
board  ships  precisely  on  account  of their  delicacy.  His  objections,  he 
explains,  arise not  from  mean-spirited  misogyny,  but  rather  from  high-
minded  chivalry: "There can  be no want  of gallantry,  admiral,  in  rating 
the claims of women  to every personal  comfort  high―and  this  is what  I 
do.  I hate  to hear  of women  on  board,  or to see them  on  board; and  no 
ship,  under  my  command,  shall  ever  convey  a  family  of  ladies  any 
where,  if I can help it." Having spent the best years of her life on a  man-
of-war,  Mrs.  Croft  regards  her  brother's  opinions  as  "idle  refinement!" 
But  Mrs.  Croft's  claim  that  "any  reasonable  woman"  can  be  "perfectly 
comfortable"  on  board  actually loses points  with  her  brother.  To a  man 
fixed  in  his  ideas  about  female  delicacy,  women  so  "reasonable"  are 
simply  not  ladies.  He  is willing to transport  women  on  his ships  insofar 
as  they  are  a  dear  friend's  property―"I  would  bring  any  thing  of  Har-
ville's  from  the  world's  end,  if he  wanted  it"―but  the  possibility  that 
women  themselves  may  not  consider  such  journeys  a  violation  of their 
lovely and  amiable natures  is obnoxious to  him:  "I might  not  like  them 
the  better  for  that,  perhaps.  Such  a  number  of  women  and  children 
have no  right  to be comfortable on  board" (emphasis Wentworth's). 
The  objections  not  only  to  female  sturdiness,  but  also  to  a  female 
"right"  to  it,  that  Wentworth  expresses here  explain  why  it was and  still 
is impossible for  him  to  recognize "strength  of mind"  and  "sweetness of 
manner"  in  Anne  Elliot,  until  Anne's sturdiness  and  her  forwardness  to 
take  control  after  the  the  catastrophe  at  Lyme  oblige him  to  surrender 
his  notions  about  delicacy.  Like  female  modesty,  which  is suspected  to 
the  same  degree  as  it  is commanded,  female  strength  is disapproved  to 
the same degree as it is desired.  Although  the  introduction  of the  tearful 
Benwick and  the  domestic  Harville upsets  conventional conjunctions of 
ideas  about  gender,  for  Wentworth  delicacy and  strength  are  sex-typed 
oppositions  reinforced  by  class,  and  where  he  finds  them  conjoined  in 
women  of his  own  class―officer's wives―he  is  by  his  own  admission 
displeased.  Mrs. Croft's extraordinary  rebuttal  seizes on what she  regards 
as absurd  in  her  brother's  ideas about  manners  and  class: "I hate  to  hear 
you  talking  so,  like  a  fine  gentleman,  and  as  if women  were  all  fine 
ladies,  instead  of rational  creatures."  As  we  recall,  Mr.  Knightley  can 
convincingly  oppose  the  modish  primitivism  of Mrs.  Elton's  projected 
"gipsy party" to the "nature  and  simplicity of gentlemen  and  ladies,  with 
their  servants  and  furniture,"  because  Emma  as  a  whole  is  predicated 
upon  the  worthiness  of the  gentry  ideal  and  the  gentlemen  and  ladies 
who  comprise  it.  But in  Persuasion,  gentlemen  and  ladies are  excluded 
from  the  category  of "rational  creatures. "  Not  that  rational  creatures of 
either sex here abandon  the  amenities of life,  like Mrs.  Elton's impossi02
bly idealized  gypsies.  Indeed,  the  conditions Wentworth  imagines to be 
too grueling  for a lady to bear turn  out  to be quite  accommodating  after 
294 
CLAUDIA  L. 
JOHNSON 
all.  It is Wentworth  himself  who  ridicules land-loving  civilians for  sup02
posing that  sailors rough it,  "living on  board  without  any thing to eat,  or 
any  cook to dress  it if there  were,  or any  servant  to wait,  or any knife or 
fork  to  use." 
But  though  Mrs.  Croft  may  not  repudiate  some  of the  comforts of 
gentility,  she  does  repudiate  the  system  of sexually differentiated  man02
ners  ladies  and  gentlemen  depend  upon.  Her  views  on  the  subject  are 
actually  quite  remarkable,  given  the  renewed  importance  ascribed  to 
female  manners  during  the  period  in  question.  Conservatives and  radi02
cals alike agreed that amiable weakness and  loveliness in women  guaran02
tee the continuance of patriarchy  itself. "The age of chivalry is gone," as 
Burke  famously  wailed  in  a  passage  of the  Reflections  which  Lady Rus02
sell  seems  to  remember,  and  along  with  the  chivalric  sensibility,  he 
predicts,  will die the conditions which  make the old regime possible: the 
gallant disposition  in  men  to feel  fondly disposed  to the amiable softness 
of  women  restrains  the  otherwise  indecent  and  uncivilized  rapacity of 
their  appetites,  and  the  retiring  docility and  dutiful  chastity  of  women 
insures  the  identity  and  survival  of the  blood  lines of good families.4 Of 
course not all of Burke's allies believed that  the  civilized world  was held 
together by chivalrous opinion.  Jane West, for one,  opined  that Burke's 
notions  of chivalry  bordered  on  idolatry,  and  granted  women  far  more 
than  they  intrinsically deserved,  filling  their weak heads  with  silly ideas 
about  their  own  importance,  when  it  is they  instead  who  should  study 
to  please,  and  to  be  sensible  helpmates  and  useful  companions  rather 
than  lovely and  ever-distressed  females. 
While  conservative and  progressive discourse sometimes intersects on 
the  phrase  "rational  creatures,"  the  insistence  that  men  and  women's 
shared  status  as  rational  creatures  takes  precedence  over  sexual  differ02
ence  in  questions  relating  to their  manners  and  their  morals was gener02
ally perceived to be the  progressive position.  Wollstonecraft's critique of 
the cultivation  of speciously differentiating  delicacy in women  was often 
treated  as though  it were a wholesale recommendation  of grossly viragi-
nous5  strength.  Thus  Robert Bisset,  for example,  scoffs  that Wollstone-
craft  included  among  the  "rights  of  women" 
the  right  to  serve  as 
"soldiers, sailors, senators, politicians, scholars, philosophers,  and rakes. 
.  .  .  She trusted  the  time would  soon arrive when  the sex would  require 
high  renown  in  boxing  matches,  sword  and  pistol."  Seen  in  this  light, 
Mrs.  Croft  is a  tour  de  force of characterization.  Though  her  comport02
ment  has  not  the  slightest hint  of mannish  impropriety  about  it―Lady 
Russell,  for  one,  finds  her  a  pleasing  and  sensible neighbor―her  man02
ners are conspicuous by their  lack of features  usually  construed  as femi-
4.  Edmund  Burke,  Reflections on  the Revolution  in  France  (1790),  in  a passage bemoaning the 
fact  that "ten thousand swords" failed to leap from  their scabbards to "avenge even a look that 
threatened  [the Queen of France] with insult." 
5.  Characteristic of viragoes: bold,  quarrelsome,  aggressive women. 
PERSUASION:  T HE  "UNFEUDAL  TONE  OF  THE  PRESENT  D A Y" 
2 95 
nine,  such  as  bashfulness,  roundness,  sweetness,  and  daintiness.  She 
"had  a squareness,  uprightness,  and  vigour  of form,  which  gave  impor02
tance  to  her  person"  and  "a  weatherbeaten  complexion,  the  conse02
quence  of her  having  been  almost as much  at sea as her  husband."  She 
omits  that  self-doubt  and  reluctance  that  Edgeworth,  for  one,  exacted 
from  women,  particularly  in  public  situations.  She looks "as  intelligent 
and  keen as any of the officers around  her," and  her  manners  are  "open, 
easy, and decided,  like one who had  no distrust  of herself,  and  no  doubts 
of what to do; without  any approach  to coarseness, however,  or any  want 
of  good  humour. "  And  finally,  without  ever  really  appearing  to  be  the 
eccentric  she  is,  Mrs.  Croft  prefers  warships  to  the  most  comfortable 
manors  in  the  kingdom,  throwing  overboard  as  needless  weight  the 
excellencies  of  the  proper  lady,  and  she  "shares  with  him  [Admiral 
Croft]  in  everything." 
Mrs.  Croft  appears  never  to  consider  robustness  and  self-confidence 
an oxymoronic violation of her feminine  nature,  and  she could bid fare02
well  to  the  age  of chivalry  without  worrying  much  about  the  future  of 
the  civilized world.  To  her  chivalry and  the  way of life  it guarantees  are 
superfluous:  Wentworth's  solicitude  for  women's  comfort  is  a  "super02
fine,  extraordinary  sort of gallantry," which  appears  even more  unneces02
sary in his case,  since he  in particular,  as his sister implies, has the  good 
fortune  not  to  be  a  "fine  gentleman"  to  begin  with.  Sir Walter,  for  his 
part,  does  not  regard  Wentworth  as a "gentleman"  at all,  and  his  usage, 
however unpleasant,  is far  from  idiosyncratic. Wielding a fortune  in  war 
prizes of mythically immense  proportions,  Wentworth  is nouveau  riche 
with  a  vengeance.  Sir  Walter  restricts  the  term  "gentlemen" 
to  "some 
man  of property,"  and  thus does  not  recognize the  claim even  of Went02
worth's  clerical  brother  to  the  title:  "Mr.  Wentworth  was  nobody,  I 
remember; quite  unconnected,  nothing  to do with  the  Strafford  family." 
He  objects  besides  to  the  tendency  of Wentworth's  profession  itself  to 
contend  with  and  confound  the  established  networks  of social prestige, 
for  the  military  is "the  means  of bringing  persons  of obscure  birth  into 
undue  distinction,  and  raising  men  to  honours  which  their  fathers  and 
grandfathers  never  dreamt  of. "  In  all  fairness,  the  contempt  is  entirely 
mutual.  To a man  who  prides  himself on  "the  gratification  of believing 
myself  to  earn  every  blessing that  I  enjoyed"  the  famous  "Elliot  pride" 
in  membership  within  their  own  family―as  well  as  the  precedence-, 
title-,  and  pedigree-mongering  that  goes  along  with  it―is  offensive. 
Mary Musgrove's eagerness to assure him  that  she regards  the  Hayters  as 
unworthy  connections only arouses  in  him  "a  contemptuous  glance,  as 
he  turned  away,  which  Anne  perfectly  knew  the  meaning  of. "  Further02
more,  the  record  of  filial  piety  which  makes  up  an  important  part  of 
Darcy's  characterization,6  for  example,  has  no  place  in  Wentworth's 
6.  Darcy is the hero of Pride and  Prejudice. 
296 
CLAUDIA  L.  JOHNSON 
history,  and  his  impatience  with  Anne's  hesitation  at  nineteen  to  defy 
paternal  displeasure  surely  suggests  how  little  store  he  sets  by  paternal 
authority  in  general.  Since  Wentworth  has  no  place  in,  and  indeed  is 
actually  hostile  to,  the  patriarchal  world  of family  and  neighborhood 
which  Sir Walter represents,  though  none  too well,  his "superfine" gal02
lantry  has  no  rationale  and  operates  at  political cross-purposes  with  his 
own  designs and  energies. 
Wentworth's  argument  with  Admiral  and  Mrs.  Croft  does  not  settle 
any  issues, for  no  sooner does the  subject reach  an  impasse than  Went02
worth  breaks  off and  withdraws  altogether.  To  their  assurance  that  he 
will  change  his  mind  when  he  marries,  he  rather  angrily  returns:  " 'I 
can  only say, "No,  I shall not;" and  then  they say again,  "Yes,  you will," 
and  there  is  an  end  of it.'  He  got  up  and  moved  away."  Wentworth's 
words here both  recapitulate his quarrel  with Anne  Elliot eight years ago 
and  prefigure  the  same  dilemma  he  will  face  in  a  matter  of days  when 
Louisa wants to jump down  from  the stiles at the new Cobb: "He [Went02
worth]  advised  her  against  it,  thought  the  jar too  great; but  no,  he  rea02
soned and  talked in vain; she smiled and  said,  'I am determined  I will.' " 
Recurring  to  the  imagery  of hardness  and  to  such  related  concepts  as 
complaisance and determination,  elasticity and  fixation,  impressionabil02
ity  and  obstinacy,  Persuasion  continues  to  explore  the  antinomies  of 
autonomy  and  authority  that  figure  prominently  in  Austen's  other  nov02
els  as well.  The  subject  of one  of Elizabeth's and  Darcy's first debates, 
after  all,  is the  worth  of ductility  and  resoluteness: "To yield  readily― 
easily―to the persuasion  of a friend,"  Elizabeth taunts,  "is no merit with 
you"  (emphasis  Elizabeth's). But  while  both  novels  attempt  to  delimit 
the  legitimate  boundaries  of authoritative  interference,  the  later  novel 
deals  with  conflicts which,  as  with  the  conceit of fat  sighings,  "reason 
will patronize  in  vain," and  where  persuasion  accordingly is more  prob02
lematic. 
In  Persuasion  neither  giving  in  on  the  one  hand,  nor  holding  out  to 
get  one's  way  on  the  other,  are  very  attractive  options.  Conservative 
apologists,  of course,  cut  the  Gordian  knot by submitting  such conflicts 
to the  arbitration  of persons wisely vested by tradition  with  the  authority 
to  decide.  But  if Persuasion  does  not  specifically indict  this  method,  it 
also  stops  far  short  of adopting  it,  since  the  "authorities"  so  vested  are 
inadequate.  In  Anne's  case,  an  older  woman  friend,  and  no  venerable 
father,  carried  the  day.  Lady  Russell  stands  not  in  place  of a  mother, 
but  rather  "in  the  place  of a  parent,"  and  the  very  need  to  replace  a 
living but  morally dysfunctional  father  itself points to a problem with  the 
conservative model.  Moreover, although  Anne  is steadfast  in  refusing  to 
apologize  for  having  once  been  persuaded  by  a  woman  who  takes  the 
place of a parent,  she soon eschews Lady Russell's prudential  reasonings 
on  the  grounds  that  they  "insult  exertion  and  distrust  Providence," and 
she  never  allows  herself  to  be  persuaded  again.  When  Anne  receives a 
PERSUASION:  T HE  "UNFEUDAL  TONE  OF  THE  PRESENT  D A Y"  2 97 
proposal  from  Charles  Musgrove,  she  solicits neither  her  father's  opin02
ions nor  Lady Russell's, but  "left  nothing  for advice to do." Anne's  gen02
tle  imperviousness  to  interference  is  fortunate,  for  Lady  Russell's 
approval  of Charles  Musgrove's  suit  and  her  championship  of William 
Elliot's  do  not  testify  to  her  powers  of discrimination.  Like  Northanger 
Abbey,  Persuasion 
reflects  on  its own  refusal  to  ratify  received  notions: 
the  narrator  validates the  perseverance of young  people  in  carrying  their 
points  even  though  doing  so  is,  as  she  says,  "bad  morality  to  conclude 
with."  In  erased  notes of the  cancelled chapter  covering the  same  mate02
rial, Austen dwells at greater length  on her departures  from  conventional 
wisdom  in  fashioning  a story where  the  older  and  unassailably  "proper" 
woman  is  wrong,  not  once,  but  twice: "Bad  Morality  again.  A  young 
Woman  proved  to have  .  .  . more discrimination  of Character than  her 
elder―to  have  seen  in  two  Instances more  clearly what  a Man  was  .  .  . 
But on the point  of Morality,  I confess myself almost in despair  .  .  .  and 
shall  leave i t . ..  to the  mercy of Mothers and  Chaperons  and  Middle-
aged  Ladies  in  general."  Even  though  Anne  finally  avers  in  defense  of 
her  own  infelicitous,  but  not  culpable,  deference  to  Lady  Russell, "if I 
mistake not,  a strong  sense of duty is no bad part of a woman's  portion," 
the efficacy  of "submission" is, if not  utterly  undone,  then  at least called 
into  question  by  authorially  emphasized  criticism  of  the  principles 
which  underpin  and  valorize such  duty. 
The  unyielding  firmness  and  independence  Wentworth  advocates  is 
likewise  tested  and  found  wanting.  After  persuading  Henrietta  to  visit 
Charles  Hayter  despite  the  interference  of Mary  Musgrove,  Louisa  pro02
claims: 
"And  so I made  her go.  .  .  . What!―would  I be turned  back  from 
doing  a  thing  that  I  had  determined  to  do,  and  that  I  knew  to  be 
right,  by  the  airs  and  interference  of such  a  person?―or,  of  any 
person  I may say. No,―I have no idea  of being so easily  persuaded. 
When  I have  made  up  my  mind,  I have  made  it. " 
This  speech,  and  Wentworth's  enthusiastic  response  to  it,  are  not  the 
simple  assertions  of  principled  self-determination  they  appear  to  be. 
Louisa,  after  all, did  not  disinterestedly  supplement  her  sister's  faltering 
powers  of mind  with  the  strength  of her  own.  Instead,  she  took  advan02
tage of her sister's persuadability  in order to clear the field for  Wentworth 
and  herself.  Further,  Louisa  recommends  independence  even  as  she 
congratulates  herself for her  own  interference: "I made  her go." Finally, 
Wentworth  disdains  the  feeble malleability of "too yielding  and  indeci02
sive  a  character"  when  it  defies  him  as  Anne's  did,  but  he  does  not 
seem  to  mind  or even  to notice the  same qualities when  they  malleably 
conform  to his own  influence.  Louisa has really done  no more than  give 
Wentworth  what  he  wants  to  hear,  and  unaware  that  Louisa's  strength 
of  mind  is really only  persuadability  to  him  in  disguise,  he  rewards  her 
298 
CLAUDIA  L.  JOHNSON 
with  his praise: "Happy for her  [Henrietta], to have such a mind  as yours 
at  hand." 
Clearly,  Wentworth's preference for singlemindedness is as indiscrim-
inating  and  self-serving  in  its  own  way  as  Lady  Russell's prejudice  in 
favor  of wealth  and  family  is in  its.  If "complaisance" can  be,  as Louisa 
terms  it,  "nonsensical," inflexibility can  be so as well. Wentworth  takes 
little notice of this possibility. "[L]et those who would be happy be  firm," 
he  intones,  anticipating  the  moral  of  his  parable  about  the  hazelnut: 
"To  exemplify,―a  beautiful  glossy  nut,  which,  blessed  with  original 
strength,  has  outlived  all  the  storms  of autumn.  Not  a  puncture,  not  a 
weak spot anywhere.―This  nut.  .  . while so many  of its brethren  have 
fallen  and  been trodden under foot,  is still in possession of all the  happi02
ness  that  a  hazel-nut  can  be  supposed  capable  of."  The  most  salient 
feature  of the glossy hazel-nut,  however,  is not that  it holds  impressions 
well,  but  that  it is not susceptible to them  at all.  The efficacy  of determi02
nation  is  undermined  when  Louisa,  "armed  with  the  idea  of merit  in 
maintaining her own way," withholds  herself from  advice and falls head02
long  onto  the  pavement  at  the  Cobb.  Even  Wentworth  eventually  sur02
renders  resolution  so fixed and  intransigent.  After the accident,  he turns 
desperately  to  Anne  for  help,  to  be  ordered  and  told  what  to  do.  And 
throughout  the  novel,  his  immovable  resentment  of her  loosens under 
the  influence  of  other  peoples'  admiration  of  her.  He  arrives  at 
Uppercross  swearing  that  Anne  has  aged  beyond  recognition,  but  he 
changes  his  tune  when  he  observes William  Elliot  to  be  struck  by  her, 
and later when  connoisseurs of beauty sing Anne's praises in his hearing. 
Wentworth's  determination  is generally considered  to  mark  him  as a 
"new man," temperamentally  as well as ideologically opposed to the way 
of  life  Sir Walter  represents.  But like his  gallantry  towards  women,  his 
steadfastness  to  the  point  of  inflexibility  actually  aligns  him  with  Sir 
Walter,  and  he  must  mitigate his self-will before reconciliation is possi02
ble.  When  Anne  defies  him  by  suspending  their  engagement,  she 
encounters  "all  the  additional  pain  of  opinions,  on  his  side,  totally 
unconvinced  and  unbending,  and  of his  feeling  himself  ill-used  by  so 
forced  a relinquishment. " Wentworth's tenacity in holding  "unbending" 
opinions,  his tendency  to  remain  "unconvinced" by and  inaccessible to 
opposition,  and  most  alarmingly  of all,  his  readiness  to  feel  "ill-used" 
place  him  in  the  unflattering  fellowship  of none  other  than  the  Elliots 
themselves.  Like  spoiled  children,  Elizabeth  and  Sir  Walter  bitterly 
blame  the  world  for  the  necessities their  own  debts  place  them  under. 
They  feel  "ill-used  and  unfortunate,"  and  steadfast  in  their foolishness, 
they  refuse  to  forego  expensive  "decencies"―"Journeys, London,  ser02
vants,  horses, table"―that  alone make life  supportable  even to "private" 
ladies  and  gentlemen.  Having  inherited  "a  considerable  share  of  the 
Elliot  self-importance" without  commanding  any  comparable  hauteur, 
PERSUASION:  T HE  "UNFEUDAL  TONE  OF  THE  PRESENT  D A Y"  2 99 
Mary  Musgrove  manifests  their  tyrannical  self-pity  in  a  particularly 
degraded  form.  She always fancies herself "neglected or ill-used," always 
thinks  with  bullheaded  obstinacy "a great deal  of her  own  complaints," 
and  feels  everything  as  a  wound.  Wentworth  has  his  own  version  of 
the  "Elliot  self-importance"  which  prompts  him  in  like  fashion  to  be 
headstrong  and  absolute.  True,  he  may  not  have  behaved  like "an  ill-
used man" when  Louisa falls for Benwick, but this is not,  as the  Admiral 
thinks,  because  he  has  "too  much  spirit"  to  kick  against  the  goad,  but 
rather  because  he  came  to  regret  their  flirtation  to  begin  with.  As  the 
Admiral  could  not  have  known,  eight  years  ago,  when  it  counted, 
Wentworth  did  feel  like "an  ill-used  man,"  and  he  does  "murmur"  and 
"whine  and  complain"―not  with  Mary's  sorts  of whimpers,  but  rather 
with  icy vindictiveness nursed  over a period  of eight years. 
In  the  Elliots' case,  of course,  self-importance is a birthright,  a benefit 
conferred  upon  them  by  their  social position.  Sir Walter believes he  is 
somebody  to  the  "nobody"  of virtually  everyone  else.  But  though  Sir 
Walter  is convinced  that,  as  a  public  figure,  he  carries  his  importance 
around  with  him  irrespective  of place,  people  only  three  miles away  at 
Uppercross  are  contentedly  oblivious to  "the  affairs  which  at Kellynch-
hall were treated  as of such  general  publicity  and  pervading interest" by 
Sir  Walter himself.  Anne's  mortification  to discover that  Sir Walter  and 
Elizabeth "see nothing  to regret" in relinquishing "the duties and  dignity 
of  the  resident  land-holder"  bespeaks  her  lingering  sympathy  with  the 
life  of the  manor,  but  landholders  less distinguished  than  her  father  are 
not  spared  either.  As presented  in  Persuasion,  at  least,  landed existence 
itself  fosters  an  immobility  that  fixes  delusions  of  self-consequence 
which  cause so much  conflict.  Anne  is an  adept  in  "the  art  of knowing 
our  own  nothingness  beyond  our  own  circle,"  and  this  is  what  makes 
her  wise.  But  the  otherwise  unobjectionable  Musgroves,  whose  views 
are  bounded  by  the  narrowness  of  their  neighborhood,  cannot  share 
such  wisdom.  Except in  Pride  and  Prejudice,  where  a  countrified  Mrs. 
Bennet takes umbrage  at  Darcy's cosmopolitan pretentions,  only in  Per02
suasion  does Austen portray  the provinciality of her characters as a disad02
vantage.  Taken  by  himself,  Charles  Hayter,  for  example,  could  appear 
as an  earnest and  respectable gentleman.  But placed alongside Frederick 
Wentworth  and  ineffectually  pleading  with  a  troublesome  child,  he 
fades  into  nonentity.  And  just  as  the  Admiral's  tendency  to  confuse 
Henrietta  and  Louisa  suggests  their  indistinguishability,  so  the  redun02
dancy  of Hayter's  Christian  name,  doubling  with  that  of Charles  Mus02
grove,  calls  attention  to  what  is  undistinctive  about  eldest  sons  in 
general.  And  in  no other  novel  is a gentry  matron  exposed to such  pain02
ful  comparisons  with  a  woman  with  wider  horizons.  When  Mrs.  Croft 
summarizes  her  travels,  adding  "We do  not  call  Bermuda  or  Bahama, 
you  know,  the  West  Indies," poor  Mrs.  Musgrove  finds  herself  baffled: 
300 
CLAUDIA  L.  JOHNSON 
"Mrs.  Musgrove  had  not  a word  to  say in  dissent;  she could  not accuse 
herself  of  having  ever  called  them  any  thing  in  the  whole  course  of 
her  life." 
Landed  life  is not  taken  to task simply because it promotes  mediocrity 
or  ignorance,  but  rather  because its insularity  is psychologically damag02
ing,  especially  for  women.  Conservatives  laud  membership  within  a 
neighborhood  precisely on  account  of the  strong  and  stabilizing attach02
ments,  the  changeless pace,  and  the  unceasing  familiarity  that  it carries 
with  it.  But for  women  it  also  carries with  it  a  particularly  narrow  and 
unwholesome  confinement,  and  discussion  of this  problem  in  Persua02
sion  is specific,  prolonged,  and  dramatically  charged.  Whatever  baron02
etcy  does  for  Sir Walter,  it  has  not  helped  a  daughter  who  has  reached 
the  age of twenty-nine  without  marrying.  For Elizabeth the  Baronetage 
cannot be the  never-ending  fund  of solace  unalloyed  it is for her  father. 
Every  reading  mercilessly  reiterates  an  ever-receding  birthdate  and  an 
unchanging  status  as spinster.  Mr.  Bennet's sarcasm―"a  girl likes to be 
crossed  in  love a little now and  then.  . ..  It is something  to think  o f― 
has  a disturbing  relevance to  Persuasion,  where  such  crosses are all  that 
women  have  to  think  of.  Being  the  mistress  of Kellynch-hall―"doing 
the  honours,  and  laying  down  the  domestic  law  at  home"―is  not  as 
engaging,  as  satisfying,  and  as  adequate  to  Elizabeth's  imagination  as 
running  Hartfield  and  its  environs  is to  Emma's.  Elizabeth  is haunted 
by her  disappointment  in  love, and  the  cares and  duties  of "her  scene of 
life"  are  not  enough  to  keep  her  from  revisiting  and  fixing  her  pain. 
Bitterness,  mortification,  regret,  and  worry are all she has "to give inter02
est  to  a  long,  uneventful  residence  in  one  country  circle,  to  fill  the 
vacancies  which  there  were  no  habits  of  utility  abroad,  no  talents  or 
accomplishments  for  home,  to  occupy."  Nor  is  Elizabeth's  condition 
unique.  Anne  has  more  "resources," as they are termed  in  Emma, 
than 
her  sister Elizabeth, yet she understands that  her  regret over  Wentworth 
lingers because "no aid had  been given  in  change of place  .  .  . or in any 
novelty  or  enlargement  of society" that  could  dislodge  and  eventually 
efface  her  painful  impressions. 
Whether  it  is  because  we  typically  exclude  Austen  in  general  from 
access  to,  capability for,  or  interest  in  arcana  of any  sort,  or  whether  it 
is  because  we  have  a  habit  of  regarding  Persuasion 
in  particular  as  a 
tender  love  story  that  is  not  conducive  to  such  considerations,  rather 
scant  attention  has  been  accorded  to  Austen's  affiliation  with  the  eigh02
teenth-century  tradition  of liberal  psychology.  But readers  of Johnson's 
essays,  who  recall  his  fears  about  the  corrosiveness of hopes  and  disap02
pointments,  his  recommendation  of "change  of place" (Rambler  5,  47), 
and  his  anxieties about  the  "vacuities of recluse  and  domestick leisure" 
(Rambler  85), will  recognize  the  provenance  of her  concerns  and  the 
character  of her  diction,  and  will  appreciate  how,  by  linking  women's 
confinement  within  their  changeless neighborhoods  to the  strength  and 
PERSUASION:  T HE  "UNFEUDAL  TONE  OF  THE  PRESENT  D A Y" 
3 01 
longevity  of  their  feelings,  she  develops  this  tradition  with  particular 
emphasis on  women's  problems.  Anne  herself tells Harville that  women 
do  "not  forget  you  [men],  so soon  as  you  forget  us."  But far  from  pres02
enting the  constancy of woman's  love in  the  light of a virtue,  for  exam02
ple,  loyalty,  she  presents  it  as  a  burden―"our  fate  rather  than  our 
merit."  Men  will  love faithfully  "so  long  as  [they] have  an  object,"  but 
woman's  love can  subsist indefinitely  as fantasy  alone: "All the  privilege 
I  claim for  my own  sex . ..  is that  of loving longest,  when  existence or 
when  hope is gone." A dubious  privilege indeed,  this liability to hopeless 
fixation.  Anne's  rather  technical explanation  for the  stubborn  durability 
of women's  love combines social criticism with  psychological acuity: 
"We  live at home,  quiet,  confined,  and  our  feelings prey  upon  us. 
You are forced on exertion. You have always a profession,  pursuits, 
business  of  some  sort  or  other,  to  take  you  back  into  the  world 
immediately,  and  continual  occupation  and  change  soon  weaken 
impressions. " 
To  Maria  Edgeworth,  whose access to moral  psychology, unlike Aus02
ten's,  is undisputed,  Anne's analysis held  special interest.  The  margina02
lia  in  her personal  copy of Persuasion  are very sparse  until  this  episode, 
which  prompts a flurry  of scratches,  underlinings,  and  comments.  She, 
for  example,  reiterates  Anne's  socio-psychological argument  here  with 
"our  mind  is continually  fixt  on  one  object";  to the  claims that  occupa02
tion  and  change  weaken  impressions,  she  writes  a  heartily  concurring 
"That  it  does";  and  she  brushes  aside  Harville's  analogy  between  the 
strength  of  men's  "bodily  frames"  and  the  constancy  of  their  feelings 
with  an  emphatic "No." But whereas  Edgeworth  in  conservative fashion 
upholds  the  traditional  social  arrangements  that  expose  women  to  the 
problems she herself laments,  on  the grounds that defying  such  arrange02
ments  will  not  promote  their  happiness,  Persuasion  asks  us  to  consider 
whether  women's  happiness  may  not  be  better  served  by  cutting  loose 
from  those arrangements.  Mrs.  Croft  disapproves  of long and  uncertain 
engagements  because they  expose women  to  perilous  anxieties and  fan02
tasies―and  her brother,  eavesdropping,  appears  to acknowledge that  the 
application  to  his  own  case  with  Anne  has  a  compelling  legitimacy 
which  he  had  never  before  considered.  Mrs.  Croft's  example  as  a  wife 
suggests that  life  on  the  high  seas,  for  all  its dangers,  is to  be  preferred 
to  the  "safety"  of helpless  immobility  she  experienced  when  she  lived 
conventionally,  as  most  wives  such  as  Mrs.  Musgrove  do:  "The  only 
time I ever really suffered  in body  or mind,  the  only time  I ever fancied 
myself  unwell,  or  had  any  ideas  of danger,  was the  winter  that  I  passed 
by  myself  at  Deal,  when  the  Admiral  (Captain  Croft  then)  was  in  the 
North  Seas.  I lived  in  perpetual  fright  at that  time,  and  had  all  manner 
of  imaginary  complaints from  not knowing  what  to do with  myself." 
The  phenomena  of  change  and  relativity  in  Persuasion  have  long 
302 
CLAUDIA  L.  JOHNSON 
been considered symptoms  of the dizzying modernity  to come, a  moder02
nity  usually  described  as  either  brave  or  degenerate,  according  to  the 
axis  of  the  critic.  But  to  those  characters  who  take  notice  at  all,  the 
deracination  and  relativity presented  in  Persuasion  are  not  felt to be dis02
turbing  or  disorienting.  Except when  she  has  pangs  in  tender  remem02
brance  of her  dear  mother,  Anne  cannot  regret  the  Croft's  tenancy  at 
Kelly neh-hall.  She cannot  say of her  family  seat what  she knows social 
orthodoxy  would  have  her  say: "These  rooms  ought  to  belong  only  to 
us.  .  .  . How unworthily  unoccupied! An ancient family to be so driven 
away!" Rather than  feel  that  their  removal to the diminished  accommo02
dations  at  Camden-place  constitutes  a  fall,  Sir  Walter  and  Elizabeth 
themselves  find  more  than  enough  "extent to  be  proud  of between  two 
walls,  perhaps thirty  feet asunder. " Anne  is not  bewildered  to learn  that 
our  somethingness  is tenuous  and  relative,  or sad  to confront  her  noth02
ingness beyond  her family circle―she,  after all, is rather less than some02
thing  in  her  family  circle  as  well.  Only  from  within  a  mentality  which 
organizes people hierarchically from  somebodies down to nobodies,  and 
often  according to whether  or  not  they  yield or are  yielded to,  does  that 
status  of nothingness  feel  so  degrading.  Anne  does  not  possess  such  a 
mentality,  and  detached  from  a  single  neighborhood  and  a  fixed  world 
of  traditional  institutions  that  make  that  mentality  possible,  she  allows 
the  alienation  she  experiences upon  first  coming  to  Uppercross  to  be a 
benefit.  Anne finds it "very  fitting,  that every little social commonwealth 
should  dictate  its  own  matters  of discourse,"  and  by  learning  different 
social  discourses  she  is  able  to  be  a  citizen  of many  commonwealths. 
Accordingly,  she  considers  it  "highly  incumbent  on  her  to  clothe  her 
imagination,  her  memory,  and  all  her  ideas"  in  Uppercross.  Though 
first  undertaken  as  a  duty,  this  reinvestiture  is  later  experienced  as  a 
boon.  After  leaving,  Anne  discovers  that  subjects  which  she  had  felt 
obliged  to  "smother  among  the  Musgroves"  assume  only  "secondary 
interest."  She  is  "sensible  of  some  mental  change":  her  sorrow  about 
Kellynch  and  even  her tenacious loyalty to Wentworth  loosens, and  she 
now entertains  thoughts  of Benwick,  and  even  of Walter  Elliot. 
If  processes of inuring  can  be therapeutic―Anne,  for  example,  "was 
become hardened  to such  affronts" as she receives at home―some  kinds 
of malleability can bring  relief as well, even  if it makes possible a certain 
erasure.  Anne  finally  refuses  to  take  sides  in  the  debate  about  hardness 
and  softness,  and  determination  and  submission,  setting  her  sights 
instead  on  "elasticity  of  mind,  that  disposition  to  be  comforted,  that 
power of turning readily from  evil to good,  and  of finding employment. " 
When  Wentworth  wittily explains how  in  marrying  Anne  he  is not get02
ting  what  he  deserves,  he  elaborates  on  this  quality:  "  'Like  other  great 
men  under  reverses,' he  added  with  a  smile,  'I  must  endeavour  to  sub02
due  my  mind  to  my  fortune.'  "  The  ironic  mode  of  his  statement  is 
oddly  fitting,  for  the  "reverse"  in  question  of  course  is  the  happiness 
PERSUASION:  T HE  "UNFEUDAL  TONE  OF  THE  PRESENT  D A Y" 
3 03 
of  reconciliation,  possible  only  after  relinquishing  the  obduracy  of his 
resentment  and  becoming  susceptible  to  opposition.  But the  people  in 
Persuasion  who are preeminent  for elasticity of mind  are significantly far 
more  remote  than  Wentworth,  who  after  all by  the  end  of the  novel  is 
acceptable  even  to  Sir Walter.  By the  standards set  in  Austen's  fiction, 
in fact, they are unusual,  and  by those set in conservative  fiction,  far too 
marginal  to  be  the  models  they  are  here.  They  are  mostly  without  the 
kinds  of affiliations,  idealized  in  such  writing,  that  exact a  high  cost― 
confinement,  unventuresomeness,  fixity,  boredom―for  the  stability 
they  guarantee.  Some  Sir Walter  regards  as  scarcely human:  "A  Mrs. 
Smith.  A widow  Mrs.  Smith.  .  .  . And  what  is her attraction? That  she 
is old and sickly.―Upon my word,  Miss Anne Elliot, you have the  most 
extraordinary  taste! Every thing  that  revolts other people,  low  company, 
paltry  rooms,  foul  air,  disgusting  associations are  inviting  to  you." Yet 
Mrs.  Smith  above  all  others  typifies  the  "elasticity of mind"  Anne  val02
ues,  and  this is not  only despite  the  reverses that  have marginalized  her, 
but  also in  some ways because she has  undergone  them. 
Insofar  as  salvos  like  these  would  console  the  unfortunate  by  con02
tending  that  it is better to suffer after all, they condone the processes and 
conditions which  cause such suffering  to begin with,  and so may be con02
sidered  implicitly  conservative.  Persuasion 
is  sometimes  deeply  tinged 
with  such  quietism.  And  yet Anne's preference  of "low company,  paltry 
rooms,  foul  air" to the  companionship  of her father  and  those he  would 
choose for her  is nevertheless a pretty  piece of social criticism.  Fortune, 
Providence, luck, chance―these are extremely prominent  entities in  the 
novel,  and  are  emblemized  here  by the  sea  itself.  And  the  person  with 
"elasticity  of mind"―the  "choicest gift  of  Heaven"―takes  and  resigns 
what they give with  equal  cheer, and  makes her- or himself malleable to 
their impressions,  much  as the Crofts have let the sea air write itself onto 
their  complexions  without  bothering  with  applications  of  Gowland's 
Lotion.  On  Mrs. Smith, who lives beyond the margins of "good" society, 
their  marks  have  been  the  deepest: "She had  been  very fond  of her  hus02
band,―she  had  buried  him.  She  had  been  used  to  affluence,―it  was 
gone.  She had  no child to connect her with  life and  happiness  again,  no 
relations  to  assist  in  the  arrangement  of perplexed  affairs,  no  health  to 
make all the rest supportable."  But though  she is the least sheltered  from 
fortune's  blows―and  as Mrs. Croft says, "We none  of us expect to be  in 
smooth  water  all  our  days"―she  is  also  the  most  resilient  for  having 
"weathered  it," the  least inclined to feel  "ill-used." Her bodily immobil02
ity―roughly similar in kind,  if not in degree, to the confinement  under02
gone by proper  ladies in their provincial homes―serves only to highlight 
her resources more brilliantly. In a similar way Harville lives just beyond 
society,  bordering  out  onto  the  sea  itself,  which  has  not  served  him  a 
fraction  so generously  as  it  has  Wentworth.  If his  case is not  so dire  as 
Mrs.  Smith's―he is less crippled,  less cramped,  less destitute,  and  with 
304 
CLAUDIA  L.  JOHNSON 
a  loving family,  less disattached―by  Sir Walter's standards he still ranks 
as  a  "disgusting  association."  But  though  even  Anne  herself  suffers  a 
"moment's  astonishment"  at  the  meanness  of  his  lodgings,  she  later 
regards them  as the seat of "great  happiness." 
While  the  people Anne  casts her  lot with  are well-traveled  citizens of 
many  different  commonwealths,  to  recall  Anne's  metaphor,  they  are 
proprietors  of none.  Always ready to determine  orders of precedence and 
to  feel  "ill-used"  if opposed  or  neglected,  Mary  Musgrove  decides  after 
only a little consideration that even though Anne's accession to marriage 
restores her "to the rights of seniority," her own situation  is still superior: 
"Anne had  no  Uppercross-hall before her,  no landed  estate, no  headship 
of  a  family; and  if they  could  but  keep Captain  Wentworth  from  being 
made  a baronet,  she would  not change situations with Anne." To Anne, 
however,  these  lacks  are  a  virtue.  Religious  intimations  are  more  fre02
quent  in  Persuasion 
than  in  any  of  Austen's  other  novels  and  more 
enmeshed  into  its  outlook.  But  whereas  in  other  novels  the  world  of 
wealthy  gentry  in  which  Mary  takes such  pride is either genuinely  or at 
the very least nominally in the service of such intimations,  in  Persuasion 
it  is not.  Characters  here  who  are  most  like the  glossy but  impermeable 
and  therefore  irredeemable  hazelnut  in  Wentworth's  parable  are  not 
Wentworth  himself,  who  finally  yields  after  all,  but  members  of  the 
privileged  class,  such  as  Sir Walter,  who  is devoted  to  avoiding  crow's-
feet,  and  the"polished" William  Elliot,  who  is suspect precisely because 
he  "endured  too well" and  gives no  evidence of friction  or wear. 
From  the  very  beginning  of  the  novel,  Anne  has  valued  "cheerful 
confidence  in  futurity"  and  scorned  to  "distrust  Providence!"  Peopled 
more  with  friends  than  family,  and  accepting  the  "dread  of war"  that 
sometimes  dims  the  "sunshine"  of domestic  felicity,  the  society  Anne 
finally  selects―the "best" company―removes  itself from the  institutions 
of  the  country  manor  to  front  more  directly and  hospitably  onto  Provi02
dence.  But while the  break Anne accomplishes with  those institutions is 
more  complete  than  what  we  find  in  any  other  novel,  and  while  her 
efforts  at accommodation  are the  most perfunctory,  she and  the  alterna02
tive  society she  joins are  also  the  least  prone  to  overt  indictment,  and 
this  constitutes  a  departure  from  Austen's  early  fiction  especially. 
Whereas  Sense  and  Sensibility  and  Northanger  Abbey  derive  much  of 
their  dramatic  tension  from  the  defiance  of tyrannical  parents,  Persua02
sion  eludes,  even  frowns  upon,  overt  rebellion.  Social  forms  may  be 
neglected―Anne dislikes "give-and-take  invitations,  and  dinners  of for02
mality and  display"―but  not  outright  opposed.  Accordingly, Anne  her02
self is capable of betraying  some shame  about  her association with  Lady 
Dalrymple  and  Miss  Carteret,  but  she  politely  keeps  it  under  wraps: 
"  T e s ,'  sighed  Anne,  we  shall,  indeed,  be  known  to  be  related  to 
them!'―then  recollecting herself.  .  .  not  wishing to be answered." But 
William  Elliot's  history  of  expressed  disrespect  for  rank  itself  is  not 
PERSUASION:  T HE  "UNFEUDAL  TONE  OF  THE  PRESENT  D A Y" 
3 05 
acceptable.  The narrator  makes no bones about averring that "Sir Walter 
was  not  very  wise," but  Anne  shudders  "with  shock and  mortification" 
to  learn  that  his  heir  applies  words  as  irreverent  as  "fool"  to  him.  But 
before  we  conclude  that  Austen's  willingness  to  cover  for  Sir  Walter 
betrays  deplorable  bad  faith,  or  perhaps  less  damningly,  loyalties  too 
deep  and  residual  to  permit  penetrating  social  criticism,  we  would  do 
well to ponder  the  typically confounding  twist in  her  characterization of 
William  Elliot.  Surely to  identify  the  person  who  mouths  social disre02
spect with  the person  who then  panders  to the very people of "credit  and 
dignity"  whom  he  admits  are  "nothing  in  themselves" is to  underscore 
the particularly  sterile conventionality of the entire system of "blood  and 
connexion" and  the  cynicism on  which  it subsists. 
Of  none  of Austen's  works,  but  of Persuasion  perhaps  least of all,  can 
it  be said,  as Trilling has,  "Nothing  in  the  novels questions  the  ideal of 
the archaic 'noble' life which  is appropriate  to the great beautiful  houses 
with 
the  ever-remembered  names―Northanger  Abbey,  Donwell 
Abbey,  Pemberly,  Hartfield,  Kellynch  Hall,  Norland  Park,  Mansfield 
Park.  In  them  'existence  is  sweet  and  dear,'  at  least  if  one  is  rightly 
disposed.  .  .  .  With  what  the  great  houses  represent  the  heroines  of the 
novels are,  or become,  completely in  accord." Northanger  Abbey is far 
from  a  haven  to Catherine  Morland,  and  this  is not  because she fails to 
be  "rightly  disposed";  Norland  Park  provides  no  values  with  which  the 
Dashwood  sisters  can  accord;7  and  Kellynch  Hall,  not  even  "ever-
remembered" by its own  proprietors,  is bidden  a  rather  wistful  good  rid02
dance  by a  daughter  far  superior  to  what  it  now  "represents."  Works of 
fiction  written  on  the  conservative  model  tirelessly exhort  us  to  accept 
infelicity  as the  condition  of life  and  urge  us  instead  to seek our  modest 
satisfactions  in  the  consciousness  of prescribed  attachments  well  hon02
ored,  and  duties  well  done.  But  Austen's  novels  are  pervasively  con02
cerned,  not  with  according  ourselves  to  an  existence "sweet and  dear," 
but  with  achieving  a  more  active,  expansive,  and  personally  fulfilling 
happiness,  and  they  persistently  suggest that  this  is well  worth  the  striv02
ing.  Sometimes,  as  in  Pride  and  Prejudice,  Austen  contrives  to  locate 
such  happiness  within  conservative  institutions  themselves,  but  . ..  it 
takes  some  work  before  Pemberly  will  accommodate  Elizabeth.  And 
once  Pemberly  does  make  a  place  for  her,  one  suspects  that  it  is  the 
"great  beautiful  house"  itself,  rather  than  Elizabeth,  that  will  be  essen02
tially  improved  for  her  presence  there,  because  whatever  its  previous 
dignity,  it never  seemed  a place of pleasure.  The  word  "happy"  rings as 
frequently  across  the  pages  of Persuasion  as  it  does  those  of Pride  and 
Prejudice,  and  it  should  tell  us  something  that  in  Persuasion 
it  is  the 
nefarious  Walter Elliot who  wishes to dissuade  Anne  from  pursuing  the 
highest happiness  she can  conceive of.  When  he  discovers that  she  pre-
7.  In Sense and Sensibility. 
306 
CLAUDIA  L.  JOHNSON 
fers  the  "best"  company  to  merely  "good"  company,  he  warns,  "You 
have a better right to be fastidious  than almost any other woman  I know; 
but  will  it  answer?  Will  it  make  you  happy?  Will  it  not  be  wiser  to 
accept the  society of these good ladies  in  Laura-place,  and  enjoy all  the 
advantages  of  the  connexion  as  far  as  possible?"  Fortunately,  Anne's 
fastidiousness,  like Elizabeth's,  finally  does "answer."  But unlike  Eliza02
beth's,  it is achieved not at a great beautiful  house  with  an  ever-remem02
bered  name,  but  rather  in  a  disposition  only  discernible in  people  who 
do  not  belong  to  such  houses,  people  such  as  the  Crofts,  who  walk 
"along in  happy independence,"  or like Harville,  whose  weather-beaten 
lodgings are a "picture  of repose and  domestic  happiness." 
The  interests  of  happiness,  piety,  and  well-being  demand  removal 
from  Kellynch  Hall,  its  proprieties  and  priorities.  But whether  moving 
beyond  Kellynch or any equivalent bespeaks a victory of autonomy  from 
what  a great house  represents,  or a despair  of its ever improving  enough 
to be desirable,  is hard to say.  Not surprisingly,  since they belong exclu02
sively to the  years which  assured  the  reaction,  Austen's  last three  novels 
reflect  a  strong  sense  of  the  increasing  immovability  of  established 
authority.  While  Sense  and  Sensibility  concludes  with  an  opposition 
and  a  withdrawal  that  are  angry,  permanent,  and  committed,  in  Nor02
thanger  Abbey  General  Tilney  finally  does  yield,  if minimally,  and  in 
Pride  and  Prejudice  Darcy is improved  by confrontation,  and  eventually 
even  Lady  Catherine  comes  around.  But  even  though  Sir  Thomas's 
judgment  in  Mansfield  Park  is thoroughly  impeached,  his  authority  is 
fixed.  In  Emma,  when  his  kind  of authority  is  transformed  and  femi02
nized,  and  joined  with  Knightley's,  it  assumes  a  benign  aspect.  But  in 
Persuasion, 
stately  houses  and  their  proprietors  are  no  longer  formida02
ble,  and  their  intransigence  is  matched  only  by  their  vapidity.  Good 
characters depart from  them  without  a breach,  differ  from  them  without 
defiance.  Thus the overarching structure  of Persuasion  as a whole  repro02
duces  and  asks us to accept the  same  sorts of unresolved  tensions  found 
in  so  many  of its shorter,  characteristically oxymoronic  formulations― 
such  as "fat sighings," or "she was deep in  the happiness  of such  misery, 
or  the  misery  of such  happiness."  Persuasion  setdes  little: it  resumes  a 
debate 
reaching  an 
agreement,  and  without  requiring  one.  Wentworth  does  not  concede 
that  Lady  Russell had  been  right,  Anne  refuses  to concede that  yielding 
was wrong:  "cheerful  confidence  in  futurity"  precludes  such  regret,  and 
Providence has been  equally served by delay. 
interrupted  eight  years 
the  past  without 
in 
The  "elasticity  of  mind"  celebrated  in  Persuasion  accepts  and  sur02
passes  both  of  these,  as  well  as  the  broader  social  conflicts  the  book 
details.  It is tempting  to see in this effort to define  and  endorse extensive 
difference  from  established  institutions,  without  effecting  an  overt  or 
impassible breach  from  them,  as the  perfection  of the  strategies and  the 
positions  that  have  marked  Austen's  fiction  from  the  start.  Austen,  no 
DOUBLENESS  AND  REFRAIN  IN  JANE  AUSTEN'S  PERSUASION 
307 
less than  Blake,8  wrote  for  an  audience  with  what  one  critic has  called 
"war-manacled  minds,"  and  her  works,  no  less than  Blake's,  attempt― 
inevitably with  only limited  success―to shed  those manacles which  she 
perforce  wore  too.  Among  the  least doctrinaire  of all  her  contemporar02
ies, Austen  from  the  outset took on the  materials which  political contro02
versy  endowed  with  such  importance,  without  inviting  or  aggravating 
partisan  impulses.  During  a  time  when  all  social criticism,  particularly 
that which aimed at the institution  of the family in general and  the place 
of  women  in  particular,  came  to  be  associated  with  the  radical  cause, 
Austen  defended  and  enlarged  a  progressive  middle  ground  that  had 
been  eaten  away  by  the  polarizing  polemics  born  of the  1790s.  If she 
very  early  opted  definitely  not  to  ratify  the  anarchism  of  the  radical 
opposition,  despite  an  allegiance to the  liberal tradition  which  underlay 
much  of it,  she  also  avoided  its  irritability,  its  confusion,  and  its  very 
early  defeat.  Conservative  fiction  was Austen's  medium  because  it very 
quickly  became  the  only  fiction  there  was,  other  voices being  quelled, 
and  Austen  persistently  subjected  its  most  cherished  mythologies  to 
interrogations  from  which  it could not recover. The highly parodie  style 
developed  in  the  juvenilia,  when  applied  to  the  stuff  of  conservative 
fiction,  constituted  a  kind  of piracy  which  commandeered  conservative 
novelistic  discourse  and  forced  it to  hoist flags of different  colors, so  to 
speak,  to  say  things  it  was  not  fashioned  to  say―as  when  Catherine 
Morland,  for  example,  assures  herself with  perfect  trust  that  the  good 
General Tilney "could not propose any thing  improper  for her"; or  when 
Marianne's "sensibility" and  Elinor's "sense" turn out not to be antitheti02
cally  opposed;  or  most  optimistically,  when  Darcy  himself absorbs  the 
values  of his  antagonist  in  order  to  make  her  as well  as  himself happy. 
In  none  of the  novels  can  conservative  ideology  be  entirely  overcome, 
but  in  all,  as  most  forcibly  in  Mansfield  Park, 
its  basic  imperatives― 
benevolence,  gratitude,  family  attachment,  female  modesty,  paternal 
authority―are  wrested  from  their  privileged  claims  and  made,  like 
Edmund  Bertram, to relinquish  their  "moral  elevation." 
C H E R YL  ANN  WEISSMAN 
Doubleness  and  Refrain  in  Jane  Austen's  Persuasion  t 
Among  the  characters  in  Jane Austen's  canon  of  fiction,  the  heroine 
is  supremely  mysterious.  Anne  Elliot suggests  a  residual 
of  Persuasion 
8.  William Blake (1757-1827),  revolutionary poet. 
t  Cheryl Ann Weissman,  "Doubleness and Refrain in Jane Austen's Persuasion," Kenyon Review 
n.s.  10  (1988):  8 7 - 9 1.  Copyright  1992 by  Kenyon  College.  Reprinted by  permission.  The 
author's notes have been deleted. 
308 
CHERYL  ANN  WEISSMAN 
depth  of personality  that  eludes  narrator  as well  as  reader  in  this,  Aus02
ten's  last completed  work.  Yet even  as character emerges with  extraordi02
nary  subtlety,  this  novel's structure  and  language  call  themselves to  our 
attention  by  virtue  of  their  contrasting  and  conspicuous  schematism. 
The  wistful  tone  of Persuasion 
is informed  by a  bizarre  and  implacable 
emphasis  on  doubleness  and  refrains  in  diction,  plot,  themes,  and  even 
syntax. 
Symmetric  doubling  is  not  intrinsically  remarkable  in  Austen's  fic02
tion,  of course. The  titles Pride  and  Prejudice  and  Sense  and  Sensibility 
reflect  the  harmoniously  epigrammatic  rhythm  of  eighteenth-century 
prose.  But in  that  tradition,  as in Austen's earlier novels, structural  sym02
metry  suggests  the  dependable  order  of a  stable,  rational  world.  In  Per02
suasion, 
reflecting  a transient,  uneasy  one. 
names  and  events  recur  in  a  disturbingly  irrational  way, 
It  is a  world  keenly  reminiscent  of the  stylized  and  gloomy milieu of 
fairy  tales.  Anne  Elliot  is a  Cinderella  figure  dominated  by  a  vain  and 
unloving  parent  (Sir Walter) and  two  selfish  sisters.  In  a  mythical  past, 
eight years prior  to the  novel's time frame,  she was persuaded by a well-
intentioned  godmother  (Lady Russell) to  reject  Frederick Wentworth,  a 
suitor  with  modest  financial  expectations,  and  that  submission  to  per02
suasion  has  proved  to  be  the  mistake  of  her  life.  Now  Wentworth 
returns,  having  improbably  made  his  fortune  after  all,  and  to  Anne's 
profound  anguish  he courts both  of her sisters-in-law; no Prince Charm02
ing  was  ever  more  misguided!  Anne  has  become  faded  and  impover02
ished,  but  she  remains  deeply  in  love  with  him.  She  regrets  her 
decision,  although  she  refuses  to  repent  it;  it  was  the  correct  choice 
under  the  circumstances,  she  insists,  even  though  it  chanced  to  be  the 
wrong  course of action. 
Meanwhile,  chance  further  contrives  to  present  her  with  a  second 
suitor,  William  Elliot.  As  heir  to  her  father's  estate,  this  man  would 
offer  her  the  unique  opportunity  to  succeed  her  long-deceased  mother 
in  name,  fortune,  and  even  place of residence.  With  fairy  tale symme02
try,  Anne  could  thus be  restored  to  her  home  and  in  some  measure  be 
compensated  for  the  wrongs  done  her  by  a  godmother's  error  in  judg02
ment  and  a  natural  mother's  symbolic abandonment.  We,  as  readers, 
can  see that  the  legacy also  includes  her  mother's  terrible  folly  of mar02
rying  an  unworthy  man,  but  for  a  time  Anne's  perception  of  this 
remains  uncertain. 
Fortunately  but  not  accidentally,  she  is  not  persuaded  to  be  incon02
stant  in  favor  of  this  specious  continuity.  The  problematic  options  of 
sameness  and  difference  do  not  double  her  vision;  she  recognizes  the 
opportunity  for  authentically  changing  the  bleakness  of  her  life  by 
remaining  faithful  to  Wentworth,  her  original  and  only  lover. Consis02
tency  of character  and  of attachment  prevail  over  the  menacing  forces 
of chance and  confer a happy ending  upon the revised fairy tale after all. 
DOUBLENESS  AND  REFRAIN  IN  JANE  AUSTEN'S  PERSUASION 
3 09 
Inlaying  this  hauntingly  elemental  story  are  stylistic  devices  that 
emphasize its kinship with  fairy tales; Austen  appears  to have gone out of 
her way to focus attention  on  the artifice of  fiction.  We find a  surprising 
occurrence of coincidentally shared  names,  for example. In the plot,  the 
dramatic  turning  point  is foreshadowed  by  an  earlier,  strikingly  similar 
contrivance.  And  both  the  narrator's  and  characters' diction  are studded 
with arresting  refrains.  Presented  from  its outset as a sequel to an implic02
itly meaningful,  unwritten  earlier story,  this  novel  is a puzzling  play  on 
the  notion  of doubleness. 
Beginning  with  names,  the  first  page  contains  a  breezily  irreverent 
reference  to  "all  the  Marys  and  Elizabeths" that  ancestral  Elliots  have 
married,  alerting  us  to  a  quirk  of  repetitiveness  that  the  coming  story 
will  vigorously  display.  In  Anne's  contemporary  world,  Charles  Mus02
grove  has  both  a  son  and  a  cousin  (his  brother-in-law-to-be)  with  the 
same  Christian  name,  and  Mrs.  Smith's  deceased  husband  was  a 
Charles  as  well.  This  is an  oddly  extravagant  gesture,  coming  from  an 
otherwise tautly  economical crafter  of novels.  Ironically, Admiral  Croft 
remarks  that  he  wishes  "young  ladies  had  not  such  a  number  of  fine 
christian  names"; how  much  simpler  "if  they  were all Sophys, or some02
thing  of the  sort. " 
William  Walter  Elliot,  heir  to  Sir  Walter  Elliot,  incorporates  a 
remarkable  range  of identities  within  his  semi-original  name.  Morally 
duplicitous,  he  has  been  a  false  friend  to  Sir  Walter  and  to  Charles 
Smith.  Narratively  he  is accorded  an  odd  versatility as well.  He  appears 
first  as  an  unidentified  traveler,  spontaneously  smitten  with  Anne  at 
Lyme,  then  later  is shown  to  have  had  a  calculated  plan  to  court  her. 
Yet,  despite his characteristic deviousness,  his admiration  at the  inn  was 
genuine,  arising  in  ignorance  of  her  identity.  It  was  simply  a  coinci02
dence―a  narrative  doubleness. 
A striking doubleness characterizes the  plot as well as the cast of char02
acters.  Anne's  anticipated  first  meeting  with  her  former  lover,  Went02
worth,  is  scuttled  by  a  domestic  accident  in  the  Musgrove  household: 
little  Charles  is  injured  in  a  fall.  And  with  a  thud  that  is  uncannily 
familiar,  the  turning point  of the  novel will occur when  the  boy's aunt, 
Louisa  Musgrove,  falls  on  the  Cobb  at  Lyme.  The  symmetry  is as sig02
nificant  as the  similarity; as the  child's fall  heralds  a courteous  and  cold 
reacquaintanceship,  Louisa's  precipitates  Wentworth's  recognition  of 
love and  his return  to Anne. 
Freud  was  intrigued  by  the  congruence  of chronological and  spatial 
patterning  in  the  grammar  of dreams,  observing  that  "temporal 
repeti02
tion  of an  act is regularly shown  . ..  by the  numerical  multiplication  of 
an  object."  Repetitions inform  Louisa's accident with  just such  dream02
like ciphering.  The company at Lyme are taking their second walk along 
the Cobb, owing to Louisa's determination,  and  she further,  obstinately 
insists that Wentworth  "jump" her down the steps once, and  then  again. 
310 
CHERYL  ANN  WEISSMAN 
After  she  has  fallen  and  her  sister Henrietta  has  fainted  from  shock,  we 
are  told  that  the  passersby  are  especially  delighted  with  the  entertain02
ment  of  seeing  not  merely  one,  "nay,  two  dead  young  ladies,  for  it 
proved  twice as fine as the first report. " 
Along with  such  doubling  in  names  and  actions, a cadence of poetic 
refrain  characterizes  much  of  the  novel's  diction.  For  example,  an 
unusually  long  and  spiraling  sentence expresses Anne's  piteous  solitude 
in  the  wake of events following Louisa's accident: 
She  was  the  last,  excepting  the  little  boys  at  the  cot,  she  was  the 
very last, the only remaining  one of all that had filled and  animated 
both  houses,  of all that had  given Uppercross its cheerful  character. 
This  nostalgic sentence echoes another  description  of lingering lastness, 
the  reference to the old nursery-maid  who  is delightedly  rehabilitated by 
Louisa's  fall: 
A chaise was sent for from  Crewkherne,  and Charles conveyed back 
a far more  useful  person  in the  old nursery-maid  of the family,  one 
who  having  brought  up  all  the  children,  and  seen  the  very  last, 
the  lingering and  long-petted  master  Harry,  sent to school after  his 
brothers,  was now living in  her deserted  nursery  to mend stockings, 
and  dress  all  the  blains  and  bruises  she  could  get  near  her,  and 
who,  consequently,  was only too happy  in being allowed to go and 
help  nurse  dear  Miss Louisa. 
The  sentence  is a chanting,  balladlike story; the  image of the  nursery  is 
presented  with  the  soothingly  monotonous  rhythm  of a  nursery  rhyme, 
another  variation  on  the  theme  of refrain. 
And  refrain  is a theme.  Implicit in the novel's premise is a  doubleness 
of  time,  for  Persuasion 
is  constructed  like  a  palimpsest,  an  overlay 
through  which  we  must  decipher  an  original. The dramatic  action  that 
occurred  in  the  novel's  implied  past  is  reflected  and  reflected  upon 
throughout  the  text.  We  need  only  consider  the  way  in  which  Anne  is 
presented;  until  the  events  at  Lyme  precipitate  her  "second  spring  of 
youth  and  beauty,"  she  belongs  more  to  the  ghostly  past  than  to  her 
dismal  present  circumstances.  She  lives  amid  the  resonant  tension  of 
simultaneous  time  periods. 
The  passage  which  most  pivotally  expresses  this  impossible  dou02
bleness of time occurs just before the story's turning point.  In the poised, 
held  moment  before  Louisa  jumps  down  the  Cobb  steps  and  sets  in 
motion  a  tumultuous  rearrangement  of the  characters'  romantic  pair02
bonds,  Austen  pauses  in  her  story for a haunting reverie on  the sea: 
The  party  from  Uppercross  passing  down  by the  now  deserted  and 
melancholy looking rooms, and  still descending,  soon found  them02
selves  on  the  sea  shore,  and  lingering  only,  as all  must  linger  and 
DOUBLENESS  AND  REFRAIN  IN  JANE  AUSTEN'S  PERSUASION 
3 11 
gaze  on  a  first  return  to  the  sea,  who  ever  deserve  to  look on  it  at 
all,  proceeded  towards  the  Cobb.  .  .  . 
Anne's first view of the  sea is paradoxically not her first view,  it is a "first 
return." And  all  of the  radical  patterning  in  Persuasions  plot  structure 
and  diction  emphasizes this tremulous  union  of beginnings and  returns. 
The  motif  of first returns  opens  the  apparently  closed story of Anne's 
life.  It suggests  the  possibility for  recovery  of what  was  thought  to  have 
been  irrevocably  lost.  And  as  the  story  of  a  misunderstanding  that  is 
revisited, the novel challenges the reader's  convictions regarding his own 
perceptions.  In  the  earlier Austen  novels,  the  anticipation  of the  happy 
ending  invests the  whole with  a promise  of pleasing  resolution.  But  the 
anticipated  ending  of Persuasion  must  provoke apprehension;  we cannot 
be sure where this return will lead,  or if it will have an  ultimate  destina02
tion  at all. 
Even  Anne's  dizzyingly  narrow  escape  from  a  wasted  life  is  not  as 
properly  satisfying as we expect  fictional  escapes to be. A painful  residue 
of doubt  clings to the ending,  and  we wince with  ambivalent desires  and 
beliefs when  we are told  that 
They  returned  into  the  past,  more  exquisitely  happy  perhaps,  in 
their  re-union,  than  when  it had  been first projected; more  tender, 
more  tried,  more  fixed  in  a  knowledge  of  each  other's  char02
acter.  .  .  . 
Analogue  of a  first  return,  here  is  a  redeemed  past.  And  Anne  teas-
ingly  denies  us  our  sigh  of  relief  with  her  paradoxical  insistence  that 
Lady  Russell  had  been  wrong  in  her  advice,  yet  she  herself  had  been 
right  to  follow  it.  We  want  to  agree,  yet  we  are  left  frowning;  like  Dr. 
Johnson's  Rasselas, we  are  being  asked  to  drink  from  the  mouth  of the 
Nile  even  as  we  drink  from  its  source.  Anne's  defense  of  her  terrible 
error  feels  like  a  flirtation  with  disaster  even  as  the  novel  is  about  to 
close,  grinding  against her  miraculous,  precarious  rescue. 
It  is the  nature  of storytelling  to  etch  patterns  and  simultaneously  to 
this  aesthetic  conflict  is  brought  into  the 
violate  them.  In  Persuasion 
foreground;  the will to conserve the patterns  of the past inviolate  abrades 
against  the  impulse  to  disrupt  and  reform  them.  As  the  "imaginist" 
Emma  Woodhouse  in  Emma  wishes  to  preserve  authority  over  her 
world  and  yet  wishes  to  make  matches  (which  must  necessarily  under02
mine  her  control  over  those  matched),  so  the  narrator  of  Persuasion 
expresses  contradictory  impulses  toward  enshrinement  of the  past  and 
toward  implacable progress. 
Narrative ambivalence is apparent  from  the start.  If the promised  story 
of  Anne  Elliot  is introduced  as  the  wistful  remnant  of a  lost past,  then 
the scene with  which  that  story commences farcically counterpoints  the 
yearning  to  return  there.  We  meet  the  fatuous  Sir Walter  gazing  tire-
312 
CHERYL  ANN  WEISSMAN 
lessly  at  the  two  handsome  duodecimo  pages  of the  Baronetage  upon 
which  his  family's  historical  existence is summarily  acknowledged.  He 
delights  in  beholding  his own  name,  feeling an  endless glow radiated  by 
his ancestors' prestige.  He  favors  the  pursuit of no  profession  at all,  any 
sort  of employment  being  necessarily deleterious  to  one's  original  per02
sonal substance. Absurd as such a caricature of conservatism is, his com02
pulsion  to  hold  his  story  still  brings  into  relief  the  narrator's  and 
heroine's  inclinations to  cut  Anne's  losses, to  deny  the  potentially  dan02
gerous possibilities of hope  and  change. 
In  change  there  is loss,  of course,  but  there  can  be  more  than  com02
pensatory  gain as well. On  a thematic level, both characters and  narrator 
frequently  express faith  in  justice and  the value of suffering.  On  another 
level,  Anne's  losses  can  be  equated  with  the  missing  elements  of  the 
narrative.  The  story that  overflows the banks of fictional knowledge  is in 
a  sense  lost,  but  as  with  Anne's  and  Wentworth's  lost days,  absent  fea02
tures  of the  text are pledges  of a greater richness to come. 
The  more  information  we are given about  a character's inner  life,  the 
sparser  that  information  seems.  Who  was Anne  Elliot  before  the  novel 
began,  and  how  can  we account for the  eight years that  transformed  the 
persuadable  girl  of nineteen  into  the  firm  woman  we  are  shown?  And 
further,  how  has  this  narrator  elicited  from  us  such  unconventional, 
seemingly  inappropriate  curiosity? 
She  has  done  so at  least  in  part  by  contrasting  a  playfully  contrived, 
non-mimetic  fictional  background  with  an  earnestly  realized,  provoca02
tively elusive central  figure.  Figure and  ground  resonate,  creating a  ten02
sion  that  invests  the  text  with  powerful  emotional  authenticity,  and 
anticipating  the  direction  taken  by  such  later  novelists  as  Proust  and 
Joyce. 
In place of the  unobtrusive  mimetic foundation  that persuasively  sup02
ports  earlier  Austen  heroines,  here  is  fictional  scaffolding  illuminated 
with  narrative  searchlights.  Patterns  of  doubleness  and  refrain  have 
taken  the  place  of progressive  momentum,  creating  a  cadence  exqui02
sitely suited  to this heroine's step.  For she is no  Elizabeth Bennet, com02
ing  of age  and  learning  to  distinguish  between  appearances  and  reality; 
Anne  Elliot  begins  her  narrative  journey  with  maturity  and  discern02
ment,  and  in  her  world  such  phenomenological  distinctions  are  no 
longer possible. Here  the  focus has veered from  character to the  percep02
tion  of character,  and  knowledge  of another  person's  motives and  idio02
syncratic  vision 
Persuasions 
schematically  patterned  narrative  surface,  personality  emerges  with  a 
residual  richness that  extends beyond  the borders  of the text. 
insufficient.  Grounded  by 
is  always 
Jane Austen: 
A  Ckronology 
1775 
1784 
1789-91 
Jane Austen  born,  December  16, at Steventon,  Hampshire, 
the  seventh  of eight  children  of the  Rev. George  Austen. 
George  III  is on  the  throne  of England. 
Formal education  ends at age 9,  at school in  Reading. 
Between  the  ages  of  14 and  16,  she  writes  a  novel  called 
"Love  and  Freindship," a "History  of England," and  stories 
called  "Lesley Castle" and  "A Collection of Letters." 
1793-96  Writes "Lady Susan" and  "Elinor and  Marianne," the earli02
1797 
est  version  of Sense  and 
Writes "First Impressions," the  earliest version  of Pride  and 
Prejudice. 
Sensibility. 
1797-98  Rewrites  "Elinor  and  Marianne"  as  Sense  and 
Sensibility 
(which  remains  unpublished  until  1811). 
1798-99  Writes Northanger  Abbey  (published posthumously  in  1818). 
1801 
1804-05  Now  at  Southampton,  she  writes  "The  Watsons," possibly 
Austen  family moves to Bath. 
1805 
1809 
1811-20 
1811 
1813 
1814 
1815 
1816 
1817 
1818 
and 
for  publication. 
an  early version of  Emma. 
Her  father  dies  and  the  following  year  the  family  moves 
to  Southampton,  where  after  an  interval  of  several  years 
her  major  works  were  composed. 
Rewrites  "First  Impressions"  as  Pride  and  Prejudice, 
revises Sense  and  Sensibility 
The Regency:  George, Prince of Wales,  takes over the  pow02
ers of George III, who lives on  until 1820. 
Sense  and  Sensibility  published  at  last,  anonymously―like 
all  her other works; writes Mansfield  Park. 
Pride  and  Prejudice  published. 
Writes Emma  and  publishes  Mansfield  Park. 
Writes  Persuasion. 
Emma  published. 
Jane Austen dies at the age of 42  in Winchester, of Addison's 
disease,  leaving "Sanditon," an  unfinished  novel. 
Northanger  Abbey  and  Persuasion  published,  again  anony02
mously. 
3 13 
Selected  Bibliography 
The first section  of this  bibliography  lists the  editions  of Jane  Austen  essential  to serious  study 
of her work. The second  section  includes  the tides of works that bear indirectly on Austen's  modes 
of thought.  All  are cited  in  the essays  included  in  this edition.  Works of biography  and criticism, 
with emphasis  on  relatively  recent criticism,  are listed in the third section,  which  provides  biblio02
graphic data for other critical citations from the essays.  Except for the editions  in  the first section, 
nothing  listed is the source of any excerpt appearing in  the present text. 
JANE  AUSTEN:  W O R KS  AND  L E T T E RS 
The  Novels  of]ane  Austen.  Ed.  R. W.  Chapman.  5 vols.  3rd ed.,  Oxford,  1933. A sixth  volume, 
including  minor works by Austen,  appeared in 1954. 
Jane Austen's  juvenilia  have appeared in  three  volumes: 
Volume  the First.  Ed.  R.  W.  Chapman.  Oxford,  1933. 
Volume  the Third.  Ed.  R.  W.  Chapman  . Oxford, 1951. 
Volume  the Second.  Ed. B.  C.  Southam.  Oxford,  1963. 
Jane  Austen's  Letters  to  Her  Sister  Cassandra  and  Others.  Ed.  R.  W.  Chapman.  2nd  ed.  Lon02
don,  1952. 
R E L A T ED  M A T E R I AL 
Donagan,  Alan.  The Theory of Morality.  Chicago,  1977. 
Fried,  Charles. "Liberals and  Love." The New  Republic  (December  24,  1984). 
Maclntyre,  Alasdair.  After  Virtue:  A Study  in Moral  Theory.  London,  1981. 
Nagel,  Thomas.  Mortal  Questions.  Cambridge, 1979. 
Richards,  David  A.  J. A Theory of Reasons  for Action.  Oxford,  1971. 
Slote,  Michael.  Common-sense  Morality and  Consequentialism.  London,  1985. 
Spring,  David.  "Land and Politics  in Edwardian England." Agricultural  History 58 (1984):  17-42. 
Williams,  Bernard. Moral  Luck: Philosophical  Papers,  1973-1980.  Cambridge, 1981. 
BIOGRAPHY  AND  CRITICISM 
Austen-Leigh,  J. E. A  Memoir  of Jane  Austen.  London,  1870. 
Battestin,  Martin C.  The Providence of Wit:  Aspects  of Form  in Augustan  Literature  and  the  Arts. 
Oxford,  1974. 
Booth,  Wayne C.  The Rhetoric  of Fiction.  Chicago,  1983. 
Brown,  Julia Prewitt.  Jane  Austen's  Novels:  Social  Change  and  Literary  Form.  Cambridge,  MA, 
1979. 
Brown,  Lloyd.  Bits of Ivory: Narrative  Techniques  in  Jane  Austen's  Fiction.  Baton Rouge,  1973. 
Crane,  R.  S.  "The  Concept  of  Plot  and  the  Plot  of  Tom  Jones."  Critics  and  Criticism:  Ancient 
and  Modem.  Ed. R.  S.  Crane.  Chicago,  1952. 
Damrosch,  Leo.  God's  Plot and  Man's  Stories:  Studies  in  the Fictional  Imagination  from  Milton 
to Fielding.  Chicago, 1985. 
Devlin,  D.  D.  Jane  Austen  and  Education.  London,  1975. 
Duckworth,  Alistair  M.  The  Improvement  of  the  Estate:  A  Study  of Jane  Austen's  Novels.  Balti02
more,  1971. 
Duffy,  Joseph  M.  "Structure and  Idea  in  Persuasion."  Nineteenth  Century  Fiction  8  (1953): 
272-79. 
Dussinger,  John A.  In  the Pride of  the Moment:  Encounters  in  Jane  Austen's  World.  Columbus, 
OH,  1990. 
315 
316 
SELECTED  BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Forster,  E. M.  Abinger  Harvest.  London,  1936. 
Gard,  Roger.  Jane  Austen's  Novels:  The  Art  of Clarity.  New  Haven,  1992.  Unlike  most  recent 
criticism,  this book  returns to a mode  of "appreciation" for Austen's  accomplishment. 
Garrod,  H.  W.  "Jane Austen,  a  Depreciation." Essays  by  Divers  Hands  .  .  .  Transactions  of the 
Royal  Society  of Literature.  N.s.  8 (August  1957):  21-40.  One  of the first negative appraisals. 
Greene,  D.  J. "Jane Austen  and the Peerage." PMLA 68 (1953):  1017-31.  Useful  for understand02
ing  Austen's  treatment of social  class. 
Halperin,  John, ed.  Jane  Austen:  Bicentenary  Essays.  Cambridge, 1975. 
Harding,  D.  W.  "Regulated  Hatred: An  Aspect  of the  Work  of Jane  Austen." Scrutiny  8  (1940): 
346-62. 
Hardy,  Barbara.  A  Reading  of Jane  Austen.  New  York,  1976. 
Honan,  Park.  Jane  Austen:  Her Life.  New  York,  1987. The best recent biography. 
Kaplan,  Deborah.  Jane  Austen  and  the  World  of Women.  Baltimore,  1992. A fresh  treatment of 
Austen's  cultural situation. 
Kroeber,  Karl.  Styles  in  Fictional  Structure:  The  Art  of  Jane  Austen,  Charlotte  Bront05,  George 
Eliot.  Princeton, 1971. 
Lawrence,  D.  H.  Apropos  of Lady  Chatterley's  Lover.  London,  1930. 
Lewis,  C.  S.  "A Note  on  Jane Austen.  Essays  in Criticism  4  (1954):  359-71. 
Monaghan,  David  M.  Jane  Austen:  Structure  and  Social  Vision.  Totowa, 1980. 
Mooneyham,  Laura  G.  Romance,  Language,  and  Education  in  Jane  Austen's  Novels.  London, 
1988. 
Poovey,  Mary.  The  Proper Lady  and  the  Woman  Writer:  Ideology as Style  in  the Works of  Mary 
Wollstonecraft,  Mary  Shelley,  and  Jane  Austen.  Chicago, 1984. 
Price,  Martin. Forms  of Life:  Character  and  Moral  Imagination  in the Novel.  New  Haven, 1983. 
Sieferman,  Sylvia.  "Persuasion:  The  Motive  for  Metaphor."  Studies  in  the  Novel  11  (1979): 
283-301. 
Southam,  B.  C,  ed.  Critical  Essays  on  Jane  Austen.  London,  1968. 
Spence,  Jon. "The Abiding Possibilities of Nature in Persuasion." SEL  21 (1981):  625-36. 
Spring,  David.  "Interpreters of  Jane  Austen's  Social  World: Literary  Critics and  Historians." In 
Jane  Austen:  New  Perspectives.  Ed. Janet Todd.  New  York,  1983. Pp.  53-72. 
Sulloway,  Alison G.  Jane  Austen  and  the Province ofWomanhood.  Philadelphia,  1989. 
Tave,  Stuart M.  Some  Words  of Jane  Austen.  Chicago, 1973. 
Trilling,  Lionel.  Sincerity  and  Authenticity.  Cambridge, MA, 1971. 
Weinsheimer,  Joel.  "Chance and  the  Hierarchy of  Marriages in  Pride  and  Prejudice." ELH  39 
(1972):  4 0 4 - 1 9. 
Wiesenforth,  Joseph.  "History and  Myth  in  Jane  Austen's  Persuasion." The  Literary  Criterion 2 
(1977):  7 6 - 8 5. 
Wilson,  Edmund.  "A  Long  Talk  about  Jane  Austen."  Classics  and  Commercials.  New  York, 
1950.  196-203. 
Wiltshire,  John. "A Romantic Persuasion?" The Critical  Review  14 (1971): 3-16. 
Wordsworth,  William.  "Essay Supplementary to the Preface" and "Preface to Lyrical  Ballads." In 
Wordsworth's Literary  Criticism.  Ed. W.  J. B. Owen.  London, 1974. 
Zietlow,  Paul  N.  "Luck and  Fortuitous Circumstance in  Persuasion: Two  Interpretations." ELH 
32(1965):  179-95. 
