 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Barac k Oba ma 
Drea ms fro m My Father 
¡°For we  are strangers before them, 
and sojourners, as were all our 
fathers. 1 CHRONICLES 29:15 
PREFACE TO THE 2004 EDITION 
A LM OST A DECADE HAS passed since this book was first published. As I mention in the original introduction, 
the opportunity to write the book ca me wh ile I was in la w school, the result of my e lection as the first African -
American president of the Harvard La w Rev iew. In the wa ke of some modest publicity, I rece ived an advance from a 
publisher and went to work with the belief that the story of my fa mily, and my efforts to understand that story, might 
speak in some way to the fissures of race that have characterized the A merican e xperience, as we ll as the flu id state of 
identity-the leaps through time, the collision of cultures -that mark our modern life. 
 
Like most first-time  authors, I was filled with hope and despair upon the book¡¯s publication -hope that the book might 
succeed beyond my youthful drea ms, despair that I had fa iled to say anything worth saying. The reality fe ll some where  
in between. The rev iews were  mildly favorable. People  actually  showed up at the readings my publisher arranged. The  
sales were underwhelming. And, after a fe w  months, I went on with the business of my life , certain that my ca reer as 
an author would be short-lived, but glad to have survived the process with my dignity mo re or less intact. 
 
I had little time for reflection over the next ten years. I ran a voter registration project in the 1992 election cycle, began a 
civil rights practice, and started teaching constitutional law at the University of Chicago. My wife and I bought a house, 
were blessed with two gorgeous, healthy, and mischievous daughters, and struggled to pay the bills. When a seat in the state 
legislature opened up in 1996, some friends persuaded me to run for the office, and I won. I had been warned, before taking 
office, that state politics lacks the glamour of its Washington counterpart; one labors largely in obscurity, mostly on topics 
that mean a great deal to some but that the average man or woman on the street can safely ignore (the regulation of mobile 
homes, say, or the tax consequences of farm equipment depreciation). Nonetheless, I found the work satisfying, mostly 
because the scale of state politics allows for concrete results -an expansion of health insurance for poor children, or a reform 
of laws that send innocent men to death row-within a meaningful time frame. 
 
 
 
 
And too, because within the capitol building of a big, industrial state, one sees every day the face of a nation in constant 
conversation: inner-c ity mothers and corn and bean farmers, immigrant day laborers alongside suburban investment 
bankers-all jostling to be heard, a ll ready to tell their stories. 
 
A few months ago, I won the De moc ratic no mination for a seat as the U.S. senator from Illinois. It was a difficult 
race, in a cro wded fie ld of we ll-funded, skilled, and prominent candidates; without organizational backing or personal 
wealth, a b lack man with a funny name, I was considered a long shot. And so, when I won a ma jority of the votes in 
the De mocratic prima ry, winning in white areas as well as blac k, in the suburbs as well as Chicago, the reaction  that 
followed echoed the response to my elect ion to the Law Rev iew. Mainstrea m co mmentators e xpressed surprise and 
genuine hope that my victory signaled a broader change in our rac ial polit ics. Within the blac k co mmunity, there was a 
sense of pride regarding my acco mplishment, a  pride ming led with frustration that fifty years after Brown v. Board of 
Education and forty years after the passage of the Voting Rights Act, we should still be celebrat ing the possibility (and 
only the possibility, fo r I have a tough general elect ion coming up) that I might be the sole African A merican -and only 
the third since Reconstruction-to serve in the Senate. My fa mily, friends, and I were  mild ly bewildered by the attention, 
and constantly aware of the gulf between the hard sh een of media reports and the messy, mundane realities of life as it 
is truly lived. 
 
Just as that spate of publicity prompted my publisher¡¯s interest a decade ago, so has this fresh round of news clippings 
encouraged the book¡¯s re-publication. For the first time in many years, I¡¯ve pulled out a copy and read a few chapters to see 
how much my voice may have changed over time. I confess to wincing every so often at a poorly chosen word, a mangled 
sentence, an expression of emotion that seems indulgent or overly practiced. I have the urge to cut the book by fifty pages or 
so, possessed as I am with a keener appreciation for brevity. I cannot honestly say, however, that the voice in this book is not 
mine-that I would tell the story much differently today than I did ten years ago, even if certain passages have proven to be 
inconvenient politically, the grist for pundit commentary and opposition research. 
 
What has changed, of course, dramatica lly, decisively, is the context in wh ich the book might now be read. I b egan 
writing against a backdrop of Silicon Va lley and a booming stock ma rket; the collapse of the Berlin Wa ll; Mandela -in 
slow, sturdy steps-emerg ing fro m prison to lead a country; the signing of peace accords in Oslo. Do mestically, our 
cultural debates-around guns and abortion and rap lyrics -seemed so fierce prec isely because Bill Clinton¡¯s Third 
Way, a scaled-back we lfare  state without grand ambition but without sharp edges, seemed to describe a broad, 
underlying consensus on bread-and-butter issues, a consensus to which even Geo rge W. Bush¡¯s first campaign, with 
its ¡°compassionate conservatism,¡± would have to give a nod. Internationally, writers announced the end of history, 
the ascendance of free markets and liberal de mocracy, the replace ment of old hatreds and wars between nations with 
virtual co mmun ities and battles for ma rket share. 
 
And then, on September 11, 2001, the world fractured.  
 
It¡¯s beyond my skill as a writer to capture that day, and the days that would follo w-the planes, like specters, vanishing 
into steel and glass; the slow-motion cascade of the towers crumbling into themselves; the ash -covered figures 
wandering the streets; the anguish and the fear. Nor do I pretend to understand the stark nih ilis m that drove the 
terrorists that day and that drives their brethren still. My powers of e mpathy, my ability to reach into another¡¯s heart, 
cannot penetrate the blank stares of those who would murder innocents with abstract, serene satisfact ion. 
 
 
 
 
What I do know is that history returned that day with a vengeance; that, in fact, as Faulkner re minds us, the past is 
never dead and buried-it isn¡¯t even past. This collective h is tory, this past, directly touches my own. Not mere ly 
because the bombs of Al Qaeda have marked, with an eerie prec ision, some of the landscapes of my life -the buildings 
and roads and faces of Nairobi, Ba li, Manhattan; not mere ly because, as a consequence o f 9/11, my na me is an 
irresistible target of mocking websites fro m overzea lous Republican operatives. But also because the underlying 
struggle-between worlds of plenty and worlds of want; between the modern and the ancient; between those who 
embrace  our tee ming, co lliding, irksome  diversity, while still insisting on a set of values that binds us together, and 
those who would seek, under whatever flag or slogan or sacred te xt, a ce rtainty and simp lificat ion that justifies cruelty 
toward those not like  us -is the struggle set forth, on a miniature scale, in this book.  
 
I know, I have seen, the desperation and disorder of the powerless: how it t wists the lives of child ren on the streets 
of Jaka rta or Nairobi in much the same way as it does the lives of children on Chicago¡¯s South Side, how narrow the 
path is for them between hu miliation and untrammeled fury, how easily they slip into violence and despair. I know 
that the response of the powerful to this disorder-alternating as it does between a dull co mplacency and, when the 
disorder spills out of its proscribed confines, a steady, unthinking application of fo rce, of longer prison sentences and 
more  sophisticated military hard ware-is inadequate to the task. I know that the hardening  of lines, the embrace of 
fundamentalis m and tribe, dooms us all. 
 
And so what was a more interior, intimate e ffort on my part, to understand this struggle and to find my p lace in it, 
has converged with a broader public debate, a debate in which I a m pro fe ssionally engaged, one that will shape our 
lives and the lives of our children for many years to come.  
 
The policy implications of a ll this are a topic  for another book. Let me end instead on a more personal note. Most of 
the characters in this book re ma in a part of my life, albe it in vary ing degrees -a function of work, ch ildren, geography, 
and turns of fate. 
 
The e xception is my mother, who m we lost, with a brutal swiftness, to cancer a few months after this book 
was published. 
 
She had spent the previous ten years doing what she loved. She traveled the world, working in the distant villages of 
Asia and Africa, help ing wo men buy a sewing machine or a milk cow o r an education that might give the m a 
foothold in the world¡¯s economy. She gathered friends from high and low, took long wa lks, stared at the moon, and 
foraged through the local ma rkets of De lhi or Marra kesh for some trifle, a scarf or stone carving that would make  her 
laugh or please the eye. She wrote reports, read novels, pestered her children, and drea med of grandchildren.  
 
We saw each other frequently, our bond unbroken. During the writing of this book, she would read the drafts, 
correcting stories that I had misunderstood, careful not to comment on my characterizations o f her but quick to 
e xpla in or defend the less flattering aspects of my father¡¯s character. She managed her illness with grace and good 
humor, and she helped my sister and me push on with our lives, despite our dread, our denials, our sudden 
constrictions of the heart. 
 
I think sometimes that had I known she would not survive her illness, I might have written a different book-less a meditation 
on the absent parent, more a celebration of the one who was the single constant in my life. In my daughters I 
 
 
 
 
see her every day, her joy, her capacity for wonder. I won¡¯t try to describe how deeply I mourn he r passing still. I 
know that she was the kindest, most generous spirit I have ever kno wn, and that what is best in me I owe to her. 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I ORIGINA LLY INTENDED A VERY d ifferent book. The opportunity to write it first arose while I was still in 
law school, after my e lection as the first blac k president of the Harvard La w Rev iew, a legal periodica l largely 
unknown outside the profession. A burst of publicity fo llo wed that election, including several newspaper artic les that 
testified less to my modest accomplishments than to Harvard Law School¡¯s peculia r place in the A merican 
mythology, as well as A merica¡¯s hunger for any optimistic sign fro m the rac ial front -a mo rsel of proof that, after a ll, 
some progress has been made. A few publishers called, and I, imag in ing myself to have something origina l to say 
about the current state of race re lations, agreed to take off a year after g raduation and put my thoughts to paper. 
 
In that last year of la w school, I began to organize in my  mind, with a frightening confiden ce, just how the book 
would proceed. There would be an essay on the limits of civil rights lit igation in bringing about racial equality, 
thoughts on the meaning of co mmun ity and the restoration of public life through grassroots organizing, musings on 
affirmat ive action and Afrocentrism-the list of topics filled an entire page. I¡¯d inc lude personal anecdotes, to be 
sure, and analyze the sources of certain recurring e motions. But a ll in a ll it was an intellectual journey that I 
imagined fo r myself, co mplete with maps and restpoints and a strict itinera ry: the first section completed by 
March, the second submitted for revision in August¡­.  
 
When I actually sat down and began to write, though, I found my mind pulled toward rockier shores. First longings 
leapt up to brush my heart. Distant voices appeared, and ebbed, and then appeared again. I re me mbered the stories that 
my mother and her parents told me as a child, the stories of a fa mily trying to e xp lain itself. I recalled my first year as 
a commun ity organize r in Chicago and my awkwa rd steps toward manhood. I listened to my grand mother, sitting 
under a mango tree as she braided my sister¡¯s hair, describing the father I had never truly known.  
 
Co mpared to this flood of me mories, all my  we ll-ordered theories seemed insubstantial and pre mature. St ill, I 
strongly resisted the idea of offe ring up my past in a book, a  past that left me feeling e xposed, even slightly ashamed. 
Not because that past is particularly pain ful or perverse but because it speaks to those aspect s of myself that resist 
conscious choice and that-on the surface, at least-contradict the world I now occupy. After a ll, I¡¯m thirty -three now; I 
work as a la wyer active in the social and polit ical life of Ch icago, a town that¡¯s accustomed to its racial wou nds and 
prides itself on a certa in lac k of sentiment. If I¡¯ve been able to fight off cynic ism, I nevertheless like  to think of 
myself as wise to the world, care ful not to e xpect too much.  
 
And yet what strikes me most when I thin k about the story of my fa mily is a running strain of innocence, an innocence 
that seems unimaginable, even by the measures of childhood. My wife ¡¯s cousin, only six years old, has already lost 
such innocence: A few weeks ago he reported to his parents that some of his first grade classmates had refused to play 
with him because of his dark, unble mished skin. Obv iously his parents, born and raised in Chicago and Ga ry, lost their 
 
 
 
 
own innocence long ago, and although they aren¡¯t bitter-the two of them being as strong and proud and resourceful as 
any parents I know-one hears the pain in  their voices as they begin to have second thoughts about having mov ed out of 
the city into a   mostly wh ite suburb, a  move they  made to protect their son fro m the possibility of being caught in a  
gang shooting and the certainty of attending an underfunded school. 
 
They know too much, we have all seen too much, to take my parents¡¯ brief union-a blac k man and white wo man, an 
African and an A merican-at face value. As a result, some people have a hard time  taking me at face  value. When 
people who don¡¯t know me we ll, blac k or wh ite, discover my background (and it is usually a dis covery, for I ceased to 
advertise my mother¡¯s race at the age of twe lve or th irteen, when I began to suspect that by doing so I was ingratiating 
myself to whites), I see the split-second adjustments they have to make , the searching of my eyes for some te llta le sign. 
They no longer know who I a m. Privately, they guess at my troubled heart, I suppose -the mixed blood, the divided 
soul, the ghostly image of the tragic mu latto trapped between two worlds. And if I were to e xp la in that no, the tragedy 
is not mine, or at least not mine alone, it is yours, sons and daughters of Ply mouth Rock and Ellis Island, it is yours, 
children of A frica, it is the tragedy of both my wife¡¯s six-year-o ld cousin and his white first grade classmates, so that 
you need not guess at what troubles me, it ¡¯s on the nightly news for all to see, and that if we  could acknowledge at least 
that much then the tragic cycle begins to break down¡­we ll, I suspect that I sound incurably naive, wedded to lost 
hopes, like those Co mmunists who peddle their newspapers on the fringes of various college towns. Or worse, I sound 
like I¡¯m trying to hide fro m myself. 
 
I don¡¯t fault people their suspicions. I lea rned long ago to distrust my childhood and the stories that shaped it. It was 
only many years later, after I had sat at my father¡¯s grave and spoken to him through Africa¡¯s red soil, that I could 
circ le back and evaluate these early stories for myself. Or, mo re accurately, it was only then that I understood that I 
had spent much of my life try ing to rewrite these stories, plugging up holes in the narrative, accommodating 
unwelco me details, pro jecting ind ividual choices against the blind sweep of history, all in the hope of e xtract ing some 
granite slab of truth upon which my unborn children can firmly stand. 
 
At some point, then, in spite of a stubborn desire to protect myself fro m scrutiny, in spite of the periodic impulse to 
abandon the entire project, what has found its way onto these pages is a record of a personal, interior journey -a boy¡¯s 
search for his father, and through that search a workable meaning for his life  as a black A me rican. The result is 
autobiographical, a lthough whenever someone¡¯s asked me over the course of these last three years just what the book 
is about, I¡¯ve usually avoided such a description. An autobiography promises feats worthy of record, conversations 
with fa mous people, a central ro le in important events. There is none of that here. At the very least, an autobiography 
implies a summing up, a certa in closure, that hardly suits someone of my years, still busy charting his way through 
the world. I can¡¯t even hold up my e xperience as being somehow representative of the black A me rican e xpe rience 
(¡°After all, you don¡¯t come fro m an underpriv ileged background,¡± a Manhatta n publisher helpfully points out to me); 
indeed, learn ing to accept that particular truth-that I can e mbrace my  blac k brothers and sisters, whether in this 
country or in Africa , and affirm a  common destiny without pretending to speak to, or for, a ll our va rious struggles-is 
part of what this book¡¯s about. 
 
Finally, there are the dangers inherent in any autobiographical work: the temptation to color events in ways favorable 
to the writer, the tendency to overestimate the interest one¡¯s experiences hold for others, selective lapses of memory. 
 
 
 
 
Such hazards are only magnified when the writer lacks the wisdom of age; the distance that can cure one of certain 
vanities. I can¡¯t say that I¡¯ve avoided all, or any, of these hazards successfully. A lthough much of this book is based 
on contemporaneous journals or the oral histories of my fa mily, the dia logue is necessarily an appro ximat ion of what 
was actually said or re layed to me. For the sake of co mpression, some of the characters that appear are composites of 
people I¡¯ve known, and some events appear out of precise chronology. With the exception of my fa mily and a handful 
of public figures, the names of most characters have been changed for the sa ke of their privacy. 
 
Whatever the label that attaches to this book-autobiography, me mo ir, fa mily h istory, or something else-what I¡¯ve tried 
to do is write an honest account of a particular p rovince of my life. When I¡¯ve strayed, I¡¯ve been able to look to  my 
agent, Jane Dystel, for her faith and tenacity; to my editor, Henry Ferris, for h is gentle but firm correct ives; to Ruth 
Fecych and the staff at Times Books, for their enthusiasm and attention in shepherding the manuscript through its 
various stages; to my friends, especially Robert Fisher, for their generous readings; and to my wonderful wife , 
Michelle , for her wit, grace, candor, and unerring ability to encourage my best impulses. 
 
It is to my fa mily, though-my mother, my grandparents, my siblings, stretched across oceans and continents -that I owe 
the deepest gratitude and to whom I dedicate this book. Without their constant love and support, without their 
willingness to let me sing their song and their toleration of the occasional wrong note, I could never have hoped to 
fin ish. If nothing else, I hope that the love and respect I fee l for the m shines through on every page. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER ONE 
 
 
A FEW MONTHS AFTER MY twenty-first birthday, a stranger called to give me the news. I was living in New York at the 
time, on Ninety-fourth between Second and First, part of that unnamed, shifting border between East Harlem and the rest of 
Manhattan. It was an uninviting block, treeless and barren, lined with soot-colored walk-ups that cast heavy shadows for 
most of the day. The apartment was small, with slanting floors and irregular heat and a buzzer downstairs that didn¡¯t work, so 
that visitors had to call ahead from a pay phone at the corner gas station, where a black Doberman the size of a wolf paced 
through the night in vigilant patrol, its jaws clamped around an empty beer bottle. 
 
None of this concerned me much, for I didn¡¯t get many visitors. I was impat ient in those days, busy with work and 
unrealized plans, and prone to see other people as unnecessary distractions. It wasn¡¯t that I didn¡¯t appreciate co mpany 
e xactly. I enjoyed e xchanging Spanish pleasantries with my mostly Puerto Rican neighbors, and on my way back fro m 
classes I¡¯d usually stop to talk to the boys who hung out on the stoop all summe r long about the Knicks or the gunshots 
they¡¯d heard the night before. When the weather was good, my roo mmate and I might sit out on the fire escape to 
smoke c igarettes and study the dusk washing blue over the city, or watch wh ite people fro m the better neighborhoods 
nearby walk their dogs down our block to let the anima ls shit on our curbs -¡°Scoop the poop, you bastards!¡± my 
 
 
 
 
roommate would shout with imp ressive rage, and we¡¯d laugh at the faces of both master and beast, 
grim and unapologetic as they hunkered down to do the deed. 
 
I enjoyed such moments -but only in brief. If the talk began to wander, or cross the border into familiarity, I would 
soon find reason to excuse myself. I had grown too comfortable in my solitude, the safest place I knew. 
 
I re me mbe r there was an old man liv ing ne xt door who seemed to share my disposition. He lived alone, a  gaunt, 
stooped figure who wore a  heavy black overcoat and a misshapen fedora on those rare occasions when he left his 
apartment. Once in a while I¡¯d run into him on his way back fro m the store, and I would offe r to carry his groceries up 
the long flight of stairs. He would look at me and shrug, and we wou ld begin our ascent, stopping at each landing so 
that he could catch his breath. When we finally arrived at his apart ment, I¡¯d carefu lly set the bags down on the floor 
and he would offer a  courtly nod of acknowledgment before  shuffling inside and closing the latch. Not a single word 
would pass between us, and not once did he ever thank me fo r my e fforts. 
 
The old man¡¯s silence impressed me; I thought him a kindred spirit. Later, my roommate would find him c ru mpled 
up on the third-floor landing, his eyes wide open, his limbs stiff and curled up like a  baby¡¯s. A crowd gathered; a few 
of the wo men crossed thems elves, and the smaller children whispered with e xcite ment. Eventually the para med ics 
arrived to take away the body and the police let the mselves into the old man¡¯s apart ment. It  was neat, almost e mpty -a 
chair, a  desk, the faded portrait of a  wo man with heavy eyebrows and a gentle smile set atop the mantelpiece. 
Somebody opened the refrigerator and found close to a thousand dollars in sma ll bills rolled up inside wads of old 
newspaper and carefully arranged behind mayonnaise and pickle jars.  
 
The loneliness of the scene affected me , and for the briefest mo ment I wished that I had learned the old man¡¯s na me.  
 
Then, almost immed iately, I regretted my desire, along with its companion grie f. I fe lt as if an understanding had 
been broken between us -as if, in that barren roo m, the old man was whispering an untold history, telling me  things I 
preferred not to hear. 
 
It must have been a month or so later, on a cold, dreary Nove mber mo rning, the sun faint behind a gauze  of c louds, 
that the other call ca me.  I  was in the middle of  ma king  myself brea kfast, with coffee on the stove and two eggs in 
the skillet, when my roo mmate handed me the phone. The line was thic k with static. 
 
¡°Barry? Ba rry, is this you?¡± 
¡° Yes¡­. Who¡¯s this?¡± 
¡° Yes, Ba rry ¡­this is your Aunt Jane. In Na irobi. Can you 
hear me?¡± ¡°I¡¯m sorry-who did you say you were?¡± 
 
 
¡°Aunt Jane. Listen, Ba rry, your father is dead. He  is killed in a  car acc ident. He llo? Can you hear me? I say, your 
father is dead. Ba rry, please call your uncle in Boston and tell him. I can¡¯t talk now, okay, Ba rry. I will t ry to call 
you again¡­.¡± 
 
That was all. The line cut off, and I sat down on the couch, smelling eggs burn in the kitchen, staring at cracks 
in the plaster, trying to measure my loss. 
 
At the time of his death, my father re mained a myth to me, both more  and less than a man. He  had left Ha waii back in 
1963, when I was only two years old, so that as a child I knew h im only through the stories that my mother and  
 
 
 
 
grandparents told. They all had their favorites, each one seamless, burnished smooth fro m repeated use. I can still 
picture Gra mps leaning back in his old stuffed chair a fter d inner, sipping wh iskey and cleaning his teeth with the 
cellophane fro m h is cigarette pack, recounting the time that my father almost threw a  man off the Pali Loo kout 
because of a pipe¡­. 
 
¡°See, your mo m and dad decided to take this friend of his sightseeing around the island. So they drove up 
to the Lookout, and Barac k was probably on the wrong side of the road the whole way over there-¡± 
 
¡° Your father was a terrible driver,¡±  my mother e xpla ins to me. ¡°He ¡¯d end up on the left -hand side, the way the 
British drive, and if you said something he¡¯d just huff about silly A me rican rules -¡± 
 
¡°Well, this particular time  they arrived in one piece, and they got out and stood at the railing to admire  the view.  
 
And Barack, he was puffing away on this pipe that I¡¯d given him for his birthday, pointing out all the sights with the 
stem, like a sea captain-¡± 
 
¡° Your father was really proud of this pipe,¡± my mother interrupts again. ¡°He¡¯d s moke  it a ll night wh ile he studied, 
and sometimes-¡± 
 
¡°Look, Ann, do you want to tell the story or are you going to let me  finish?¡± 
¡°Sorry, Dad. Go  ahead.¡± 
 
¡°Anyway, this poor fella-he was another African student, wasn¡¯t he? Fresh off the boat. This poor kid must¡¯ve been 
impressed with the way Barack was holding fo rth with this pipe, ¡¯cause he asked if he could give it a try. Your dad 
thought about it for a minute, and fina lly agreed, and as soon as the fella took h is first puff, he started coughing up a 
fit. Coughed so hard that the pipe slipped out of his hand and dropped over the railing, a  hundred feet down the face 
of the cliff.¡± 
 
Gra mps stops to take another nip fro m his flask before continuing. ¡°Well, now, your dad was gracious enough to 
wait until his friend stopped coughing before he told him to climb over the ra iling and bring the pipe back. Th e man 
took one peek down this ninety-degree incline and told Barac k that he¡¯d buy him a rep lace ment -¡± 
 
¡°Quite sensibly,¡± Toot says from the kitchen. (We ca ll my grand mother Tutu, Toot for short; it means 
¡°grandparent¡± in Hawaiian, for she decided on the day I was born that she was still too young to be called Granny.) 
Gra mps scowls but decides to ignore her. 
 
¡°-but Barac k was ada mant about getting his pipe back, because it  was a gift and couldn¡¯t be  replaced. So  the fe lla  
took another look, and shook his head again, and that¡¯s when your dad pic ked him  clea r off the ground and started 
dangling him over the ra iling!¡±  
 
Gra mps lets out a hoot and gives his knee a jovial slap. As he laughs, I imag ine myself looking up at my  father, 
dark against the brilliant sun, the transgressor¡¯s arms fla iling about as he¡¯s held aloft. A fearsome v ision of justice.  
 
¡°He wasn¡¯t rea lly hold ing him over the railing, Dad,¡±  my mother says, looking to me with concern, but Gra mps 
takes another sip of whiskey and plo ws forwa rd. 
 
¡°At this point, other people were starting to stare, and your mother was begging Barack to stop. I guess Barack¡¯s friend 
was just holding his breath and saying his prayers. Anyway, after a couple of minutes, your dad set the  man back down on 
his feet, patted him on the back, and suggested, calm as you please, that they all go find themselves a beer. And don¡¯t you 
know, that¡¯s how your dad acted for the rest of the tour-like nothing happened. Of course, your mother 
 
 
 
 
was still p retty upset when they got home. In fact, she was barely talking to your dad. Ba rack wasn¡¯t helping 
matters any, either, ¡¯cause when your mother tried to tell us what had happened he just shook his head and started 
to laugh. ¡®Re la x, Anna,¡¯ he said to her-your dad had this deep baritone, see, and this British accent.¡± My 
grandfather tucks his chin into his neck at this point, to capture the full effect. ¡° ¡®Re la x, Anna,¡¯ he said. ¡®I only 
wanted to teach the chap a lesson about the proper care of other people¡¯s property!¡¯ ¡±  
 
Gra mps would start to laugh again until he started to cough, and Toot would mutter under her breath that s he 
supposed it was a good thing that my father had rea lized that dropping the pipe had just been an accident because who 
knows what might have happened otherwise, and my mother would roll her eyes at me and say they were e xaggerating. 
 
¡° Your father can be a b it domineering,¡± my mother would ad mit  with a hint of a  smile. ¡° But it ¡¯s just that he is 
basically a very honest person. That makes him uncompro mising sometimes.¡±  
 
She preferred a gentler portra it of my  father. She would te ll the story of when he arrive d to accept his Phi Beta Kappa 
key in h is favorite outfit-jeans and an old knit shirt with a leopard-print pattern. ¡°Nobody told him it was this big honor, 
so he walked in and found everyone standing around this elegant room dressed in tuxedos. The only ti me I ever saw 
him e mbarrassed.¡± 
 
And Gra mps, suddenly thoughtful, would start nodding to himself ¡°It ¡¯s a fact, Bar,¡± he wou ld say. ¡° Your dad could 
handle just about any situation, and that made everybody like him. Re me mbe r the time he had to sing at the 
 
International Music Festival? He ¡¯d agreed to sing some African songs, but when he arrived it turned out to be this big 
to-do, and the woman who performed just before him was a semi -professional singer, a Ha wa iian ga l with a full band 
to back her up. Anyone else would have stopped right there, you know, and e xpla ined that there had been a mistake.  
 
But not Barac k. He got up and started singing in front of this big cro wd -wh ich is no easy feat, let me  tell you-and he 
wasn¡¯t great, but he was so sure of himself that before you knew it he was getting as much applause as anybody.¡± 
My grandfather would shake his head and get out of his chair to flip on the TV set. ¡° Now there¡¯s something you can 
learn fro m your dad,¡± he wou ld tell me . ¡° Confidence. The secret to a man¡¯s success.¡± 
 
That¡¯s how all the stories went-co mpact, apocryphal, told in rapid succession in the course of one evening, then 
packed away for months, sometimes years, in my  fa mily¡¯s me mory. Like the few photographs of my father that 
re mained in the house, old black-and-wh ite studio prints that I might run across while  ru mmag ing through the closets 
in search of Ch rist mas ornaments or an old snorkle set. At the point where my own me mories begin, my mother had 
already begun a courtship with the man who would  become  her second husband, and I sensed without exp lanation 
why the photographs had to be stored away. But once in a while, sitting on the floor with my mother, the sme ll of dust 
and mothballs rising fro m the cru mbling albu m, I would stare at my father¡¯s likeness-the dark laughing face, the 
prominent forehead and thick glasses that made him appear older than his years -and listen as the events of his life 
tumbled into a single narrative. 
 
He was an African, I would learn, a Kenyan of the Luo tribe, born on the shores of Lake Victoria in a place called 
Alego. The village was poor, but his father-my other grandfather, Hussein Onyango Obama-had been a prominent 
farmer, an elder of the tribe, a medicine man with healing powers. My father grew up herding his father¡¯s goats and 
attending the local school, set up by the British colonial administration, where he had shown great promise. He 
 
 
 
 
eventually won a scholarship to study in Nairobi; and then, on the eve of Kenyan independence, he had been selected by 
Kenyan leaders and American sponsors to attend a university in the United States, joining the first large wave of 
Africans to be sent forth to master Western technology and bring it back to forge a new, modern Africa. 
 
In 1959, at the age of twenty-three, he arrived at the University of Ha waii as that institution¡¯s first African student. 
He studied econometrics, worked with unsurpassed concentration, and graduated in three years at the top of his class. 
His friends were leg ion, and he helped organize the International Students Association, of wh ich he became  the first 
president. In a Russian language course, he met an a wkward, shy American g irl, only eighteen, and they fell in love. 
 
The girl¡¯s parents, wary at first, were won over by his charm and intellect; the young couple married, and she bore them 
a son, to whom he bequeathed his name. He won another scholarship -this time  to pursue his Ph.D. at Harvard-but not 
the money to take his new fa mily with him. A separation occurred, and he returned to Africa to fulfill his pro mise to the 
continent. The mother and child stayed behind, but the bond of love survived the distances¡­.  
 
There the album would c lose, and I would wander off content, swaddled  in a tale that placed me in the center of a vast 
and orderly universe. Even in the abridged version that my mother and grandparents offered, there were many things I 
didn¡¯t understand. But I ra rely asked fo r the details that might resolve the mean ing of ¡° Ph.D.¡± or ¡°colonia lis m,¡± o r 
locate Alego on a map. Instead, the path of my father¡¯s life occupied the same terra in as a book my mother once bought 
for me , a book ca lled Origins, a co llect ion of creation tales fro m around the world, stories of Genesis and t he tree where 
man was born, Pro metheus and the gift of fire, the tortoise of Hindu legend that floated in space, supporting the weight 
of the world on its back. Later, when I beca me more  fa miliar with the narrower path to happiness to be found in 
television and the movies, I¡¯d become t roubled by questions. What supported the tortoise? Why did an omnipotent God 
let a snake cause such grief? Why didn¡¯t my father return? But at the age of five or six I was satisfied to leave these 
distant mysteries intact, each story self-contained and as true as the next, to be carried off into peaceful drea ms.  
 
That my father looked nothing like  the people around me-that he was blac k as pitch, my mother white as milk-barely 
registered in my mind. 
 
In fact, I can reca ll only one story that dealt e xplicit ly with the subject of race; as I got older, it would be repeated 
more  often, as if it  captured the essence of the mora lity tale  that my father¡¯s life  had become. According to the story, 
after long hours of study, my father had joined my grandfather and several other friends at a local Wa ikiki bar. 
Everyone was in a  festive mood, eating and drinking to the sounds of a slack-key guitar, when a wh ite man abruptly 
announced to the bartender, loudly enough for everyone to hear, that he shouldn¡¯t have to drink good liquor ¡°ne xt to a 
nigger.¡± The roo m fell quiet and people turned to my father, e xpect ing a fight. Instead, my father stood up, walked 
over to the man, s miled, and proceeded to lecture him about th e folly of bigotry, the pro mise of the Ame rican drea m, 
and the universal rights of man. ¡°Th is fella felt so bad when Ba rack was finished,¡± Gra mps would say, ¡°that he reached 
into his pocket and gave Barack a hundred dolla rs on the spot. Paid for a ll our dr inks and puu-puus for the rest of the 
night-and your dad¡¯s rent for the rest of the month.¡± 
 
By the time I was a teenager, I¡¯d grown skeptical of this story¡¯s veracity and had set it aside with the rest. Until I receiv ed a 
phone call, many years later, from a Japanese-American man who said he had been my father¡¯s classmate in Hawaii and now 
taught at a midwestern university. He was very gracious, a bit embarrassed by his own impulsiveness; he explained that he 
had seen an interview of me in his local paper and that the sight of my father¡¯s name had brought 
 
 
 
 
back a rush of me mories. Then, during the course of our conversation, he repeated the same story that my grandfather 
had told, about the white man who had tried to purchase my father¡¯s forgiveness. ¡°I¡¯ll never forget that,¡± the man said 
to me over the phone; and in his voice I heard the same note that I¡¯d heard fro m Gra mps so many years before, that 
note of disbelief-and hope. 
 
Miscegenation. The word is humpbacked, ugly, portending a monstrous outcome: like antebellu m or octoroon, it 
evokes images of another era, a  distant world of horsewhips and fla mes, dead magnolias and cru mbling porticos. And 
yet it wasn¡¯t until 1967-the year I celeb rated my sixth birthday and Jimi Hendrix pe rformed at Monterey, three years 
after Dr. King received the Nobel Peace Prize, a t ime when A merica had already begun to weary of b lack de mands for 
equality, the proble m of discrimination presumab ly solved-that the Supreme  Court of the United States would get 
around to telling the state of Virg inia that its ban on interracia l ma rriages violated the Constitution. In 1960, the year 
that my parents were ma rried, miscegenation still described a fe lony in over half the states in the Union. In many parts 
of the South, my father could have been strung up from a  tree for me rely looking at my mother the wrong way; in the 
most sophisticated of northern cities, the hostile stares, the whispers, might have driven a wo man in my  mother¡¯s 
predica ment into a back-a lley abortion-or at the very least to a distant convent that could arrange for adoption. Their 
very image together would have been considered lurid and perverse, a handy retort to the handful of softheaded liberals 
who supported a civil rights agenda. 
 
Sure-but would you let your daughter ma rry one? 
 
The fact that my grandparents had answered yes to this question, no matter how g rudgingly, re ma ins an enduring 
puzzle to me . There was nothing in their background to p redict such a response, no New England transcendentalists or 
wild-eyed socialists in their fa mily tree. True, Kansas had fought on the Union side of the Civ il War; Gra mps liked to 
re mind me  that various strands of the family contained ardent abolitionists. If asked, Toot would turn her head in 
profile to show off her bea ked nose, which, a long with a pair of jet -b lack eyes, was offered as proof of Cherokee  
blood. But an old, sepia-toned photograph on the bookshelf spoke most eloquently of their roots. It sho wed Toot¡¯s 
grandparents, of Scottish and English stock, standing in front of a ra mshackle ho mestead, unsmiling and dressed in 
coarse wool, their eyes squinting at the sun-baked, flinty life that stretched out before them. Theirs were  the faces of 
 
American Gothic, the WASP bloodline¡¯s poorer cousins, and in their eyes one could see truths that I would have to learn 
later as facts: that Kansas had entered the Union free only after a violent precursor to the Civil War, the battle in which 
John Brown¡¯s sword tasted first blood; that while one of my great-great-grandfathers, Christopher Columbus 
 
Clark, had been a decorated Union soldier, his wife ¡¯s mother was ru mored to have been a second cousin of Jefferson  
 
Davis, president of the Confederacy; that although another distant ancestor had indeed been a full-blooded 
Cherokee, such lineage was a source of considerable shame to Toot¡¯s mother, who blanched whenever someone 
mentioned the subject and hoped to carry the secret to her grave. 
 
That was the world in which my grandparents had been raised, the dab -smack, landlocked center of the country, a place 
where decency and endurance and the pioneer spirit were joined at the hip with conformity and suspicion and the potential 
for unblinking cruelty. They had grown up less than twenty miles away from each other-my grandmother in Augusta, my 
grandfather in El Dorado, towns too small to warrant boldface on a road map -and the childhoods they 
 
 
 
 
liked to reca ll for my benefit portrayed sma ll-town, Depression-era A merica in all its innocent glory: Fourth of Ju ly 
parades and the picture shows on the side of a barn; fireflies in a  ja r and the taste of vine -ripe to matoes, sweet as 
apples; dust storms and hailstorms and classrooms filled with fa rm boys who got sewn into their woolen underwear 
at the beginning of winter and stank like  pigs as the months wore on. 
 
Even the trau ma of bank fa ilures and farm forec los ures seemed ro mantic  when spun through the loom of my 
grandparents¡¯ me mories, a t ime when hardship, the great leveler that had brought people closer together, was shared by 
all. So you had to listen carefully to recognize the subtle hierarchies and unspoke n codes that had policed their early 
lives, the distinctions of people who don¡¯t have a lot and live in the middle o f nowhere. It had to do with something 
called respectability-there we re respectable people and not-so-respectable people-and although you didn¡¯t have to be 
rich to be respectable, you sure had to work harder at it if you weren¡¯t.  
 
Toot¡¯s family was respectable. Her father held a steady job all through the Depression, managing an oil lease for  
 
Standard Oil. Her mother had taught normal school before the children we re born. The fa mily kept their house 
spotless and ordered Great Books through the mail; they read the Bible but generally shunned the tent revival circuit, 
preferring a straight-backed form of Methodism that valued reason over passion and temperance over both. 
 
My grandfather¡¯s station was more troublesome. Nobody was sure why -the grandparents who had raised him and his 
older brother we ren¡¯t very we ll off, but they were decent, God -fearing Baptists, supporting themselves with work in the 
oil rigs around Wichita. So mehow, though, Gra mps had turned out a bit wild . So me  of the neighbors pointed to his 
mother¡¯s suicide: it was Stanley, afte r a ll, then only eight years old, who had found her body. Other, less charitable, 
souls would simply shake their heads: The boy takes after his philandering father, they would opine, the undoubtable 
cause of the mother¡¯s unfortunate demise. 
 
Whatever the reason, Gra mps¡¯s reputation was apparently well deserved. By the age of fifteen he¡¯d been thrown out 
of high school for punching the principal in the nose. For the next three years he lived off odd jobs, hopping rail cars to 
Chicago, then Ca liforn ia, then back again, dabbling in moonshine, cards, and wo men. As he liked to tell it, he knew 
his way around Wichita, where  both his and Toot¡¯s families had moved by that time, and Toot doesn¡¯t contradict him; 
certainly, Toot¡¯s parents believed the stories that they¡¯d heard about the young man and strongly disapprove d of the 
budding courtship. The first time Toot brought Gra mps over to her house to meet the fa mily, her father took one look 
at my grandfather¡¯s blac k, slic ked-back hair and his perpetual wise-guy grin and offered h is unvarnished assessment. 
 
¡°He looks like a  wop.¡± 
 
My grandmother didn¡¯t care. To her, a home economics major fresh out of high school and tired of respectability, my  
grandfather must have cut a dashing figure. I sometimes imagine them in every American town in those years before the 
war, him in baggy pants and a starched undershirt, brim hat cocked back on his head, offering a cigarette to this smart -
talking girl with too much red lipstick and hair dyed blond and legs nice enough to model hosiery for the local department 
store. He¡¯s telling her about the big cities, the endless highway, his imminent escape from the empty, dust -ridden plains, 
where big plans mean a job as a bank manager and entertainment means an ice-cream soda and a Sunday matinee, where 
fear and lack of imagination choke your dreams so that you already know on the day that you¡¯re born just where you¡¯ll die 
and who it is that¡¯ll bury you. He won¡¯t end up like that, my grandfather insists; he has dreams, he 
 
 
 
 
has plans; he will infect my g randmother with the great peripatetic itch that had brought both their forebears across 
the Atlantic and half of a continent so many years before. 
 
They eloped just in time fo r the bomb ing of Pearl Ha rbor, and my grandfather enlisted. And at this point the story 
quickens in my mind like one of those old movies that show a wall ca lendar¡¯s pages peeled back faster and faster by 
invisible hands, the headlines of Hit ler and Churchill and Roosevelt and Normandy spinning wild ly to the drone of 
bombing attacks, the voice of Edwa rd R. Murrow and the BBC. I watch as my mother is born at the army base 
where Gra mps is stationed; my grandmother is Rosie the Riveter, working on a bo mber assembly line; my 
grandfather sloshes around in the mud of France, part of Patton¡¯s army.  
 
Gra mps returned fro m the war never having seen real co mbat, and the family headed to Califo rnia, where he enro lled 
at Berke ley under the GI b ill. But the classroom couldn¡¯t contain his ambit ions, his restlessness, and so the family 
moved again, first back to Kansas, then through a series of small Te xas towns, then finally to Seattle, where they  stayed 
long enough for my mother to finish high school. Gra mps worked as a furn iture salesman; they bought a house and 
found themselves bridge partners. They were p leased that my mother proved bright in school, although when she was 
offered early ad mission into the University of Chicago, my  grandfather forbade her to go, deciding that she was still too 
young to be living on her own. 
 
And that¡¯s where the story might have stopped: a home , a fa mily, a respectable life. Except something must have still 
been gnawing at my grandfather¡¯s heart. I can imagine him standing at the edge of the Pacific, h is hair p re maturely 
gray, his tall, lanky fra me bulkier now, looking out at the horizon until he could see it curve and still s melling, deep in 
his nostrils, the oil rigs and corn husks and hard-bitten lives that he thought he had left far behind. So that when the 
manager of the furniture co mpany where  he worked happened to mention that a new store was about to open in 
Honolulu, that business prospects seemed limit less there, what with statehood right around the corner, he would rush 
home that same day and talk my grand mother into selling their house and packing up yet again, to embark on the fina l 
leg of their journey, west, toward the setting sun¡­. 
 
He would always be like that, my grandfather, a lways searching for that new start, always running away fro m the 
fa miliar. By the time the fa mily a rrived in Hawa ii, h is character would have been fully formed, I think -the generosity 
and eagerness to please, the awkward mix o f sophistication and provincialism, the ra wness of emotion that could ma ke 
him at once tactless and easily bruised. His was an American character, one typical of men of his generation, men who 
embraced the notion of freedom and individualism and the open road without always knowing its price, and whose 
enthusiasms could as easily lead to the cowardice o f Mc Carthyism as to the heroics of World War II. Men who were 
both dangerous and promising precisely because of their fundamental innocence; men prone, in the end, to 
disappointment. 
 
In 1960, though, my grandfather had not yet been tested; the disappointments would come later, and even then they 
would co me slowly, without the violence that might have changed him, fo r better or worse. In the back of his  mind 
he had come to consider himself as something of a freethin ker-bohe mian, even. He wrote poetry on occasion, listened 
to jazz, counted a number of Je ws he¡¯d met in the furniture business as his closest friends. In his only skirmish into 
organized re ligion, he would enroll the fa mily in the local Un itarian Universalist congregation; he liked the idea that  
 
 
 
 
Unitarians drew on the scriptures of all the great religions (¡°It¡¯s like you get five religions in one,¡± he would say). 
 
Toot would eventually dissuade him o f his vie ws on the church (¡°For Christ¡¯s sake, Stanley, religion¡¯s not supposed 
to be like buying breakfast cereal!¡±), but if my grand mother was more skeptica l by nature, and disagreed with Gra mps 
on some of his more outlandish notions, her own stubborn independence, her own insistence on thinking something 
through for herself, generally brought them into rough align men t. 
 
All this ma rked the m as vaguely liberal, a lthough their ideas would never congeal into anything like  a firm ideology; 
in this, too, they were A merican. And so, when my mother ca me ho me one day and mentioned a friend she had met at 
the University of Ha wa ii, an African student named Barack, their first impulse was to invite him over fo r dinner. The 
poor kid¡¯s probably lonely, Gra mps would have thought, so far away fro m ho me. Better take  a look at him, Toot would 
have said to herself. When my father arrived at the door, Gra mps might have been immed iately struck by the African¡¯s 
resemblance to Nat King Co le, one of h is favorite singers; I imagine him asking my  father if he can sing, not 
understanding the mortified look on my mother¡¯s face. Gra mps is probably  too busy telling one of his jokes or arguing 
with Toot over how to cook the steaks to notice my mother reach out and squeeze the smooth, sinewy hand beside hers. 
 
Toot notices, but she¡¯s polite enough to bite her lip and offe r dessert; her instincts warn her against ma king a 
scene. When the evening is over, they¡¯ll both re ma rk on how intelligent the young man seems, so dignified, with 
the measured gestures, the graceful draping of one leg over another-and how about that accent! 
 
But would they let their daughter ma rry one? 
We don¡¯t know yet; the story to this point doesn¡¯t expla in enough. The truth is that, like most wh ite A mericans at the 
time, they had never really given blac k people much thought. Jim Cro w had made its way north into Kansas well 
before my grandparents were born, but at least around Wichita it appeared in its more informa l, genteel form, without 
much of the vio lence that pervaded the Deep South. The same unspoken codes that governed life  a mong whites kept 
contact between the races to a minimu m; when black people appear at a ll in the Kansas of my grandparents¡¯ me mories, 
the images are fleeting-black men who come  around the oil fie lds once in a wh ile , searching for work as hired hands; 
black wo men taking in the wh ite fo lks¡¯ laundry or help ing  clean wh ite homes. Blacks are there but not there, like Sa m 
the piano player or Beulah the ma id or A mos and Andy on the radio -shadowy, silent presences that elic it neither 
passion nor fear. 
 
It wasn¡¯t until my  fa mily moved to Te xas, after the war, that questions of race began to intrude on their lives. During 
his first wee k on the job there, Gra mps rece ived some friendly advice  fro m his fe llo w furniture salesmen about serving 
black and Me xican customers: ¡°If the coloreds want to look at the me rchandise, they need to come after hours and 
arrange for their own de livery.¡±  Later, at the bank where she worked, Toot made the acquaintance of the janitor, a ta ll 
and dignified blac k World War II vet she re me mbers only as Mr. Reed. While the two of them chatted in the hallway 
one day, a secretary in the office stormed up and hissed that Toot should never, ever, ¡°ca ll no nigger ¡®M ister.¡¯ ¡± Not 
long afterward, Toot would find Mr. Reed in a  corner of the building we ep ing quietly to himself. When she asked him 
what was wrong, he straightened his back, dried his eyes, and responded with a question of his own. 
 
¡°What have we ever done to be treated so mean?¡± 
My grandmother didn¡¯t have an answer that day, but the question lingered in her mind, one that she and Gramps 
would sometimes discuss once my mother had gone to bed. They decided that Toot would keep calling Mr. Reed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¡°Mister,¡± although she understood, with a mixture  of re lief and sadness, the careful distance that the janitor now 
ma intained whenever they passed each other in the halls. Gra mps began to decline invitations fro m his coworkers to 
go out for a beer, telling them he had to get home to keep the wife happy. They grew inward, skittish, filled with 
vague apprehension, as if they were pe rmanent strangers in town. 
 
This bad new air hit my mother the hardest. She was eleven or twelve by this time, an only child just growing out of a bad 
case of asthma. The illness, along with the numerous moves, had made her something of a loner-cheerful and easy-tempered 
but prone to bury her head in a book or wander off on solitary walks -and Toot began to worry that this latest move had only 
made her daughter¡¯s eccentricities more pronounced. My mother made few friends at her new school. 
 
She was teased mercilessly for her na me , Stanley Ann (one of Gra mps¡¯s less judicious ideas -he had wanted a son). 
Stanley Stea mer, they called her. Stan the Man. When Toot got home fro m work, she would usually find my mother 
alone in the front yard, swinging her legs off the porch or lying in the gras s, pulled into some solitary world of her o wn. 
Except for one day. There was that one hot, windless day when Toot came ho me to find a crowd of children gathered 
outside the picket fence that surrounded their house. As Toot drew closer, she could make out t he sounds of mirthless 
laughter, the contortions of rage and disgust on the children¡¯s faces. The children were chanting, in a high -pitched, 
alternating rhythm: 
 
¡°Nigger  lover!¡± 
¡°Dirty Yankee!¡± 
¡°Nigger lover!¡± 
 
 
 
 
 
The children scattered when they saw Toot, but not before one of the boys had sent the stone in his hand sailing over 
the fence. Toot¡¯s eyes followed the stone¡¯s trajectory as it ca me to rest at the foot of a tree. And there she saw the 
cause for all the e xcite ment: my mother and a blac k g irl of about the same age lying side by side on their stomachs in 
the grass, their skirts gathered up above their knees, their toes dug into the ground, their heads propped up on their 
hands in front of one of my mother¡¯s books. Fro m a distance the two girls seemed perfectly serene beneath the leafy 
shade. It was only when Toot opened the gate that she realized the black g irl was shaking and my mother¡¯s eyes shone 
with tears. The girls re mained motion less, paralyzed in thei r fear, until Toot finally leaned down and put her hands on 
both their heads. 
 
¡°If you two are go ing to play,¡± she said, ¡°then for goodness sake, go on inside. Co me on. Both of you.¡± She pic ked 
up my mother and reached for the other girl¡¯s hand, but before she could say anything more, the girl was in a  full 
sprint, her long legs like  a whippet¡¯s as she vanished down the street. 
 
Gra mps  was beside himself  when he heard  what  had happened. He  interrogated  my  mother,  wrote down  na mes. 
The ne xt day he took the  morning off fro m  work to v isit the school principa l. He  personally ca lled  the parents of 
some of the offending children to g ive the m a p iece of h is mind. And fro m every adult  that he spoke to, he  rece ived 
the same response: 
 
¡° You best talk to your daughter, Mr. Dunham. White girls don¡¯t play with coloreds in this town.¡± 
It¡¯s hard to know how much weight to give to these episodes, what permanent allegiances were made or broken, or 
whether they stand out only in the light of subsequent events. Whenever he spoke to me about it, Gramps would insist 
 
 
 
 
that the family left Te xas in part because of their disco mfort with such racism. Toot would be mo re c ircu mspect; once, 
when we were a lone, she told me that they had moved fro m Te xas only because Gra mps wasn¡¯t doing particularly 
well on his job, and because a friend in Seattle  had promised him something better. According to  her, the word rac ism 
wasn¡¯t even in their vocabulary back then. ¡° Your grandfather and I just figured we should treat people decently, Bar. 
That¡¯s all.¡± 
 
She¡¯s wise that way, my grand mother, suspicious of overwrought sentiments or overblown cla ims, content  with 
common sense. Which is why I tend to trust her account of events; it corresponds to what I know about my 
grandfather, his tendency to rewrite h is history to conform with the image he wished for himself.  
 
And yet I don¡¯t entirely dismiss Gramps¡¯s recollection of events as a convenient bit of puffery, another act of white 
revisionism. I can¡¯t, precisely because I know how strongly Gramps believed in his fictions, how badly he wanted them to be 
true, even if he didn¡¯t always know how to make them so. After Texas I suspect that black people became a part of these 
fictions of his, the narrative that worked its way through his dreams. The condition of the black race, their pain, their wou nds, 
would in his mind become merged with his own: the absent father and the hint of scandal, a mother who had gone away, the 
cruelty of other children, the realization that he was no fair-haired boy-that he looked like a ¡°wop.¡± 
 
Racis m was part of that past, his instincts told him, part of convention and respectability and status, the smirks and 
whispers and gossip that had kept him on the outside looking in.  
 
Those instincts count for something, I think; for many white people of  my  grandparents¡¯ generation and background, 
the instincts ran in an opposite direction, the direction of the mob. And although Gra mps¡¯s re lationship with my 
mother was already strained by the time  they reached Hawa ii -she would never quite forg ive his instability and often-
violent temper and would grow ashamed of h is crude, ham-fisted manners-it was this desire of his to obliterate the 
past, this confidence in the possibility of re ma king the world fro m whole c loth, that proved to be his most lasting 
patrimony. Whether Gra mps realized it or not, the sight of his daughter with a b lack man offe red at some deep 
unexplored level a window into his own heart. 
 
Not that such self-knowledge, even if accessible, would have made my mother¡¯s engagement any easier for h im to 
swallow. In fact, how and when the ma rriage occurred re ma ins a bit murky, a  bill of part iculars that I¡¯ve never quite 
had the courage to explo re. There ¡¯s no record of a rea l wedding, a ca ke, a  ring, a giv ing away of the bride. No 
fa milies were  in attendance; it¡¯s not even clear that people back in Kansas were fully informed. Just a small c ivil 
cere mony, a justice of the peace. The whole thing seems so fragile in retrospect, so haphazard. And perhaps that¡¯s 
how my grandparents intended it to be, a tria l that would pass, just a matter of t ime, so long as they ma intained a 
stiff upper lip and didn¡¯t do anything drastic. 
 
If so, they miscalculated not only my mother¡¯s quiet determination but also the sway of their own e mot ions. First the 
baby arrived, eight pounds, two ounces, with ten toes and ten fingers and hungry for food. What in the heck we re they 
supposed to do? 
 
Then time and place began to conspire, transforming potential misfortune into something tolerable, even a source of 
pride. Sharing a few beers with my father, Gra mps might listen to his new son-in-law sound off about politics or the 
economy, about far-off places like Whitehall or the Kremlin, and imagine himself seeing into the future. He would 
begin to read the newspapers more carefully, finding early reports of America¡¯s newfound integrationist creed, and 
 
 
 
 
decide in his mind that the world was shrinking, sympathies changing; that the family fro m Wichita had in fact 
moved to the forefront of Kennedy¡¯s New Frontier and Dr. King¡¯s magnificent drea m. How could A me rica send men 
into space and still keep its black cit izens in bondage? One of my ea rliest me mories is of sitting on my grandfather¡¯s 
shoulders as the astronauts from one of the Apollo missions arrived at Hicka m Air Force Base after a successful 
splashdown. I re me mbe r the astronauts, in aviator glasses, as being far away, bare ly visib le through the portal of an 
isolation chamber. But Gra mps would always swear that one of the astronauts waved just at me and that I waved 
back. It was part of the story he told himself. W ith his black son -in-law and his brown grandson, Gra mps had entered 
the space age. 
 
And what better port for setting off on this new adventure than Hawaii, the Un ion¡¯s newest me mber? Even now, with 
the state¡¯s population quadrupled, with Waikiki ja mmed wa ll to wa ll with fast -food emporiu ms and pornographic video 
stores and subdivisions marching re lentlessly into every fold of green h ill, I can retrace the first steps I took as a child 
and be stunned by the beauty of the islands. The trembling blue plane of the Pacific . The moss -covered cliffs and the 
cool rush of Manoa Falls, with its ginger blossoms and high canopies filled with the sound of invisible b irds. The North 
Shore¡¯s thunderous waves, crumb ling as if in a slow-mot ion ree l. The shadows off Pa li¡¯s peaks; the sultry, scented air.  
 
Hawa ii! To my fa mily, ne wly a rrived in 1959, it must have seemed as if the earth itself, weary of stampeding armies 
and bitter civilizat ion, had forced up this chain of e mera ld roc k where pioneers fro m across the globe could populate 
the land with children bronzed by the sun. The ugly conquest of the native Hawa iians through aborted treaties and 
crippling disease brought by the missionaries; the carving up of rich volcanic soil by Ame rican co mpanies for 
sugarcane and pineapple plantations; the indenturing system th at kept Japanese, Chinese, and Filip ino immig rants 
stooped sunup to sunset in these same fields; the internment of Japanese-Americans during the war-all th is was 
recent history. And yet, by the time my  fa mily arrived, it had somehow vanished fro m collectiv e me mory, like 
morn ing mist that the sun burned away. There were  too many races, with power a mong them too diffuse, to impose 
the ma inland¡¯s rig id caste system; and so few blac ks that the most ardent segregationist could enjoy a vacation secure 
in the knowledge that race mixing in Hawa ii had little to do with the established order back home.  
 
Thus the legend was made of Hawa ii as the one true me lting pot, an e xperiment in rac ial harmony. My grandparents -
especially Gra mps, who ca me into contact with a range of people through his furniture business -threw themselves 
into the cause of mutual unders tanding. An old copy of Dale Carnegie ¡¯s How to Win Friends and Influence People 
still sits on his bookshelf. And growing up, I would hear in him the bree zy, chatty style that he must have decided 
would help him with h is customers. He  would whip out pictures of the fa mily and offer h is life story to the nearest 
stranger; he would pump the hand of the mailman or ma ke off-color jo kes to our wait resses at restaurants. 
 
Such antics used to make me  cringe, but people mo re forg iving than a grandson appreciated his curiosity, so that 
while he never gained much in fluence, he made h imself a wide c irc le of friends. A Japanese -American man who called 
himself Freddy and ran a sma ll ma rket near our house would save us the choicest cuts of aku for sashimi and give me 
rice candy with edible  wrappers. Every so often, the Hawa iians who worked at my grandfather¡¯s store as deliverymen 
would invite us over for poi and roast pig, wh ich Gra mps gobbled down heartily (Toot would s moke c igarettes until she 
could get home and fix herself some scra mb led eggs). So metimes I would acco mpany Gra mps to Ali¡¯i Park, where he 
liked to play checke rs with the old Filipino men who smoked cheap cigars and spat up betel-nut juice as if it we re 
 
 
 
 
blood. And I still re me mbe r how, one early mo rning, hours before the sun rose, a Portuguese man to who m my  
grandfather had given a good deal on a sofa set took us out to spear fish off Kailua Bay. A gas lantern hung from t he 
cabin on the small fishing boat as I watched the men dive into inky -blac k waters, the beams of their flashlights glowing 
beneath the surface until they e merged with a large fish, iridescent and flopping at the end of one pole. Gra mps told me 
its Hawa iian na me , hu mu-hu mu-nuku-nuku-apuaa, wh ich we repeated to each other the entire way ho me.  
 
In such surroundings, my rac ia l stock caused my grandparents few proble ms, and they quickly adopted the scornful 
attitude local residents took toward visitors who e xpressed such hang-ups. Somet imes when Gra mps saw tourists 
watching me play in the sand, he would come up beside them and whisper, with appropriate reverence, that I was the 
great-grandson of King Ka meha meha, Ha wa ii¡¯s first monarch. ¡°I¡¯m sure that your picture¡¯s in a thousand scrapbooks, 
Bar,¡± he liked to tell me  with a grin, ¡°fro m Idaho to Maine.¡± That particular story is ambiguous, I think; I see in it a 
strategy to avoid hard issues. And yet Gra mps would just as readily tell another story, the one about the  tourist who saw 
me  swimming one day and, not knowing who she was talking to, co mmented that ¡°swimming must just come naturally 
to these Hawaiians.¡± To wh ich he responded that that would be hard to figure, since ¡°that boy happens to be my 
grandson, his mother is fro m Kansas, his father is fro m the interior of Kenya, and there isn¡¯t an ocean for miles in 
either da mn place.¡± For my  grandfather, race wasn¡¯t something you really needed to worry about anymore; if ignorance 
still he ld fast in certa in loca les, it was safe to assume that the rest of the world would be catching up soon. 
 
In the end I suppose that¡¯s what all the stories of my father we re rea lly about. They said less about the man himself 
than about the changes that had taken place in the people around  him, the halting process by which my grandparents¡¯ 
racia l attitudes had changed. The stories gave voice to a spirit that would grip the nation for that fleet ing period 
between Kennedy¡¯s election and the passage of the Voting Rights Act: the seeming triu mp h of universalism over 
parochialis m and narro w-mindedness, a bright new world where d iffe rences of race or culture  would instruct and 
amuse and perhaps even ennoble. A useful fict ion, one that haunts me no less than it haunted my fa mily, evoking as it 
does some lost Eden that e xtends beyond mere  childhood. 
 
There was only one problem: my father was missing. He had left paradise, and nothing that my mother or grandparents told 
me could obviate that single, unassailable fact. Their stories didn¡¯t tell me why he had left. They couldn¡¯t describe what it 
might have been like had he stayed. Like the janitor, Mr. Reed, or the black girl who churned up dust as she raced down a 
 
Texas road, my father became a prop in someone else¡¯s narrative. An attractive prop-the alien figure with the heart of gold, 
the mysterious stranger who saves the town and wins the girl-but a prop nonetheless. I don¡¯t really blame my mother or 
grandparents for this. My father may have preferred the image they created for him-indeed, he may have been complicit in its 
creation. In an article published in the Honolulu Star-Bulletin upon his graduation, he appears guarded and responsible, the 
model student, ambassador for his continent. He mildly scolds the university for herding visiting students into dormitories and 
forcing them to attend programs designed to promote cultural understanding -a distraction, he says, from the practical training 
he seeks. Although he hasn¡¯t experienced any problems himself, he detects self-segregation and overt discrimination taking 
place between the various ethnic groups and expresses wry amusement at the fact that ¡°Caucasians¡± in Hawaii are 
occasionally at the receiving end of prejudice. But if his assessment is relatively clear-eyed, he is careful to end on a happy 
note: One thing other nations can learn 
 
 
 
 
fro m Hawa ii, he says, is the willingness of races to work together toward common develop ment, something 
he has found whites elsewhere too often unwilling to do. 
 
I discovered this article, folded away a mong my b irth cert ificate and old vaccination forms, when I was in high 
school. It¡¯s a short piece, with a photograph of him. No mention is made of my mother or me, and I¡¯m le ft to wo nder 
whether the omission was intentional on my father¡¯s part, in antic ipation of his long departure. Perhaps the reporter 
failed to ask personal questions, intimidated by my father¡¯s imperious manner; or perhaps it was an editoria l decision, 
not part of the simple story that they were looking for. I wonder, too, whether the o mission caused a fight between my 
parents. 
 
I would not have known at the time , fo r I was too young to realize that I was supposed to have a live-in father, just as I 
was too young to know that I needed a race. For an improbably short span it seems that my father fe ll under the same 
spell as my mother and her parents; and for the first six years of my life, even as that spell was  broken and the worlds 
that they thought they¡¯d left behind recla imed each of the m, I occupied the place where  their drea ms had been. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER TWO 
 
 
T HE ROAD TO THE e mbassy was choked with traffic : cars, motorcycles, tricycle rickshaws, buses and jitney s 
filled to twice their capacity, a  procession of wheels and limbs all fighting for space in the midafternoon heat. We 
nudged forward a few feet, stopped, found an opening, stopped again. Our ta xi d river shooed away a group of boys 
who were  hawking gu m and loose cigarettes, then barely avoided a motor scooter carrying an entire fa mily on its back-
father, mother, son, and daughter all lean ing as one into a turn, their mouths wrapped with handkerchiefs to blunt the 
e xhaust, a family of bandits. Along the side of the road, wizened brown wo men in faded brown sarongs stacked straw 
baskets high with ripening fru it, and a pair of mechanics squatted before their open -air garage, la zily brushing away 
flies as they took an engine apart. Behind the m, the bro wn earth dipped into a smolde ring du mp where  a pair of 
roundheaded tots frantically chased a scrawny black hen. The children slipped in the mud and corn husks and banana 
leaves, squealing with pleasure, until they disappeared down the dirt road beyond. 
 
Things eased up once we hit the highway, and the ta xi dropped us off in front of the e mbassy, where a pair of smart ly 
dressed Marines nodded in greeting. Inside the courtyard, the clamor of the street was replaced by the steady rhythm of 
gardening clippers. My mother¡¯s  boss was a portly black man with closely cropped hair sprinkled gray at the te mples. 
 
An American flag draped down in rich fo lds fro m the pole beside his desk. He  reached out and offered a firm 
handshake: ¡°How are you, young man?¡± He  sme lled o f after -shave and his starched collar cut hard into his neck. I 
stood at attention as I answered his questions about the progress of my studies. The air in the office was cool and dry, 
like the a ir of mountain peaks: the pure and heady breeze of privilege.  
 
Our audience over, my  mother sat me down in the libra ry wh ile  she went off to do some wo rk. I finished my co mic 
books and the homework my mother had made me  bring before climb ing out of my chair to browse through the 
stacks. Most of the books held little interest for a n ine-year-old boy-World Bank reports, geological surveys, five-year 
development plans. But in one corner I found a collection of Life maga zines neatly displayed in clea r plastic binders. I  
 
 
 
 
thumbed through the glossy advertisements -Goodyear Tires and Dodge Fever, Zenith TV (¡°Why not the best?¡±) and 
Ca mpbell¡¯s Soup (¡°M m-mm good!¡±), men in white turtlenecks pouring Seagra m¡¯s over ice as wo men in red min iskirts 
looked on admiringly-and fe lt vaguely reassured. When I ca me upon a news photograph, I tried to guess the subject of 
the story before reading the caption. The photograph of French children dashing over cobblestoned streets: that was a 
happy scene, a game of h ide-and-go-seek after a day of schoolbooks and chores; their laughter spoke of freedo m. The 
photograph of a Japanese woman c radling a young, naked girl in a  shallow tub: that was sad; the girl was sick, her legs 
twisted, her head fallen back aga inst the mother¡¯s breast, the mother¡¯s face tight with grief, perhaps she blamed 
herself¡­. 
 
Eventually I ca me ac ross a photograph of an older man in dark glasses and a raincoat walking down an empty road.  
 
I couldn¡¯t guess what this picture was about; there seemed nothing unusual about the subject. On the next page was 
another photograph, this one a close-up of the same man¡¯s hands. They had a strange, unnatural pallor, as if blood had 
been drawn fro m the flesh. Turning back to the first picture, I now saw that the man¡¯s crinkly hair, his heavy lips and 
broad, fleshy nose, all had this same uneven, ghostly hue. 
 
He must be terrib ly sick, I thought. A radiation vict im, maybe, or an a lbino -I had seen one of those on the street a 
few days before, and my mother had e xp lained about such things. Except when I read the words that went with the 
picture, that wasn¡¯t it at all. The man had rece ived a chemica l treat ment, the artic le e xpla ined, to lighten his 
comple xion. He  had paid for it with h is own money. He e xp ressed some regret about trying to pass himself off as a 
white man, was sorry about how badly things had turned out. But the results were irreversible. There were thousands 
of people like  him, blac k men and wo men back in A merica who¡¯d undergone the same treat ment in response to 
advertisements that promised happiness as a white person. 
 
I felt my face and neck get hot. My stomach knotted; the type began to blur on the page. Did my mother know about this? 
What about her boss-why was he so calm, reading through his reports a few feet down the hall? I had a desperate urge to 
jump out of my seat, to show them what I had learned, to demand some explanation or assurance. But something held me 
back. As in a dream, I had no voice for my newfound fear. By the time my mother came to take me home, my face wore a 
smile and the magazines were back in their proper place. The room, the air, was quiet as before. 
 
We had lived in Indonesia for over three years by that time, the result of my   mother¡¯s marriage to an Indonesian 
named Lolo, another student she had met at the Un iversity of Ha wa ii. His na me meant ¡°cra zy¡± in Ha wa iian, wh ich 
tickled Gra mps to no end, but the meaning didn¡¯t suit the man, for Lolo possessed the good manners and easy gr ace of 
his people. He was short and brown, handsome, with thick b lack hair and features that could have as easily been 
Mexican or Sa moan as Indonesian; his tennis game was good, his smile  uncommonly even, and his te mpera ment 
imperturbable. For t wo years, fro m the time I was four until I was six, he endured endless hours of chess with Gra mps 
and long wrestling sessions with me. When my mother sat me down one day to tell me that Lolo had proposed and 
wanted us to move with him to a fa raway p lace, I wasn¡¯t surprised and expressed no objections. I did ask her if she 
loved him-I had been around long enough to know such things were important. My mother¡¯s chin tre mbled, as it still 
does when she¡¯s fighting back tears, and she pulled me  into a long hug that made me  fee l very brave, a lthough I 
wasn¡¯t sure why. 
 
 
 
 
Lolo left Hawaii quite suddenly after that, and my mother and I spent months in preparation -passports, visas, plane tickets, 
hotel reservations, an endless series of shots. While we packed, my grandfather pulled out an atlas and ticked off the names 
in Indonesia¡¯s island chain: Java, Borneo, Sumatra, Bali. He reme mbered some of the names, he said, from reading Joseph 
Conrad as a boy. The Spice Islands, they were called back then, enchanted names, shrouded in mystery. ¡°Says here they still 
got tigers over there,¡± he said. ¡°And orangutangs.¡± He looked up from the book and his eyes widened. ¡°Says here they even 
got headhunters!¡± Meanwhile, Toot called the State Department to find out if the country was stable. Whoever she spoke to 
there informed her that the situation was under control. Still, she insisted that we pack several trunks full of foodstuffs: Tang, 
powdered milk, cans of sardines. ¡°You never know what these people will eat,¡± she said firmly. My mother sighed, but Toot 
tossed in several boxes of candy to win me over to her side. 
 
Finally, we boarded a Pan A m jet for our flight around the globe. I wore  a long -sleeved white shirt and a gray clip-on 
tie, and the stewardesses plied me with puzzles and e xtra peanuts and a set of metal pilot¡¯s wings that I wo re over my  
breast pocket. On a three-day stopover in Japan, we walked through bone-chilling rains to see the great bronze Buddha 
at Ka maku ra and ate green tea ice crea m on a fe rry that passed through high mountain lakes. In the evenings my mother 
studied flash cards. Walking off the plane in Dja karta, the tarmac  rippling with heat, the sun bright as a furnace, I 
clutched her hand, determined to protect her fro m whatever might come .  
 
Lo lo was there to greet us, a few pounds heavier, a bushy mustache now hove ring over his smile . He hugged my 
mother, ho isted me up into the air, and told us to follo w a s mall, wiry man who was carrying our luggage straight past 
the long line at customs and into an awaiting car. The man s miled cheerfully as he lifted the bags into  the trunk, and 
my mother tried to say something to him but the man just laughed and nodded his head. People swirled around us, 
speaking rapidly in a language I didn¡¯t know, sme lling unfa miliar. For a long time we watched Lo lo talk to a group of 
brown-uniformed soldie rs. The soldiers had guns in their holsters, but they appeared to be in a jovial mood, laughing 
at something that Lolo had said. When Lolo fina lly joined us, my mother asked if the soldiers needed to check through 
our bags. 
 
¡°Don¡¯t worry ¡­that¡¯s  been all taken care  of,¡± Lo lo said, c limb ing into the driver¡¯s seat. ¡°Those are friends of mine.¡±  
 
The car was borrowed, he told us, but he had bought a brand -new motorcycle -a Japanese make , but good enough for 
now. The new house was finished; just a few touch-ups remained to be done. I was already enrolled in a  nearby 
school, and the relatives were  an xious to meet us. As he and my mother talked, I stuck my head out the backseat 
window and stared at the passing landscape, brown and green uninterrupted, vil lages falling back into forest, the smell 
of diesel oil and wood smoke. Men and wo men stepped like cranes through the rice paddies, their faces hidden by 
their wide straw hats. A boy, wet and slick as an otter, sat on the back of a du mb -faced water buffa lo, whipping its 
haunch with a stick of ba mboo. The streets became more congested, small stores and markets and men pulling carts 
loaded with gravel and timber, then the buildings grew taller, like buildings in Ha wa ii -Hotel Indonesia, very modern, 
Lo lo said, and the new shopping center, white and glea ming -but only a few we re higher than the trees that now cooled 
the road. When we passed a row of big houses with high hedges and sentry posts, my mother said something I 
couldn¡¯t entirely ma ke out, something about the government and a man na med Suka rno. 
 
 
 
 
¡°Who¡¯s Sukarno?¡± I shouted from the backseat, but Lolo appeared not to hear me. Instead, he touched my arm and 
motioned ahead of us. ¡°Look,¡± he said, pointing upward. There, standing astride the road, was a towering giant at 
least ten stories tall, with the body of a man and the face of an ape.  
 
¡°That¡¯s Hanuman,¡± Lolo said as we c ircled the statue, ¡°the monkey god.¡± I turned around in my seat, mes merized 
by the solitary figure, so dark aga inst the sun, poised to leap into the sky as puny traffic swirled a round its feet. ¡°He¡¯s 
a great warrio r,¡± Lo lo said firmly. ¡° Strong as a hundred men. When he fights the demons, he¡¯s never defeated.¡± 
 
The house was in a still-developing area on the outskirts of town. The road ran over a narrow bridge that spanned a 
wide bro wn river; as we passed, I could see villagers bathing and washing clothes along the steep banks below. The 
road then turned fro m tarmac  to gravel to dirt as it wound past small stores and whitewashed bungalows until it fina lly 
petered out into the narrow footpaths of the ka mpong. The house itself was modest stucco and red tile, but it was open 
and airy, with a b ig mango tree in the s mall courtyard in front. As we passed through the gate, Lolo announced that he 
had a surprise for me; but before he could e xpla in we heard a deafening howl fro m h igh up in the tree. My mother and 
I ju mped back with a start and saw a big, hairy creature with a s mall, flat head and long, menacing arms drop onto a 
low branch. 
 
¡°A monkey!¡±  I shouted. 
¡°An ape,¡± my mother corrected. 
 
 
Lo lo drew a peanut fro m his pocket and handed it to the anima l¡¯s grasping fingers. ¡°His name  is Tata,¡± he 
said. ¡°I brought him all the way fro m New Guinea for you.¡± 
 
I started to step forward to get a closer look, but Tata threatened to lunge, his dark-ringed eyes fierce and 
suspicious. I decided to stay where I was. 
 
¡°Don¡¯t worry,¡± Lolo said, handing Tata another peanut. ¡°He¡¯s on a leash. Co me-there¡¯s more .¡± 
 
I looked up at my mother, and she gave me a tentative smile . In the backyard, we found what seemed like a s mall zoo: 
chickens and ducks running every which way, a big ye llo w dog with a balefu l howl, t wo birds of paradise, a wh ite 
cockatoo, and finally two baby crocodiles, half submerged in a  fenced -off pond toward the edge of the compound. Lo lo 
stared down at the reptiles. ¡°There were three,¡±  he said, ¡°but the biggest one crawled out through a hole in the fence. 
Slipped into somebody¡¯s rice fie ld and ate one of the man¡¯s ducks. We had to hunt it by torchlight.¡±  
 
There wasn¡¯t much light left, but we took a short walk down the mud path into the village. Groups of giggling  
neighborhood children waved fro m their co mpounds, and a few barefoot old men ca me up to shake our hands. We 
stopped at the common, where  one of Lolo¡¯s men was grazing a fe w goats, and a small boy ca me up beside me  holding 
a dragonfly that hovered at the end of a string. When we returned to the house, the man who had carried our luggage 
was standing in the backyard with a rust-colored hen tucked under his arm and a long knife in his right hand. He said 
something to Lolo, who nodded and called over to my mot her and me . My mother told me  to wa it where  I was and sent 
Lo lo a questioning glance. 
 
¡°Don¡¯t you think he¡¯s a little young?¡± 
 
Lo lo shrugged and looked down at me . ¡°The boy should know where his dinner is co ming fro m. What do you 
think, Barry?¡± I looked at my mother, then turned back to face the man hold ing the chicken. Lo lo nodded again, and 
 
I watched the man set the bird down, pinning it gently under one knee and pulling its neck out across a narrow gutter. 
 
 
 
 
For a mo ment the bird struggled, beating its wings hard against the ground, a few feathers dancing up with the wind. 
Then it grew comp letely still. The man pulled the blade across the bird¡¯s neck in a single s mooth motion. Blood shot 
out in a long, crimson ribbon. The man stood up, holding the bird far away fro m his body, and suddenly tossed it high 
into the air. It landed with a thud, then struggled to its feet, its head lolling grotesquely  against its side, its legs pumping 
wildly in a wide, wobbly circ le. I watched as the circle gre w s malle r, the blood tric kling down to a gurgle, until finally 
the bird collapsed, life less on the grass. 
 
Lo lo rubbed his hand across my head and told me and my mother to go wash up before dinner. The three of us ate 
quietly under a dim ye llo w bulb-ch icken stew and rice, and then a dessert of red, hairy-skinned fru it so sweet at the 
center that only a stomachache could ma ke me  stop. Later, lying a lone beneath a mosquito net canopy, I listened to 
the crickets chirp under the moonlight and re me mbered the last twitch of life that I¡¯d witnessed a few hours before. I 
could barely believe my good fortune. 
 
 
¡°The first thing to reme mber is how to protect yourself.¡± 
Lo lo and I faced off in the backyard. A day earlie r, I had shown up at the house with an egg -sized lu mp on the side of 
my head. Lo lo had looked up fro m washing his motorcycle and asked me what had happened, and I told him about my 
tussle with an older boy who lived down the road. The boy had run off with my  friend¡¯s soccer ball, I said, in the 
middle o f our ga me. When I chased after him, the boy picked up a rock. It wasn¡¯t fair, I said, my voice  choking with 
aggrievement. He had cheated. 
 
Lo lo had parted my hair with his fingers and silently e xa mined the wound. ¡°It¡¯s not bleeding,¡± he said fina lly , 
before returning to his chrome . 
 
I thought that had ended the matter. But when he came  home  fro m work the ne xt day, he had with him t wo pairs 
of boxing gloves. They smelled of ne w leather, the la rger pair blac k, the smalle r pair red, the laces tied together 
and thrown over his shoulder. 
 
He now fin ished tying the laces on my gloves and stepped back to e xa mine his handiwork. My hands dangled at 
my sides like  bulbs at the ends of thin stalks. He shook his head and raised the gloves to cover my face.  
 
¡°There. Keep your hands up.¡± He adjusted my elbows, then crouched into a stance and started to bob. ¡°You want to 
keep moving, but always stay low-don¡¯t give them a target. How does that feel?¡± I nodded, copying his move ments as 
best I could. After a  fe w minutes, he stopped and held his palm up in  front of my nose. 
 
¡°Okay,¡± he said. ¡° Let ¡¯s see your swing.¡± 
This I could do. I took a step back, wound up, and delivered my best shot. His hand barely wobbled.  
 
 
¡°Not bad,¡± Lo lo said. He  nodded to himself, his e xpression unchanged. ¡°Not bad at all. Agh, b ut look 
where your hands are now. What did I tell you? Get the m up ¡­.¡±  
 
I raised my arms, throwing soft jabs at Lolo¡¯s palm, glancing up at him every so often and realizing how familiar his face 
had become after our two years together, as familiar as the earth on which we stood. It had taken me less than six months to 
learn Indonesia¡¯s language, its customs, and its legends. I had survived chicken pox, measles, and the sting of my teachers¡¯ 
bamboo switches. The children of farmers, servants, and low-level bureaucrats had become my best friends, and together 
we ran the streets morning and night, hustling odd jobs, catching crickets, battling swift kites with 
 
 
 
 
razor-sharp lines-the loser watched his kite soar off with the wind, and kne w that somewhere other children had 
formed a long wobbly train, their heads toward the sky, wa iting for their prize to land. With Lolo, I learned how to eat 
small green ch ill peppers raw with dinner (p lenty of rice), and, away fro m the dinner table , I was introduced to dog 
meat (tough), snake meat (tougher), and roasted grasshopper (crunchy). Like many Indonesians, Lolo fo llo wed a brand 
of Isla m that could ma ke roo m for the re mnants of more anc ient animist and Hindu faiths. He e xpla ined that a man 
took on the powers of whatever he ate: One day soon, he promised, he would bring ho me a piece  of tiger meat fo r us 
to share. 
 
That¡¯s how things were, one long adventure, the bounty of a young boy¡¯s life. In letters to my grandparents, I would 
faithfully record many of these events, confident that more civilizing packages of chocolate and peanut butter would surely 
follow. But not everything made its way into my letters; some things I found too difficult to explain. I didn¡¯t tell 
 
Toot and Gra mps about the face of the man who had come to our door one day with a gaping hole where h is nose 
should have been: the whistling sound he made as he asked my mother for food. Nor d id I mention the time that one 
of my friends told me in the middle  of recess that his baby brother had died the night before of an evil spirit brought in 
by the wind-the terror that danced in my friend¡¯s eyes for the briefest of mo ments before he let out a strange laugh and 
punched my arm and broke off into a breathless run. There was the empty look on  the faces of farme rs the year the 
rains never came , the stoop in their shoulders as they wandered barefoot through their barren, crac ked fie lds, bending 
over every so often to crumble  earth between their fingers; and their desperation the following year when the ra ins 
lasted for over a month, swelling the river and fields until the streets gushed with water and swept as high as my waist 
and families scra mbled to rescue their goats and their hens even as chunks of their huts washed away. 
 
The world was violent, I was learn ing, unpredictable and often cruel. My grandparents knew nothing about such a 
world, I decided; there was no point in disturbing them with questions they couldn¡¯t answer. So metimes, when my 
mother ca me  home  fro m wo rk, I would te ll her the things I had seen or heard, and she would stroke my forehead, 
listening intently, trying her best to exp lain what she could. I a lways appreciated the attention -her voice, the touch of 
her hand, defined all that was secure. But her knowledge of floods and exorc is ms and cockfights left much to be 
desired. Everything was as new to her as it was to me , and I would leave such conversations feeling that my questions 
had only given her unnecessary cause for concern. 
 
So it was to Lolo that I turned for guidance and  instruction. He didn¡¯t talk much, but he was easy to be with. With his 
fa mily and friends he introduced me as his son, but he never pressed things beyond matter-of-fact advice or pretended 
that our relationship was more  than it was. I appreciated this dis tance; it implied a man ly trust. And his knowledge of 
the world see med ine xhaustible. Not just how to change a flat tire or open in chess. He kne w more  elusive things, 
ways of managing the emotions I fe lt, ways to exp lain fate¡¯s constant mysteries. 
 
Like how to deal with beggars. They seemed to be everywhere, a gallery of ills -men, women, children, in tattered clothing 
matted with dirt, some without arms, others without feet, victims of scurvy or polio or leprosy walking on their hands or 
rolling down the crowded sidewalks in jerry-built carts, their legs twisted behind them like contortionists¡¯. At first, I watched 
my mother give over her money to anyone who stopped at our door or stretched out an arm as we passed on the streets. 
Later, when it became clear that the tide of pain was endless, she gave more selectively, learning 
 
 
 
 
to calibrate the leve ls of misery. Lolo thought her mora l ca lculations endearing but silly, and whenever he caught me 
following her e xa mp le with the fe w coins in my  possession, he would raise his eyebrows and take me  aside. 
 
¡°How much money do you have?¡± he would 
ask. I¡¯d e mpty my pocket. ¡°Thirty rupiah.¡± 
¡°How many beggars are there on the street?¡± 
 
 
 
 
 
I tried to imag ine the number that had come by the house in the last week. ¡° You see?¡± he said, once it was 
clear I¡¯d lost count. ¡°Better to save your money and ma ke sure you don¡¯t end up on the street yourself.¡± 
 
He was the same way about servants. They were mostly young villagers newly arrived in the city, often working for 
fa milies not much better off than themselves, sending money to their people back in the c ountry or saving enough to 
start their own businesses. If they had ambit ion, Lolo was willing to help them get their start, and he would generally 
tolerate their personal id iosyncrasies: for over a year, he e mp loyed a good -natured young man who liked to dress up as 
a wo man on wee kends -Lolo loved the man¡¯s cooking. But he wou ld fire the servants without compunction if they 
were c lu msy, forgetful, or otherwise cost him money; and he would be baffled when either my mother o r I tried to 
protect them fro m his judg ment. 
 
¡° Your mother has a soft heart,¡± Lolo would tell me one day after my mother t ried to take  the bla me for knocking a 
radio off the dresser. ¡°That¡¯s a good thing in a wo man. But you will be a man someday, and a man needs to have 
more  sense.¡± 
 
It had nothing to do with good or bad, he e xpla ined, like or d islike. It was a matter of ta king life on its own terms.  
I fe lt a hard knock to the ja w, and looked up at Lo lo¡¯s sweating face. 
¡°Pay attention. Keep your hands up.¡± 
We sparred for another half hour before Lolo dec ided it was time for a rest. My arms burned; my head flashed with a 
dull, steady throb. We took a jug full of water and sat down near the crocodile pond. 
 
¡°Tired?¡± he asked me. 
I slu mped forward, bare ly nodding. He s miled, and ro lled up one of his pant legs to scratch his calf. I noticed 
a series of indented scars that ran from his ankle halfway up his shin. 
 
¡°What are those?¡± 
¡°Leech ma rks,¡± he said. ¡°Fro m when I was in New Gu inea. They cra wl inside your army  boots while you¡¯re h iking 
through the swamps. At night, when you take off your socks, they¡¯re stuck there, fat with blood. You sprinkle salt on 
them and they die, but you still have to dig them out with a hot kn ife.¡±  
 
I ran my  finger over one of the oval grooves. It was s mooth and hairless where the skin had been singed. I asked Lolo 
if it had hurt. 
 
¡°Of course it hurt,¡± he said, ta king a sip fro m the jug. ¡°So met imes you can¡¯t worry about hurt. So metimes you 
worry only about getting where you have to go.¡± 
 
We fell silent, and I watched him out of the corner of my eye. I realized that I had never heard him talk about what he 
was feeling. I had never seen him really angry or sad. He see med to inhabit a world of hard surfaces and well-defined 
thoughts. A queer notion suddenly sprang into my head. 
 
¡°Have you ever seen a man killed?¡± I asked him. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
He glanced down, surprised by the question. 
¡°Have you?¡± I asked again. 
¡° Yes,¡± he said. 
¡°Was it bloody?¡± 
¡°Yes.¡± 
I thought for a mo ment. ¡°Why was the man killed? The one 
you saw?¡± ¡°Because he was weak.¡±  
¡°That¡¯s all?¡± 
Lo lo shrugged and rolled his pant leg back down. ¡°That¡¯s usually enough. Men take advantage of weakness in 
other men. They¡¯re just like countries in that way. The strong man takes the wea k man¡¯s land. He makes the wea k 
man work in his fields. If the wea k man¡¯s wo man is pretty, the strong man will take her.¡± He  paused to take another 
sip of water, then asked, ¡°Which would you rather be?¡± 
 
I didn¡¯t answer, and Lo lo squinted up at the sky. ¡°Better to be strong,¡± he said finally, rising to his feet. ¡° If you can¡¯t 
be strong, be clever and make  peace with someone who¡¯s strong. But always better to be strong yourself. Always.¡±  
 
My mother watched us from inside the house, propped up at her desk grading papers. What are they talking about? she 
wondered to herself. Blood and guts, probably; swallowing nails. Cheerful, manly things. 
 
She laughed aloud, then caught herself. That wasn¡¯t fair. She rea lly was grateful for Lo lo¡¯s solicitude toward me. He  
wouldn¡¯t have treated his own son very differently. She knew that she was lucky for Lolo¡¯s basic kindness. She set 
her papers aside and watched me do push-ups. He¡¯s growing so fast, she thought. She tried to picture herself on the 
day of our arrival, a mother of t wenty-four with a child in tow, married to a man whose history, whose country, she 
barely kne w. She had known so litt le then, she realized now, her innocence carried right along with her A merican 
passport. Things could have turned out worse. Much worse. 
 
She had e xpected it to be difficult, this new life of hers. Be fore leaving Ha waii, she had tried to learn a ll she could 
about Indonesia: the population, fifth in the world, with hun dreds of tribes and dialects; the history of colonialis m, first 
the Dutch for over three centuries, then the Japanese during the war, seeking control over vast stores of oil, metal, and 
timber; the fight for independence after the war and the e mergence of a freedo m fighter na med Su karno as the 
country¡¯s first president. Sukarno had recently been replaced, but all the reports said it had been a bloodless coup, and 
that the people supported the change. Sukarno had grown corrupt, they said; he was a demagogue, totalitarian, too 
comfo rtable with the Co mmun ists. 
 
A poor country, underdeveloped, utterly foreign -this much she had known. She was prepared for the dysentery and 
fevers, the cold water baths and having to squat over a hole in the ground to pee, the elec tric ity¡¯s going out every few 
weeks, the heat and endless mosquitoes. Nothing more  than inconveniences, really, and she was tougher than she 
looked, tougher than even she had known herself to be. And anyway, that was part of what had drawn her to Lolo 
after Barac k had le ft, the pro mise of so mething new and important, help ing her husband rebuild a country in a 
charged and challenging place beyond her parents¡¯ reach. 
 
 
 
 
But she wasn¡¯t prepared for the loneliness. It was constant, like a shortness of breath. There was nothing definite that 
she could point to, really. Lolo had welco med her wa rmly and gone out of his way to ma ke her feel at ho me, 
providing her with whatever creature co mforts he could afford. His fa mily had treated her with tact and generosity, 
and treated her son as one of their own. 
 
Still, something had happened between her and Lolo in the year that they had been apart. In Ha waii he had been so 
full of life, so eager with his plans. At night when they were alone, he would te ll her about growing up as a boy 
during the war, watching his  father and eldest brother leave to join the revolutionary army, hearing the news that both 
had been killed and everything lost, the Dutch army¡¯s setting their house aflame , their flight into the countryside, his 
mother¡¯s selling her gold jewe lry a  piece at a t ime in e xchange for food. Things would be changing now that the 
 
Dutch had been driven out, Lolo had told her; he would return and teach at the university, be a part of that change. He 
didn¡¯t talk that way anymore. In fact, it seemed as though he barely spoke to her at all, only out of necessity or 
 
when spoken to, and even then only of the task at hand, repairing a leak or planning a t rip to visit so me distant cousin. 
It was as if he had pulled into some dark h idden place, out of reach, taking with hi m the brightest part of himself. On 
some nights, she would hear him up after everyone else had gone to bed, wandering through the house with a bottle of 
imported wh iskey, nursing his secrets. Other nights he would tuck a pistol under his pillow before fall ing off to sleep. 
Whenever she asked him what was wrong, he would gently rebuff her, saying he was just tired. It was as if he had 
come to mistrust words somehow. Words, and the sentiments words carried.  
 
She suspected these problems had something to do with Lo lo¡¯s job. He was working for the army as a geologist, 
surveying roads and tunnels, when she arrived. It was mind -nu mbing work that didn¡¯t pay very much; the refrigerator 
alone cost two months¡¯ salary. And now with a wife and child to provide for¡­no wo nder he was depressed. She 
hadn¡¯t traveled all this way to be a burden, she decided. She would carry her own weight.  
 
She found herself a job right away teaching English to Indonesian businessmen at the American e mbassy, part of the  
 
U.S. fo reign a id package to developing countries. The money helped but didn¡¯t relieve her loneliness. The Indonesian 
businessmen we ren¡¯t much interested in the niceties of the English language, and several made passes at her. The 
Americans were mostly older men, ca reerists in the State Department, the occasional economist or journalist who 
would mysteriously disappear for months at a time, their a ffiliat ion or function in the e mbassy never quite clear. So me 
of them were  caricatures of the ugly American, prone to ma king jokes about Indonesians until they found out that she 
was ma rried to one, and then they would try to play it off-Don¡¯t take Jim too seriously, the heat¡¯s gotten to him, 
how¡¯s your son by the way, fine, fine boy. 
 
These men knew the country, though, or parts of it anyway, the closets where the skeletons were buried. Over lunch or 
casual conversation they would share with her things she couldn¡¯t learn in the published news reports. They exp lained 
how Sukarno had frayed badly the nerves of a U.S. government already obsessed with the march o f co mmunis m 
through Indochina, what with h is nationalist rhetoric and his politics of nonalignment -he was as bad as Lu mu mba or 
 
Nasser, only worse, given Indonesia¡¯s strategic importance. Word was that the CIA ha d played a part in the coup, 
although nobody knew for sure. More  certain was the fact that after the coup the milita ry had swept the countryside 
for supposed Communist sympathize rs. The death toll was anybody¡¯s guess: a few hundred thousand, maybe; half a 
million. Even the sma rt guys at the Agency had lost count. 
 
 
 
 
Innuendo, half-whispered asides; that¡¯s how she found out that we had arrived  in Dja karta less than a year after one of 
the more bruta l and swift ca mpa igns of suppression in modern times. The idea frightened her, the notion that history 
could be swallowed up so comp letely, the same way the rich and loa my earth could soak up the riv ers of b lood that had 
once coursed through the streets; the way people could continue about their business beneath giant posters of the new 
president as if nothing had happened, a nation busy developing itself. As her circle  of Indonesian friends widened,  a 
few of them would be willing to tell her other stories -about the corruption that pervaded government agencies, the 
shakedowns by police and the military, entire industries carved out for the president¡¯s family and entourage. And with 
each new story, she would go to Lolo in private and ask him: ¡°Is it true?¡± 
 
He would never say. The mo re she asked, the more steadfast he became in his good -natured silence. ¡°Why are you 
worry ing about such talk?¡± he would ask her. ¡°Why don¡¯t you buy a new dress for the party ?¡± She had finally 
compla ined to one of Lo lo¡¯s cousins, a pediatrician who had helped look after Lo lo during the wa r.  
 
¡° You don¡¯t understand,¡± the cousin had told 
her gently. ¡°Understand what?¡± 
 
 
¡°The circu mstances of Lolo¡¯s return. He hadn¡¯t planned on coming back fro m Ha wa ii so early, you know. Du ring 
the purge, all students studying abroad had been summoned without explanation, their passports revoked. When 
Lo lo stepped off the plane, he had no idea of what might happen next. We couldn¡¯t see him; the army  officia ls took 
him a way and questioned him. They told him that he had just been conscripted and would be going to the jungles of 
New Gu inea for a  year. And he was one of the lucky ones. Students studying in Eastern Bloc countries did much 
worse. Many of them a re still in jail. Or vanished. 
 
¡° You shouldn¡¯t be too hard on Lolo,¡± the cousin repeated. ¡°Such times are best forgotten.¡± 
My mother had le ft the cousin¡¯s house in a daze. Outside, the sun was high, the air fu ll of dust, but instead of taking a  
taxi ho me, she began to walk without direction. She found herself in a  wea lthy neighborhood where the diplo mats and 
generals lived in sprawling houses with tall wrought-iron gates. She saw a wo man in bare  feet and a tattered shawl 
wandering through an open gate and up the driveway, where a  group of men we re washing a fleet of Mercedes -Benzes 
and Land Rovers. One of the men shouted at the woman to leave, but the wo man stood where she was, a bony arm 
stretched out before her, her face shrouded in shadow. Ano ther man finally dug in his pocket and threw out a handful 
of coins. The wo man ran a fter the coins with terrible speed, checking the road suspiciously as she gathered them into 
her bosom. 
 
Power. The wo rd fixed in my mother¡¯s mind like a  curse. In A merica, it had generally re ma ined hidden fro m vie w 
until you dug beneath the surface of things; until you visited an Indian reservation or spoke to a black person whose 
trust you had earned. But here power was undisguised, indiscriminate, na ked, always fresh in t he me mory. Powe r had 
taken Lo lo and yanked him back into line just when he thought he¡¯d escaped, ma king him fee l its weight, lett ing him 
know that his life wasn¡¯t his own. That¡¯s how things were; you couldn¡¯t change it, you could just live by the rules, so  
simp le once you learned them. And so Lolo had made his peace with power, learned the wisdom of forgetting; just as 
his brother-in-la w had done, making millions as a high offic ial in the national o il co mpany; just as another brother had 
tried to do, only he had miscalculated and was now reduced to stealing pieces of silverwa re whenever he came for a  
visit, selling them later for loose cigarettes. 
 
 
 
 
She re me mbe red what Lolo  had told her once when her constant questioning had finally touched a nerve. ¡° Guilt is a 
lu xury only fore igners can afford,¡± he had said. ¡° Like  saying whatever pops into your head.¡± She didn¡¯t know what it 
was  like  to  lose  everything,  to  wa ke   up  and  fee l  her  be lly   eating  itself.  She   didn¡¯t  know  how  c rowded  and 
treacherous the path to security could be. Without absolute concentration, one could easily slip, tu mb le backward.  
 
He was right, of course. She was a fore igner, middle -class and white and protected by her heredity whether she 
wanted protection or not. She could always leave if things got too messy. That possibility negated anything she might 
say to Lolo; it was the unbreachable barrie r between them. She looked out the window now and saw that Lolo and I had 
moved on, the grass flattened where the two of us had been. The sight made her shudder slightly, and she rose to her 
feet, filled with a sudden panic. 
 
Power was taking her son. 
 
 
Looking back, I¡¯m not sure that Lolo ever fully understood what my mother was going through during these years, 
why the things he was working so hard to provide for her seemed only to increase the distance between them. He was 
not a man to ask himself such questions. Instead, he maintained his concentration, and over the period that we lived in 
Indonesia, he proceeded to climb. W ith the help of his brother-in-la w, he landed a new job in the government 
relations office of an A merican oil co mpany. We moved to a house in a bette r neighborhood; a car replaced the 
motorcycle; a te levision and hi-fi replaced the crocodiles and Tata, the ape; Lolo could sign fo r our dinners at a 
company club. So met imes I would overhear him and my mother a rguing in their bedroom, usually about her ref usal to 
attend his company dinner parties, where  A merican businessmen fro m Te xas and Louisiana would slap Lolo¡¯s back 
and boast about the palms they had greased to obtain the new offshore drilling rights, while their wives comp lained to 
my mother about the quality of Indonesian help. He would ask her how it would look for h im to go alone, and re mind 
her that these were her own people, and my mother¡¯s voice would rise to almost a shout. 
 
They are not my people. 
 
Such arguments were rare, though; my mother an d Lolo would re main cord ial through the birth of my sister, Maya, 
through the separation and eventual divorce, up until the last time I saw Lo lo, ten years later, when my mother he lped 
him travel to Los Angeles to treat a liver ailment that would kill h im at the age of fifty-one. What tension I noticed had 
ma inly to do with the gradual shift in my mother¡¯s attitude toward me. She had always encouraged my rap id 
acculturation in Indonesia: It had made me  re latively self-suffic ient, undemanding on a tight budget, and extre me ly 
well mannered when compared to other A merican children. She had taught me to d isdain the blend of ignorance and 
arrogance that too often characterized A mericans abroad. But she now had learned, just as Lolo had lea rned, the 
chasm that separated the life chances of an Ame rican fro m those of an Indonesian. She kne w which side of the div ide 
she wanted her child to be on. I was an A merican, she decided, and my true life  lay e lsewhere.  
 
Her init ial efforts centered on education. Without the mon ey to send me to the International School, where  most of 
 
Dja karta¡¯s fore ign children went, she had arranged fro m the mo ment of our arrival to supplement my 
Indonesian schooling with lessons from a  U.S. correspondence course. 
 
Her efforts now redoubled. Five days a week, she came into my room at four in the morning, force-fed me breakfast, and 
proceeded to teach me my English lessons for three hours before I left for school and she went to work. I offered 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stiff resistance to this regimen, but in response to every strategy I concocted, whether unconvincing (¡°My stomach 
hurts¡±) or indisputably true (my eyes kept closing every five minutes), she would patiently repeat her  most 
powerful de fense: 
 
¡°This is no picnic for me e ither, buster.¡± 
Then there were the periodic  concerns with my safety, the voice of my grand mother ascendant. I re me mbe r co ming 
home after dark one day to find a la rge search party of neighbors that had be en assembled in our yard. My mother 
didn¡¯t look happy, but she was so relieved to see me that it took he r several minutes to notice a wet sock, bro wn with 
mud, wrapped around my forearm. 
 
¡°What¡¯s that?¡± 
¡°What?¡± 
¡°That. Why do you have a sock wrapped around 
your arm?¡± ¡°I cut myself.¡±  
¡°Let¡¯s see.¡± 
¡°It¡¯s not that bad.¡± 
¡°Barry. Let me  see it.¡±  
I unwrapped the sock, e xposing a long gash that ran from my wrist to my e lbow. It had missed the vein by an inch, 
but ran deeper at the muscle, where  pinkish flesh pulsed out from under the skin. Hoping to calm her down, I e xpla ined 
what had happened: A friend and I had hitchhiked out to his fa mily¡¯s farm, and it started to rain, and on the farm was a 
terrific  place to mudslide, and there was this barbed wire that marked the farm¡¯s boundaries, and¡­.  
 
¡°Lolo !¡± 
My mother laughs at this point when she tells this story, the laughter of a mother forg iving her ch ild those sins that 
have passed. But her tone alters slightly as she reme mbers that Lo lo suggested we wa it until morning to get me 
stitched up, and that she had to browbeat our only neighbor with a ca r to drive us to the hospital. She re me mbers that 
most of the lights were out at the hospital when we a rrived, with no receptionist in sight; she recalls the sound of her 
frantic footsteps echoing through the hallway until she fina lly found two young men in bo xer shorts playing dominoes 
in a s mall room in the back. When she asked them where the doctors were, the men cheerfully rep lied ¡°We are the 
doctors¡± and went on to finish their ga me  before slipping on their trousers and giving me twenty stitches that would 
leave an ugly scar. And through it all was the pervading sense that her child¡¯s life might slip a way when she wasn¡¯t 
looking, that everyone else around her would be too busy trying to survive to notice -that, when it counted, she would 
have plenty of sympathy but no one beside her who believed in fighting against a threatening fate. 
 
It was those sorts of issues, I rea lize  now, less tangible than school transcripts or medical services, that became  the 
focus of her  lessons with  me. ¡°If you want to gro w  into a hu man be ing,¡± she would say to  me, ¡°you¡¯re going to 
need some values.¡± 
 
Honesty-Lolo should not have hidden the refrige rator in the storage room when the tax offic ials ca me, even if 
everyone else, including the tax offic ials, e xpected such things. Fairness -the parents of wealthier students should not 
give television sets to the teachers during Ra madan, and their children could take no pride in the higher marks they 
might have received. Stra ight talk-if you didn¡¯t like the shirt I bought you for your birthday, you should have just said 
 
 
 
 
so instead of keeping it wadded up at the bottom of your closet. Independent judgment -just because the 
other children tease the poor boy about his haircut doesn¡¯t mean you have to do it too. 
 
It was as if, by traveling halfway around the globe, away fro m the smugness and hypocrisy that familia rity had 
disclosed, my mother could give voice to the virtues of her mid western past and offer them up in distilled form. The 
problem was that she had few reinfo rce ments; whenever she took me aside fo r such commentary, I wou ld dutifully 
nod my assent, but she must have known that many of her ideas seemed rather imp ractica l. Lo lo had mere ly e xp lained 
the poverty, the corruption, the constant scramb le for security; he hadn¡¯t created it. It re ma ined all a round me and bred 
a relentless skepticism. My mother¡¯s confidence in needlepoint virtues depended on a faith I didn¡¯t possess, a faith 
that she would refuse to describe as religious; that, in fact, her e xpe rien ce told her was sacrilegious: a fa ith that 
rational, thoughtful people could shape their own destiny. In a land where fatalism re ma ined a necessary tool for 
enduring hardship, where u ltimate t ruths were kept separate fro m day -to-day realities, she was a lonely witness for 
secular humanis m, a  soldier for New Dea l, Peace Corps, position -paper libera lism. 
 
She had only one ally in all this, and that was the distant authority of my father. Increasingly, she would re mind me 
of his story, how he had grown up poor, in a poor country, in a poor continent; how his life  had been hard, as hard as 
anything that Lolo might have known. He hadn¡¯t cut corners, though, or played all the angles. He was diligent and 
honest, no matter what it cost him. He  had led his life according to princ iples that demanded a different kind of 
toughness, princip les that promised a higher fo rm of power. I would follow h is e xa mple , my mother decided. I had no 
choice. It was in the genes. 
 
¡° You have me to thank for your eyebrows¡­your father has t hese little wispy eyebrows that don¡¯t amount to much. 
But your brains, your character, you got fro m him.¡±  
 
Her message came to embrace  black people generally. She would co me ho me with books on the civil rights 
move ment, the recordings of Mahalia Jackson, the speeches of Dr. King. When she told me  stories of schoolchildren in 
the South who were forced to read books handed down fro m wea lthier white schools but who went on to become 
doctors and lawyers and scientists, I felt chastened by my reluctance to wake up and study in the mornings. If I told her 
about the goose-stepping demonstrations my Indonesian Boy Scout troop performed in front of the president, she 
might mention a different kind of march, a ma rch of children no older than me, a ma rch for freedo m. Every blac k man 
was Thurgood Marshall or Sidney Poit ier; every b lack wo man Fannie  Lou Ha me r or Lena Horne. To be blac k was to 
be the beneficiary of a  great inheritance, a special destiny, glorious burdens that only we were  strong enough to bear. 
Burdens we we re to carry with style. More than once, my mother would point out: ¡°Ha rry Be lafonte is the best -looking 
man on the planet.¡± 
 
It was in this context that I came across the picture in Life magazine of the black man who had tried to peel off his skin. I 
imagine other black children, then and now, undergoing similar mo ments of revelation. Perhaps it comes sooner for most -the 
parent¡¯s warning not to cross the boundaries of a particular neighborhood, or the frustration of not having hair like Barbie no 
matter how long you tease and comb, or the tale of a father¡¯s or grandfather¡¯s humiliation at the hands of an employer or a 
cop, overheard while you¡¯re supposed to be asleep. Maybe it¡¯s easier for a child to receive 
 
 
 
 
the bad news in small doses, allowing for a system of defenses to build up -although I suspect I was one of the 
luckier ones, having been given a stretch of childhood free fro m self-doubt. 
 
I know that seeing that article was violent for me, an ambush attack. My mother had warned me about bigots -they were 
ignorant, uneducated people one should avoid. If I could not yet cons ider my own mortality, Lolo had helped me understand 
the potential of disease to cripple, of accidents to maim, of fortunes to decline. I could correctly identify common greed or 
cruelty in others, and sometimes even in myself. But that one photograph had told me something else: that there was a 
hidden enemy out there, one that could reach me without anyone¡¯s knowledge, not even my own. 
 
When I got home that night fro m the e mbassy library, I went into the bathroom and stood in front of the mirror with all 
my senses and limbs seemingly intact, looking as I had a lways looked, and wondered if so mething was wrong with me . 
The alternative seemed no less frightening-that the adults around me lived in the midst of madness. 
 
The init ial flush of anxiety would pass, and I would spend my re main ing year in Indonesia much as I had before. I 
retained a confidence that was not always justified and an irrepressible talent for mischief. But my vision had been 
permanently a ltered. On the imported television shows that had started running in the evenings, I began to notice that 
Cosby never got the girl on I Spy, that the black man on Mission Impossible spent all his time  underground. I noticed 
that there was nobody like me  in the Sears, Roebuck Christmas catalog that Toot and Gra mps sent us, and that Santa 
was a white man. 
 
I kept these observations to myself, dec iding that either my mother d idn¡¯t see them or she was trying to protect me and 
that I shouldn¡¯t e xpose her efforts as having failed. I still t rusted my mother¡¯s love -but I now faced the prospect that her 
account of the world, and my father¡¯s place in it, was somehow inco mplete.  
 
 
 
CHAPTER THREE 
 
 
I T TOOK M E A while to recognize  them in the crowd. When the sliding doors first parted, all I could ma ke out was 
the blur of s miling, an xious faces tilted over the guardrail. Eventually I spotted a tall, silver-ha ired man towa rd the rear 
of  the  crowd,  with  a  short,  owlish  woman  bare ly  visible  beside  him.  The  pair  began  to  wave  in  my  d irection,  but 
before I could wave back they disappeared behind frosted glass. 
 
I looked to the front of the line, where  a Chinese fa mily see med to be having some proble ms with the customs 
offic ia ls. They had been a lively bunch during the flight fro m Hong Kong, the father taking off h is shoes and padding 
up and down the aisles, the children c la mbering over seats, the mother and grandmother hoarding pillo ws and 
blankets and chattering endlessly to one another. Now the fa mily was standing absolutely still, trying to will 
themselves invisible, their eyes silently fo llo wing the hands that  riffled through their passports and luggage with a 
menac ing calm. The father re minded me  of Lo lo somehow, and I looked down at the wooden mask I was carrying in 
my hand. It was a gift fro m the Indonesian copilot, a friend of my mother¡¯s who had led me a wa y as she and Lolo and 
my ne w sister, Maya, stood by at the gate. I closed my eyes and pressed the mask to my face . The wood had a nutty, 
cinnamon s mell, and I fe lt myself drifting back across oceans and over the clouds, into the violet horizon, bac k to the  
place where I had once been¡­. 
 
 
 
 
Someone shouted out my na me. The mask dropped to my side, and with it my  daydream, and I saw my grandparents 
again standing there, waving almost frantically now. This time  I waved back; and then, without thinking, I brought the 
mask aga in up to my face, swaying my  head in an odd litt le dance. My grandparents laughed and pointed at me and 
waved some more until the customs offic ial finally tapped me on the  shoulder and asked me if I was an Ame rican. I 
nodded and handed him my  passport. 
 
¡° Go ahead,¡± he said, and told the Chinese fa mily to step to one side. 
 
 
The sliding doors closed behind me. Toot gathered me into a hug and tossed candy -and-chewing-gum leis around my 
neck. Gra mps threw an arm over my  shoulder and said that the mask was a definite improve ment. They took me to the 
new car they had bought, and Gra mps showed me  how to operate the air-condit ioning. We drove along the highway, 
past fast-food restaurants and economy motels and used-car lots strung with festoons. I told them about the trip and 
everyone back in Djaka rta. Gra mps told me what they¡¯d plan ned for my welco me-bac k dinner. Toot suggested that I¡¯d 
need new clothes for school. 
 
Then, suddenly, the conversation stopped. I realized that I was to live with strangers. 
The new arrangement hadn¡¯t sounded so bad when my mother first explained it to me. It was time for me to attend an 
American school, she had said; I¡¯d run through all the lessons of my correspondence course. She said that she and 
 
Maya would be join ing me in Ha wa ii very soon -a year, tops-and that she¡¯d try to make it there for Christmas . She 
re minded me of what a great t ime I¡¯d had liv ing with Gra mps and Toot just the previous summe r-the ice  crea m, the 
cartoons, the days at the beach. ¡°And you won¡¯t have to wake up at four in the morn ing,¡± she said, a point that I 
found most compelling. 
 
It was only now, as I began to adjust to an indefinite stay and watched my grandparents in the rhythm of their 
schedules, that I realized how much the two of the m had changed. After my mother and I left, they had sold the big, 
ra mbling house near the university and now rented a small, two-bedroo m apart ment in a high-rise on Be retania Street. 
Gra mps had left the furn iture business to become a life insurance agent, but as he was unable to convince himself that 
people needed what he was selling and was sensitive to rejection, the work went badly. Every Sunday night, I would 
watch him gro w mo re and more irritable  as he gathered his briefcase and set up a TV tray in front of his chair, 
following the lead of every possible distraction, until finally he would chas e us out of the living roo m and try to 
schedule appointments with prospective clients over the phone. Sometimes I would t iptoe into the kitchen for a  soda, 
and I could hear the desperation creeping out of his voice, the stretch of silence that followed whe n the people on the 
other end expla ined why Thursday wasn¡¯t good and Tuesday not much better, and then Gra mps¡¯s heavy sigh after he 
had hung up the phone, his hands fumbling through the files in h is lap like those of a cardplayer who¡¯s deep in the 
hole. Eventually, a few people would relent, the pain would pass, and Gra mps would wander into my roo m to tell me  
stories of his youth or the new joke he had read in Reader¡¯s Digest. If h is calls had gone especially we ll that night, he 
might discuss with me some  s cheme he still harbored-the book of poe ms he had started to write, the sketch that would 
soon bloom into a painting, the floor plans for his ideal house, complete with push -button conveniences and terraced 
landscaping. I saw that the plans grew bolder the further they receded fro m possibility, but in the m I recognized some 
of his old enthusiasm, and I would usually t ry to think up encouraging questions that might sustain his good mood.  
 
 
 
 
Then, somewhere in the middle of h is presentation, we would both notice Toot standing in the hall outside 
my roo m, her head tilted in accusation. 
 
¡°What do you want, Madelyn?¡± 
¡°Are you finished with your calls, dear?¡±  
¡° Yes, Madelyn. I¡¯m fin ished with my calls. It¡¯s ten o¡¯cloc k at night!¡±  
¡°There¡¯s no need to holler, Stanley. I just wanted to know if I could go into the kitchen.¡± 
 
 
 
 
¡°I¡¯m not hollering! Jesus H. Christ, I don¡¯t understand why -¡± But before he could finish, Toot would have retreated 
into their bedroom, and Gra mps would leave my roo m with a look of deject ion and rage. 
 
Such e xchanges became fa miliar to me, for my  grandparents¡¯ arguments followed a well -worn groove, a groove 
that originated in the rare ly mentioned fact that Toot earned more money than Gra mps. She had proved to be a 
trailb la zer o f sorts, the first wo man vice-p resident of a local bank, and a lthough Gra mps liked to say that he always 
encouraged her in her ca reer, her job had become a source of delicacy and bitterness between them as his 
commissions paid fewer and fe wer of the fa mily¡¯s bills. 
 
Not that Toot had anticipated her success. Without a college education, she had started out as a secretary to help 
defray the costs of my une xpected birth. But she had a quick mind and sound judgment, and the capacity for sustained 
work. Slo wly she had risen, playing by the rules, until she reached the threshold where co mpetence didn¡¯t suffice.  
 
There she would stay for twenty years, with scarcely a vacation, watching as her ma le counterparts kept moving up the 
corporate ladder, playing a b it loose with information passed on between the ninth hole and the ride to the clubhouse, 
becoming wealthy men. 
 
More than once, my mother would tell Toot that the bank shouldn¡¯t get away with such blatant sexism. But Toot 
would just pooh-pooh my mother¡¯s re ma rks, saying that everybody could find a reason to complain about something. 
Toot didn¡¯t compla in. Every mo rning, she woke up at five A.M. an d changed from the frowsy muu-muus she wore 
around the apartment into a tailored suit and high -heeled pumps. Her face powdered, her h ips girdled, her thinning hair 
bolstered, she would board the six-thirty bus to arrive at her downtown office befo re anyone else. Fro m t ime to t ime, 
she would admit  a grudging pride in her work and took pleasure in telling us the inside story behind the local financia l 
news. When I got older, though, she would confide in me  that she had never stopped dreaming of a house with a  wh ite 
picket fence, days spent baking or play ing bridge or volunteering at the local libra ry. I was surprised by this admission, 
for she rarely mentioned hopes or regrets. It may or may not have been true that she would have preferred the 
alternative history she imag ined for herself, but I ca me  to understand that her career spanned a time when the work of a  
wife outside the home was nothing to brag about, for her or for Gra mps -that it represented only lost years, broken 
promises. What Toot believed kept her going we re the needs of her grandchildren and the stoicism o f her ancestors. 
 
¡°So long as you kids do well, Bar,¡± she would say more  than once, ¡°that¡¯s all that rea lly matters.¡±  
 
That¡¯s how my grandparents had come to live. They still prepared sashimi fo r the now-infrequent guests to their 
apartment. Gra mps still wo re Hawa iian shirts to the office , and Toot still insisted on being called  Toot. Otherwise, 
though, the ambit ions they had carried with the m to Ha waii had slowly d rained a way, until regularity -of schedules 
and pastimes and the weather-beca me their principa l consolation. They would occasionally gru mb le about how the 
Japanese had taken over the islands, how the Chinese controlled island finance. Du ring the Watergate hearings, my  
 
 
 
 
mother would pry out of them that they had voted for Nixon, the la w-and-order candidate, in 1968. We d idn¡¯t go to the 
beach or on hikes together anymore; at night, Gra mps watched television while Toot sat in her room reading mu rder 
mysteries. Their principal e xc ite ment now ca me fro m new drapes or a stand -alone free zer. It was as if they had 
bypassed the satisfactions that should come with the middle  years, the convergence of maturity with time left, ene rgy 
with means, a recognition of accomp lishment that frees the spirit. At some point in my  absence, they had decided to 
cut their losses and settle for hanging on. They saw no more destinations to hope for. 
 
As the summe r dre w to a c lose, I beca me increasingly restless to start school. My ma in concern was finding 
companions my own age; but for my  grandparents, my ad mission into Punahou Academy heralded the start of 
something grand, an elevation in the fa mily status that they took great pains to let everyone  know. Started by 
missionaries in 1841, Punahou had grown into a prestigious prep school, an incubator for island elites. Its reputation 
had helped sway my mother in he r decision to send me back to the States: It hadn¡¯t been easy to get me in, my 
grandparents told her; there was a long waiting list, and I was considered only because of the intervention of Gra mps¡¯s 
boss, who was an alumnus (my first expe rience with affirmat ive action, it seems, had little to do with race).  
 
I had gone for several intervie ws with Punahou¡¯s admissions officer the previous summe r. She was a brisk, e ffic ient -
looking wo man who didn¡¯t see m fa zed that my feet bare ly reached the floor as she grilled me on my caree r goals. After 
the interview, the wo man had sent Gra mps and me on a tou r of the ca mpus, a co mple x that spread over several acres of 
lush green fields and shady trees, old masonry schoolhouses and modern structures of glass and steel. There were tennis 
courts, swimming pools, and photography studios. At one point, we fe ll behind the guide, and Gra mps grabbed me by 
the arm. 
 
¡°Hell, Ba r,¡± he whispered, ¡°this isn¡¯t a school. This is heaven. You might just get me  to go back to school with you.¡±  
 
With my ad mission notice had come a thic k packet of information that Toot set aside to pore over one Saturday 
afternoon. ¡°Welcome to the Punahou family,¡± the letter announced. A locker had been assigned to me; I was enrolled in  
a meal plan unless a box was  checked; there was a list of things to buy-a uniform for physical education, scissors, a 
ruler, nu mber two pencils, a ca lculator (optional). Gra mps spent the evening reading the entire school catalog, a thick 
book that listed my e xpected progression through the next seven years -the college prep courses, the extracurricula r 
activities, the traditions of we ll-rounded excellence. With each new ite m, Gra mps grew mo re and more an imated; 
several times he got up, with his thumb saving his place, and headed toward  the room where Toot was reading, h is 
voice full of a ma ze ment: ¡°Madelyn, get a load of this!¡±  
 
So it was with a great rush of e xc ite ment that Gra mps accompanied me on my  first day of school. He had insisted that 
we arrive ea rly, and Castle Hall, the building fo r the fifth and sixth graders, was not yet opened. A handful of child ren 
had already arrived, busy catching up on the summe r¡¯s news. We sat beside a slender Ch inese boy who had a large 
dental retainer strapped around his neck. 
 
¡°Hi there,¡± Gra mps said to the boy. ¡°This here¡¯s Barry. I¡¯m Barry¡¯s grandfather. You can call me  Gra mps.¡± 
He shook hands with the boy, whose name was Frederic k. ¡° Ba rry¡¯s new.¡±  
 
¡°Me too,¡± Frederic k said, and the two of the m launched into a lively conversation. I sat, embarrassed, until the 
doors finally opened and we went up the stairs to our classroom. At the door, Gra mps slapped both of us on the back. 
 
 
 
 
 
¡°Don¡¯t do anything I would do,¡± he said with a grin.  
¡° Your grandfather¡¯s funny,¡± Frederic k said as we watched Gra mps introduce himself to Miss Hefty, 
our homeroo m teacher. 
 
¡° Yeah. He  is.¡± 
 
 
We sat at a table with four other children, and Miss Hefty, an energetic middle -aged wo man with short gray hair, 
took attendance. When she read my fu ll na me, I heard titters break across the room. Frederic k leaned over to me .  
 
¡°I thought your name was Barry.¡±  
¡°Would you prefer if we ca lled you Barry?¡± Miss Hefty asked. ¡°Ba rack is such a beautiful na me. Your grandfather 
tells me your father is Kenyan. I used to live in Kenya, you know. Teach ing children just your age. It¡¯s such a 
magnificent country. Do you know what tribe your father is fro m?¡±  
 
Her question brought on more g iggles, and I re ma ined speechless for a mo ment. When I finally said ¡° Luo,¡± a 
sandy-haired boy behind me repeated the word in a  loud hoot, like  the sound of a monkey. The children could no 
longer contain themselves, and it took a stern reprimand fro m M iss Hefty before the class would settle down and 
we could me rcifully move on to the next person on the list. 
 
I spent the rest of the day in a daze. A redheaded girl asked to touch my hair and seemed hurt when I refused. A ruddy -
faced boy asked me if my father ate people. When I got home, Gramps was in the middle of preparing dinner. 
 
¡°So how was it? Isn¡¯t it terrific  that Miss Hefty used to live in Kenya? Makes the first day a little  easier, I¡¯ll bet.¡± 
I went into my roo m and closed the door. 
 
The novelty of having me in the class quickly wore off fo r the other kids, although my sense that I didn¡¯t belong 
continued to grow. The clothes that Gra mps and I had chosen for me  we re too old -fashioned; the Indonesian sandals 
that had served me so well in Dja karta were dowdy. Most of my c lassmates had been together since kindergarten; 
they lived in the same ne ighborhoods, in split-level ho mes with swimming pools; their fathers coached the same Little  
League tea ms; their mothers sponsored the bake sales. Nobody played soccer or badminton or chess, and I had no 
idea how to throw a football in a spira l or balance on a skateboard. 
 
A ten-year-old¡¯s night mare.  Still,  in   my d iscomfo rt that first  month,  I  was no  worse off than the other children 
who  were   re legated  to  the  category  of  misfits -the  girls  who  were   too  tall  or  too  shy,  the  boy  who  was  mild ly 
hyperactive, the kids whose asthma e xcused them fro m PE.  
 
There was one other child in my c lass, though, who reminded me of a  different sort of pain. Her na me was Coretta, 
and before my a rrival she had been the only black person in our grade. She was plu mp and dark and didn¡¯t seem to 
have many friends. Fro m the first day, we avoided each other but watched from a  distance, as if direct cont act 
would only re mind us mo re keen ly of our isolation.  
 
Finally, during recess one hot, cloudless day, we found ourselves occupying the same corner of the playground. I 
don¡¯t reme mbe r what we said to each other, but I re me mbe r that suddenly she was chasing  me around the jungle 
gyms and swings. She was laughing brightly, and I teased her and dodged this way and that, until she finally caught 
me  and we fell to the ground breathless. When I looked up, I saw a g roup of children, face less before the glare of 
the sun, pointing down at us. 
 
¡°Coretta has a boyfriend! Co retta has a boyfriend!¡± 
 
 
 
 
 
The chants grew louder as a fe w more  kids circ led us. 
¡°She¡¯s not my g-girlfriend,¡± I stammered. I looked to Coretta for so me assistance, but she just stood there looking 
down at the ground. ¡°Coretta¡¯s got a boyfriend! Why don¡¯t you kiss her, mister boyfriend?¡±  
 
¡°I¡¯m not her boyfriend!¡± I shouted. I ran up to Coretta and gave her a sligh t shove; she staggered back and looked 
up at me, but still said nothing. ¡° Leave me a lone!¡± I shouted again. And suddenly Coretta was running, faster and 
faster, until she disappeared from sight. Appreciative laughs rose around me. Then the bell rang, and t he teachers 
appeared to round us back into class. 
 
For the rest of the afternoon, I was haunted by the look on Coretta¡¯s face just before she had started to run: her 
disappointment, and the accusation. I wanted to expla in to her somehow that it had been nothing personal; I¡¯d just 
never had a girlfriend before and saw no particular need to have one now. But I d idn¡¯t even know if that was true. I 
knew only that it was too late for e xplanations, that somehow I¡¯d been tested and found wanting; and whenever I 
snuck a glance at Coretta¡¯s desk, I would see her with her head bent over her work, appearing as if nothing had 
happened, pulled into herself and asking no favors. 
 
My act of betrayal bought me some roo m fro m the other children, and like Co retta, I was mostly left a lone. I made a 
few friends, learned to speak less often in class, and managed to toss a wobbly football around. But fro m that day 
forwa rd, a part of me felt t ra mpled on, c rushed, and I took refuge in the life  that my grandparents led. After school let 
out, I would walk the five b locks to our apartment; if I had any change in my pockets, I might stop off at a newsstand 
run by a blind man, who would let me  know what new co mics had come  in. Gra mps would be at home  to let me  into 
the apartment, and as he lay down for h is afternoon nap, I would watch cartoons and sitcom reruns. At four  -thirty, I 
would wa ke Gra mps and we would drive downtown to pick up Toot. My home work would  be done in time  for dinner, 
which we ate in front of the television. The re I would stay for the rest of the evening, negotiating with Gra mps over 
which progra ms to watch, sharing the latest snack food he¡¯d discovered at the superma rket. At ten o¡¯c lock, I  went to 
my roo m ( Johnny Carson came on at that time, and there was no negotiating around that), and I would fa ll asleep to 
the sounds of Top 40 music on the radio. 
 
Nested in the soft, forgiving bosom of A merica¡¯s consumer culture, I felt safe; it was as if I had dropped into a long 
hibernation. I wonder sometimes how long I might have stayed there had it not been for the telegra m Toot found in 
the ma ilbo x one day. 
 
¡° Your father¡¯s co ming to see you,¡± she said. ¡°Ne xt month. Two wee ks after your mother gets here. They¡¯ll both stay 
through New Year¡¯s.¡± 
 
She carefully folded the paper and slipped it into a drawe r in the kitchen. Both she and Gra mps fe ll silent, the way 
I imagine people react when the doctor tells them they have a serious, but curable, illness. For a mo ment the air was 
sucked out of the room, and we stood suspended, alone with our thoughts. 
 
¡°Well,¡± Toot said finally, ¡° I suppose we better start looking for a p lace where he can stay.¡± 
 
 
Gra mps took off his  glasses and rubbed his eyes. 
¡°Should be one hell of a  Christ mas.¡± 
 
 
Over lunch, I explained to a group of boys that my father was a prince. 
 
 
 
 
¡°My grandfather, see, he¡¯s a chief. It¡¯s sort of like the king of the tribe, you know¡­like  the Indians. So that ma kes 
my father a prince. He¡¯ll take over when my grandfather dies.¡±  
 
¡°What about after that?¡± one of my friends asked as we emptied our t rays in to the trash bin. ¡°I mean, will you 
go back and be a prince?¡± 
 
¡°Well¡­if I want to, I could. It¡¯s sort of co mplicated, see, ¡¯cause the tribe is full of wa rriors. Like  Oba ma¡­that 
means ¡®Burning Spear.¡¯ The men in our tribe a ll want to be chief, so my father has to settle these feuds before I can 
come.¡± As the words tumbled out of my mouth, and I fe lt the boys readjust to me, mo re curious and familiar as we 
bumped into each other in the line back to clas s, a part of me rea lly began to believe the story. But another part of me 
knew that what I was telling the m was a lie, so mething I¡¯d constructed from the scraps of informat ion I¡¯d p icked up 
fro m my  mother. After a wee k of my father in the flesh, I had decided that I prefe rred his more  distant image, an 
image I could alter on a wh im-o r ignore when convenient. If my father hadn¡¯t e xactly disappointed me, he re ma ined 
something unknown, something volatile  and vaguely threatening. 
 
My mother had sensed my apprehension in the days building up to his arrival-I suppose it mirrored her own-and so, 
in between her efforts to prepare the apartment we¡¯d sublet for h im, she would try to assure me that the reunion would 
go smoothly. She had ma intained a correspondence with  him throughout the time  we had been in Indonesia, she 
e xpla ined, and he knew a ll about me . Like  her, my  father had re ma rried, and I now had five brothers and one sister 
liv ing in Kenya. He  had been in a bad car accident, and this trip was part of his recu peration after a  long stay in the 
hospital. ¡° You two will become g reat friends,¡± she decided. 
 
Along with news of my father, she began to stuff me  with info rmation about Kenya and its history -it was fro m a book 
about Jomo Kenyatta, the first president of Kenya, that I¡¯d pilfe red the name  Bu rning Spear. But nothing my mother 
told me  could re lieve my  doubts, and I retained little o f the information she offered. Only once did she really spark my 
interest, when she told me that my father¡¯s tribe, the Luo, we re a Nilotic  people who had migrated to Kenya fro m their 
original ho me along the banks of the world ¡¯s greatest river. This seemed pro mising; Gra mps still kept a painting he 
had once done, a replica  of lean, bronze  Egyptians on a golden chariot drawn by alabas ter steeds. I had visions of 
ancient Egypt, the great kingdoms I had read about, pyramids and pharaohs, Nefertit i and Cleopatra.  
 
One Saturday I went to the public library near our apart ment and, with the help of a raspy -voiced old libra rian who 
appreciated my seriousness, I found a book on East Africa . On ly there was no mention of pyra mids. In fact, the Luos 
me rited only a short paragraph. Nilote, it turned out, described a number of nomad ic tribes that had originated in the 
Sudan along the White Nile , fa r south of the Egyptian emp ires. The Luo ra ised cattle and lived in mud huts and ate 
corn mea l and ya ms and something called millet. Their trad itional costume was a leather thong across the crotch. I left 
the book open-faced on a table and walked out without thanking the lib rarian. 
 
The big day fina lly a rrived, and Miss Hefty let me  out early fro m c lass, wishing me luck. I le ft the school 
building fee ling like  a condemned man. My legs were heavy, and with each approaching step toward my 
grandparents¡¯ apartment, the thump in my chest grew louder. When I entered the elevator, I stood without pressing 
the button. The door closed, then reopened, and an older Filipino man who lived on the fourth floor got on. 
 
¡° Your grandfather says your father is coming to visit you today,¡± the man said cheerfully. ¡° You must be very happy.¡± 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When-after standing in front of the door and looking out across the Honolulu skyline at a distant ship, and then 
squinting at the sky to watch sparrows spiral through the air-I could think of no possible means of escape, I rang the 
doorbell. Toot opened the door. 
 
¡°There he is! Co me on, Bar¡­co me meet your father.¡± 
And there, in the unlit hallway, I saw him, a ta ll, dark figure who wa lked with a slight limp. He  crouched down and 
put his arms around me , and I let my a rms hang at my sides. Beh ind him stood my  mother, her chin tre mb ling as 
usual. ¡°Well, Ba rry,¡± my  father said. ¡° It is a good thing to see you after so long. Ve ry good.¡± 
 
He led me by the hand into the living roo m, and we a ll sat down. 
¡°So, Barry, your grandma ma  has told me  that you are doing very well 
in school.¡± I shrugged. 
¡°He¡¯s feeling a litt le shy, I think,¡± Toot offered. She smiled and rubbed my head.  
¡°Well,¡± my  father said, ¡°you have no reason to be shy about doing well. Have I t old you that your brothers 
and sister have also exce lled in their schooling? It¡¯s in the blood, I thin k,¡± he said with a laugh. 
 
I watched him carefu lly as the adults began to talk. He was much thinner than I had e xpected, the bones of his knees 
cutting the legs of his trousers in sharp angles; I couldn¡¯t imag ine him lifting anyone off the ground. Beside him, a 
cane with a blunt ivory head leaned against the wall. He wore a  blue bla zer, and a white shirt, and a scarlet ascot. His 
horn-rimmed glasses reflected the light of the la mp so that I couldn¡¯t see his eyes very well, but when he took the 
glasses off to rub the bridge of his nose, I saw that they were slightly yellow, the eyes of someone who¡¯s had ma laria 
more  than once. There was a fragility about his fra me, I thought, a caution when he lit a  cigarette or reached for his 
beer. After an hour or so, my mother suggested that he looked tired and should take a nap, and he agreed. He gathered 
up his travel bag, then stopped in mid-stride and began to fish around in it, until he finally pulled out three wooden 
figurines-a lion, an elephant, and an ebony man in tribal dress beating a drum-and handed them to me. 
 
¡°Say thank you, Bar,¡± my mother 
said. ¡°Thank you,¡± I muttered. 
My father and I both looked down at the carvings, lifeless in my hands. He touched my shoulder. 
¡°They are only sma ll things,¡± he said softly. Then he nodded to Gra mps, and together they gathered up his luggage 
and went downstairs to the other apartment. 
 
A month. That¡¯s how long we would have together, the five of us in my grandparents¡¯ living room most evenings, during 
the day on drives around the island or on short walks past the private landmarks of a family: the lot where my father¡¯s 
apartment had once stood; the remodeled hospital where I had been born; my grandparents¡¯ first house in Hawaii, before the 
one on University Avenue, a house I had never known. There was so much to tell in that single month, so much explaining to 
do; and yet when I reach back into my memory for the words of my father, the small interactions or conversations we might 
have had, they seem irretrievably lost. Perhaps they¡¯re imprinted too deeply, his voice the seed of all sorts of tangled 
arguments that I carry on with myself, as impenetrable now as the pattern  of my genes, so that all I can perceive is the worn-
out shell. My wife offers a simpler explanation-that boys and their fathers don¡¯t always have much to say to each other 
unless and until they trust-and this may come closer to the mark, for I 
 
 
 
 
often felt mute before h im, and he never pushed me to speak. I¡¯m left with mostly images that appear and die off in 
my mind like d istant sounds: his head thrown back in laughter at one of Gra mps¡¯s jo kes as my mother and I hang  
 
Christmas orna ments; his grip on my shoulder as he introduces me to one of his old friends from co llege; the narrowing 
of his eyes, the stroking of his sparse goatee, as he reads his important books. 
 
Images, and his effect on other people. For whenever he spoke-his one leg draped over the other, his large hands 
outstretched to direct or deflect attention, his voice deep and sure, cajoling and laughing -I would see a sudden change 
take place in the fa mily. Gra mps became  more v igorous and thoughtful, my mother more bashful; even Toot, smoked 
out of the foxhole  of her bedroo m, would start sparring with him about politics or finance, stabbing the air with her 
blue-veined hands to make  a point. It was as if his presence had summoned the spirit of earlie r t imes and allo wed each 
of them to reprise his or her old ro le; as if Dr. King had never been shot, and the  Kennedys continued to beckon the 
nation, and war and riot and fa mine were  nothing more than te mporary setbacks, and there was nothing to fear but fear 
itself. 
 
It fascinated me , this strange power of his, and for the first time  I began to think of my fath er as something rea l and 
immed iate, perhaps even permanent. After a fe w wee ks, though, I could fee l the tension around me beginning to 
build. Gra mps co mpla ined that my father was sitting in his chair. Toot muttered, wh ile  doing the dishes, that she 
wasn¡¯t anybody¡¯s servant. My mother¡¯s mouth pinched, her eyes avoiding her parents, as we ate dinner. One evening, 
I turned on the television to watch a cartoon special-Ho w the Grinch Stole  Christ mas -and the whispers broke into 
shouts. ¡°Barry, you have watched enough television tonight,¡± my father said. ¡° Go in your roo m and study now, and let 
the adults talk.¡± 
 
 
Toot stood up and turned off the TV. ¡°Why don¡¯t you turn the show on in the bedroom, Ba r.¡±  
¡°No, Madelyn,¡± my father said, ¡°that¡¯s not what I mean. He  has been watching that machine constantly, and now it is 
time fo r him to study.¡± 
 
My mother tried to e xpla in that it was almost Christmas vacation, that the cartoon was a Christmas favorite, that I had 
been looking forward to it all week. ¡°It  won¡¯t last long.¡± 
 
¡°Anna, this is nonsense. If the boy has done his work for to morro w, he can begin on his ne xt day¡¯s assignments. Or 
the assignments he will have when he returns fro m the holidays.¡± He turned to me . ¡°I tell you, Barry, you do not work 
as hard as you should. Go now, before I get angry at you.¡± 
 
I went to my room and slammed the door, listening as the voices outside grew louder, Gra mps insisting that this 
was his house, Toot saying that my father had no right to come in and bully everyone, including me, after  be ing gone 
all this time. I heard my  father say that they were spoiling me, that I needed a firm hand, and I listened to my mother 
tell her parents that nothing ever changed with them. We all stood accused, and even after my father left and Toot 
came in to say that I could watch the last five minutes of my show, I fe lt as if something had cracked open between 
all of us, goblins rushing out of some old, sealed-off la ir. Watching the green Grinch on the television screen, intent 
on ruining Ch rist mas, eventually transformed by the faith of the doe-eyed creatures who inhabited Whoville, I saw it 
for what it was: a lie . I began to count the days until my father would leave and things would return to norma l.  
 
The next day, Toot sent me down to the apart ment where my  father was staying to see if he had any laundry to wash. I 
knocked, and my father opened the door, shirtless. Inside, I saw my mother ironing some of his clothes. Her ha ir was  
 
 
 
 
tied back in a ponytail, and her eyes were  soft and dark, as if she¡¯d been crying. My father asked me to sit down beside 
him on the bed, but I told him that Toot needed me to help her, and left a fter  relay ing the message. Back upstairs, I 
had begun cleaning my roo m when my mother ca me in. 
 
¡° You shouldn¡¯t be mad at your father, Bar. He  loves you very much. He ¡¯s just a little stubborn sometimes.¡± 
¡°Okay,¡± I said without looking up. I could fee l her eyes follo w me  around the room until she finally let out a 
slow breath and went to the door. 
 
¡°I know all this stuff is confusing for you,¡± she said. ¡°For me, too. Just try to re me mber what I said, okay?¡± She put 
her hand on the doorknob. ¡°Do you want me  to close the door?¡± 
 
I nodded, but she had been gone for only a minute when she stuck her head back into the room. 
 
¡°By the way, I forgot to tell you that Miss Hefty has invited your father to come  to school on Thursday. She wants 
him to speak to the class.¡± 
 
I couldn¡¯t imagine worse news. I spent that night and all of the ne xt day trying to suppress thoughts of the 
inevitable: the faces of my classmates when they heard about mud huts, all my  lies e xposed, the painful jo kes 
afterward. Each time  I re me mbe red, my body squ irmed as if it had rece ived a jolt  to the nerves. 
 
I was still try ing to figure out how I¡¯d e xp lain  myself when my father walked into our class the next day. Miss 
Hefty we lco med him eagerly, and as I took my seat I heard several children ask each other wha t was going on. I 
became mo re desperate when our math teacher, a b ig, no -nonsense Hawaiian named M r. Eldredge, ca me  into the 
room, fo llo wed by thirty confused children fro m h is homeroo m ne xt  door. 
 
¡°We have a special treat fo r you today,¡± Miss Hefty began. ¡°Barry Oba ma ¡¯s father is here, and he¡¯s co me all the way 
fro m Kenya, in A frica, to tell us about his country.¡± 
 
The other kids looked at me  as my father stood up, and I held my head stiffly, try ing to focus on a vacant point on 
the blackboard behind him. He had been speaking for some t ime  before I could finally bring myself back to the 
mo ment. He was leaning against Miss Hefty¡¯s thick oak desk and describing the deep gash in the earth where mankind 
had first appeared. He spoke of the wild anima ls that still roa med the plains, the tribes that still required a young boy 
to kill a lion to prove his manhood. He spoke of the customs of the Luo, how e lders received the utmost respect and 
made laws fo r a ll to follow under great-trunked t rees. And he told us of Kenya¡¯s struggle to be free, how the Brit ish 
had wanted to stay and unjustly rule the people, just as they had in A merica; how many had been enslaved only 
because of the color of their skin, just as they had in Ame rica; but that Kenyans, like  all of us in the  room, longed to 
be free and develop themselves through hard work and sacrifice .  
 
When he finished, Miss Hefty was absolutely beaming with pride. A ll my  c lassmates applauded heartily, and a few 
struck up the courage to ask questions, each of which my father appeared to consider carefu lly before  answering. The  
bell rang for lunch, and Mr. Eldredge ca me up to me.  
 
¡° You¡¯ve got a pretty imp ressive father.¡± 
The ruddy-faced boy who had asked about cannibalism said, ¡° Your dad is pretty cool.¡± 
 
 
And off to one side, I saw Co retta watch my father say good -bye to some of the children. She seemed too intent 
to smile; her face  showed only a look of simp le satisfaction. 
 
 
 
 
Two wee ks later he was gone. In that time, we stand together in front of the Christ mas tree and pose for pictures, the 
only ones I have of us together, me holding an orange basketball, h is gift to me, him showing off the tie  I¡¯ve bought 
him (¡°Ah, people will know that I a m very important wearing such a tie¡±). At a Dave Brubeck concert, I struggle to 
sit quietly in the dark auditoriu m beside him, unable to follow the spare equations of sound that the performe rs make , 
careful to c lap whenever he claps. For brief spells in the day I will lie beside him, the two of us alone in the 
apartment sublet fro m a retired old wo man whose name I fo rget, the place full o f quilts and doilies and knitted seat 
covers, and I read my book wh ile  he reads his. He re mains opaque to me, a p resent mass; when I mimic h is gestures 
or turns of phrase, I know neither their orig ins nor their consequences, can¡¯t see how they play o ut over time. But I 
grow accustomed to his company. 
 
The day of his departure, as my mother and I he lped him pac k his bags, he unearthed two records, forty -fives, in dull 
brown dust jackets. 
 
¡°Barry! Look here-I forgot that I had brought these for you. The sounds of your continent.¡± 
 
It took him a while to puzzle  out my g randparents¡¯ old stereo, but finally the disk began to turn, and he 
gingerly placed the needle on the groove. A tinny guitar lic k opened, then  the sharp horns, the thump of dru ms, 
then the guitar again, and then the voices, clean and joyful as they rode up the back beat, urging us on. 
 
¡°Co me, Ba rry,¡± my  father said. ¡° You will lea rn fro m the master.¡± And suddenly his slender body was swaying back 
and forth, the lush sound was rising, his arms were swinging as they cast an invisible net, his feet wove over the floor in 
off-beats, his bad leg stiff but his ru mp high, h is head back, his hips moving in a tight circ le. The rhythm quic kened, the 
horns sounded, and his eyes closed to follo w his pleasure, and then one eye opened to peek down at me and his solemn 
face spread into a silly grin, and my  mother smiled, and my grandparents walked in to see what all the commot ion was 
about. I took my first tentative steps with my eyes closed, down, up, my arms swinging, the voices lift ing. And I hear 
him still: As I follow my  father into the sound, he lets out a quick shout, bright and high, a shout that leaves much 
behind and reaches out for more , a shout that cries for laughter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER FOUR 
M AN, I¡¯M NOT GOING to any more of these bullshit 
Punahou parties.¡± ¡°Yeah, that¡¯s what you said the last time.¡±  
Ray and I sat down at a table and unwrapped our hamburgers. He  was two years older than me, a senior who, as a 
result of his father¡¯s army transfer, had arrived fro m Los Angeles the previous year. Despite the diffe rence in age, 
we¡¯d fa llen into an easy friendship, due in no sma ll part to the fact that together we made up almost half of Punahou¡¯s 
black h igh school population. I enjoyed his company; he had a warmth and brash humor that made up for h is constant 
references to a former L.A. life -the retinue of wo men who supposedly still called him long-distance every night, his 
past football e xp loits, the celebrities he knew. Most of the things he told me I tended to discount, but not everything; it 
was true, for e xa mp le, that he was one of the fastest sprinters in the islands, Oly mp ic ca liber some said, this despite an 
improbably large stomach that quivered under his sweat -soaked jersey whenever he ran and left coaches and opposing 
 
 
 
 
teams shaking their heads in disbelief. Through Ray I  would find out about the black parties that were happening 
at  the  university  or  out  on  the  army  bases,  counting  on  him  to  ease  my  passage  through  unfamiliar  te rra in.  In  
return, I gave him a sounding board for his frustrations. 
 
¡°I mean it this time,¡±  he was saying to me now. ¡°These girls are  A -1, USDA-certified racists. All of ¡¯e m. White g irls. 
 
Asian girls-shoot, these Asians worse than the whites. Think we got a disease or something.¡± 
¡°Maybe they¡¯re looking at that big butt of yours. Man, I thought you were in t rain ing.¡± 
¡° Get your hands out of my fries. You ain¡¯t my  bitch, n igger¡­buy your own damn fries. Now what was I talking 
about?¡± 
 
¡°Just ¡¯cause a girl don¡¯t go out with you doesn¡¯t make her rac ist.¡± 
¡°Don¡¯t be thick, all right? I¡¯m not just talking about one time. Look, I ask Monica out, she says no. I say okay¡­your shit¡¯s 
not so hot anyway.¡± Ray stopped to check my reaction, then smiled. ¡°All right, maybe I don¡¯t actually say all that. I just tell 
her okay, Monica, you know, we still tight. Next thing I know, she¡¯s hooked up with Steve ¡®No Neck¡¯ Ya maguchi, the two 
of ¡¯em all holding hands and shit, like a couple of lovebirds. So fine-I figure there¡¯re more fish in the sea. I go ask Pamela 
out. She tells me she ain¡¯t going to the dance. I say cool. Get to the dance, guess who¡¯s standing there, got her arms around 
Rick Cook. ¡®Hi, Ray,¡¯ she says, like she don¡¯t know what¡¯s going down. Rick Cook! Now you know that guy ain¡¯t shit. 
 
Sorry-assed motherfucker got nothing on me, right? Nothing.¡± 
 
He stuffed a handful of fries into his mouth. ¡°It a in¡¯t just me, by the way. I don¡¯t see you doing any better in the booty 
department.¡± 
 
Because I¡¯m shy, I thought to myself; but I would never ad mit t hat to him. Ray pressed the advantage. 
 
¡°So what happens when we go out to a party with some sisters, huh? What happens? I tell you what happens. 
Bla m! They on us like there¡¯s no tomorrow. High school chicks, university chicks -it don¡¯t matter. They acting 
sweet, all smiles. ¡®Sure  you can have my nu mber, baby.¡¯ Bet.¡±  
 
¡°Well¡­¡± 
¡°Well what? Listen, why don¡¯t you get more play ing time on the basketball tea m, huh? At least two guys ahead of 
you ain¡¯t nothing, and you know it, and they know it. I seen you tear ¡¯e m up on the playground, no contest. Why 
wasn¡¯t I starting on the football squad this season, no matter how many passes the other guy dropped? Tell me we 
wouldn¡¯t be treated diffe rent if we  was wh ite. Or Japanese. Or Hawa iian. Or fucking Eskimo.¡±  
 
¡°That¡¯s not what I¡¯m saying.¡± 
¡°So what are you saying?¡± 
¡°All right, here ¡¯s what I¡¯m saying. I¡¯m saying, yeah, it¡¯s harder to get dates because there aren¡¯t any black girls 
around here. But that don¡¯t make  the girls that are here all racist. Maybe they just want somebody that looks like  their 
daddy, or their brother, or whatever, and we a in¡¯t it. I¡¯m saying yeah, I might not get the breaks on the team that 
some guys get, but they play like white boys do, and that¡¯s the style the coach likes to play, and they¡¯re win ning the 
way they play. I don¡¯t play that way. 
 
¡°As for your greasy-mouthed self,¡± I added, reaching for the last of his fries, ¡°I¡¯m saying the coaches may not like 
you ¡¯cause you¡¯re a smart-assed black man, but it might help if you stopped eating all them fries you eat, making 
you look six months pregnant. That¡¯s what I¡¯m saying.¡± 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¡°Man, I don¡¯t know why you ma king e xcuses for these folks.¡± Ray got up and crumpled h is trash into a tight ball. 
¡°Let¡¯s get out of here. Your shit¡¯s getting way too complicated for me.¡±  
 
Ray was right; things had gotten complicated. It had been five years since my father¡¯s visit, and on the surface, at 
least, it had been a placid t ime marked by the usual rites and rituals that America  e xpects fro m its children -margina l 
report cards and calls to the principal¡¯s office, part-time  jobs at the burger chain, acne and driving tests and turbulent 
desire. I¡¯d made my share of friends at school, gone on the occasional awkward date; and if I so metimes puzzled over 
the mysterious realign ments of status that took place a mong my classmates, as some rose and others fell depending on 
the whims of their bodies or the ma ke of their ca rs, I took co mfort in the knowledge that my own position had 
steadily improved. Rare ly did I meet kids whose fa milies had less than mine and might re mind me of good fortune. 
 
My mother did her best to remind me. She had separated from Lo lo and returned t o Hawa ii to pursue a master¡¯s 
degree in anthropology shortly after my own arriva l. For three years I lived with her and Maya in a s mall apart ment a 
block a way fro m Punahou, my mother¡¯s student grants supporting the three of us. So metimes, when I brought fr iends 
home after school, my mother would overhear the m re ma rk about the lack of food in the fridge or the less -than-perfect 
housekeeping, and she would pull me aside and let me  know that she was a single mother going to school again and 
raising two kids, so that baking cookies wasn¡¯t e xactly at the top of her priority list, and wh ile  she appreciated the fine 
education I was receiving at Punahou, she wasn¡¯t planning on putting up with any snotty attitudes from me or anyone 
else, was that understood? 
 
It was understood. Despite my frequent-and sometimes sullen-c laims of independence, the two of us rema ined close, 
and I did my best to help her out where I could, shopping for groceries, doing the laundry, looking after the knowing, 
dark-eyed child that my sister had become. But when my mother was ready to return to Indonesia to do her field work, 
and suggested that I go back with her and Maya to attend the international school there, I immed iately said no. I 
doubted what Indonesia now had to offer and wearied of be ing new all over again. More than that, I¡¯d a rrived at an 
unspoken pact with my g randparents: I could live with them and they¡¯d leave me  alone so long as I kept my trouble 
out of sight. The arrangement suited my purpose, a purpose that I could barely art icu late to myself, much less to them. 
Away fro m my mother, a way fro m my g randparents, I was engaged in a fitful interior struggle. I was trying to ra ise 
myself to be a black man in A merica, and beyond the given of my appearance, no one around me seemed to  know 
e xactly what that meant. 
 
My father¡¯s letters provided few c lues. They would arrive sporadically, on a single blue page with gu mmed -down 
flaps that obscured any writ ing at the margins. He  would report that everyone was fine, co mmend me on my progress 
in school, and insist that my mother, Maya, and I were a ll we lco me to take  our rightful place  beside him whenever we 
so desired. Fro m time  to time he would include advice, usually in the form of aphoris ms I didn¡¯t quite understand 
(¡° Like water finding its level, you will arrive at a  career that suits you¡±). I would respond promptly on a wide -ruled 
page, and his letters would find their way into the closet, next to my mother¡¯s pictures of him.  
 
Gra mps had a number of blac k ma le friends, mos tly poker and bridge partners, and before I got old enough not to care 
about hurting his feelings, I would let him drag me  along to some of their ga mes. They were  old, neatly dressed men 
with hoarse voices and clothes that smelled of c igars, the kind of men for who m everything has its place and who figure 
 
 
 
 
they¡¯ve seen enough not to have to waste a lot of time ta lking about it. Whenever they saw me they would give me  a 
jovial slap on the back and ask how my mother was doing; but once it was time to play, they wouldn¡¯t say another word 
e xcept to compla in to their partner about a bid. 
 
There was one e xception, a poet named Frank who lived in a dilapidated house in a run -down section of Waikiki. He 
had enjoyed some modest notoriety once, was a contemporary of Richard Wright and Langston Hughes during his 
years in Chicago-Gra mps once showed me some o f his work anthologized in a  book of b lack poetry. But by the time I 
met Frank he must have been pushing eighty, with a big, dewlapped face and an ill-ke mpt gray Afro that made h im 
look like an o ld, shaggy-maned lion. He would read us his poetry whenever we stopped by his house, sharing 
whiskey with Gra mps out of an empt ied je lly ja r. As the night  wore on, the two of the m would solic it my he lp in 
composing dirty lime ric ks. Eventually, the conversation would turn to la ments about women.  
 
¡°They¡¯ll drive you to drink, boy,¡± Frank would tell me soberly. ¡°And if you let ¡¯e m, they¡¯ll drive you into 
your grave.¡± 
 
I was intrigued by old Fran k, with his books and whiskey breath and the hint of hard -earned knowledge behind the 
hooded eyes. The visits to his house always left me  fee ling vaguely uncomfo rtable, though, as if I we re witnessing 
some comp licated, unspoken transaction between the two men, a t ransaction I couldn¡¯t fully understand. The same 
thing I fe lt whenever Gra mps took me downtown to one of his favorite bars, in Honolu lu¡¯s red -light district. 
 
¡°Don¡¯t tell your grandmother,¡± he would say with a wink, and we¡¯d wa lk past hard -faced, soft-bodied streetwalkers 
into a sma ll, dark bar with a ju kebo x and a couple of pool tables. Nobod y seemed to mind that Gra mps was the only 
white man in the place, o r that I was the only eleven - or twe lve-year-o ld. So me  of the men leaning across the bar would 
wave at us, and the bartender, a big, light-skinned wo man with bare, fleshy arms, would b ring a Scotch for Gra mps and 
a Coke  for me. If nobody else was playing at the tables, Gra mps would spot me  a fe w balls and teach me the ga me, but 
usually I would sit at the bar, my legs dangling fro m the high stool, blowing bubbles into my drink and looking at  the 
pornographic art on the walls -the phosphorescent women on animal skins, the Disney characters in compro mising 
positions. If he was around, a man na med Rodney with a wide-brimmed hat would stop by to say hello. 
 
¡°How¡¯s school coming, captain?¡± 
¡°All right.¡± 
¡° You getting them A¡¯s, ain¡¯t 
you?¡± ¡°Some.¡± 
 
 
¡°That¡¯s good. Sally, buy my man here another Co ke,¡± Rodney would say, peeling a twenty off a thic k stack 
he had pulled fro m h is pocket before he fe ll back into the shadows. 
 
I can still re me mber the e xcite ment I fe lt during those evening trips, the enticement of darkness and the clic k of the 
cue ball, and the jukebo x flashing its red and green lights, and the weary laughter that ran around the room. Yet even 
then, as young as I was, I had already begun to sense that most of the people in the bar we ren¡¯t there out of choice, 
that what my grandfather sought there was the company of people who could help him forget his own troubles, people 
who he believed would not judge him. Maybe the bar rea lly d id help him forget, but I kne w with the unerring instincts 
of a child that he was wrong about not being judged. Our presence there felt fo rced, and by the time  I had reached 
junior 
 
 
 
 
high school I had lea rned to beg off fro m Gra mps¡¯s invitations, knowing that whatever it was I was after, whatever it 
was that I needed, would have to come fro m some  other source. 
 
TV, movies, the radio; those were the places to start. Pop culture was color-coded, after a ll, an a rcade of images fro m 
which you could cop a walk, a talk, a step, a style. I couldn¡¯t croon like Marv in Gaye, but I could learn to dance all the 
Soul Tra in steps. I couldn¡¯t pack a gun like Shaft or Superfly, but I could sure enough curse like Richard Pryor.  
 
And I could play basketball, with a consuming passion that would always e xceed my limited talent. My father¡¯s  
 
Christmas gift had co me at a t ime when the University of Ha waii basketball tea m had slipped into the national rankings 
on the strength of an all-blac k starting five that the school had shipped in fro m the ma inland. That same spring, Gra mps 
had taken me to one of their ga mes, and I had watched the players in wa rm-ups, still boys themselves but to me poised 
and confident warrio rs, chuckling to each other about some inside joke , glanc ing over the heads of fawning fans to 
win k at the girls on the sidelines, cas ually flipping layups or tossing high-arcing ju mpers until the whistle b lew and the 
centers jumped and the players joined in fu rious battle. 
 
I decided to become part of that world, and began going down to a playground near my grandparents¡¯ apartment after  
school. Fro m her bedroo m window, ten stories up, Toot would watch me on the court until well after dark as I threw 
the ball with two hands at first, then developed an awkwa rd ju mp shot, a crossover dribble, absorbed in the same 
solitary moves hour after hour. By the time  I reached high school, I was playing on Punahou¡¯s teams, and could take 
my ga me  to the university courts, where a handful of blac k men, mostly gym rats and has -beens, would teach me an 
attitude that didn¡¯t just have to do with the sport. That respect came fro m what you did and not who your daddy was. 
 
That you could talk stuff to rattle  an opponent, but that you should shut the hell up if you couldn¡¯t back it up. That 
you didn¡¯t let anyone sneak up behind you to see emotions -like hurt or fear-you didn¡¯t want them to see. 
 
And something else, too, something nobody talked about: a way of being together when the game was tight and the 
sweat broke and the best players stopped worrying about their points and the worst players got swept up in the 
mo ment and the score only mattered because that¡¯s how you sustained the trance. In the middle of wh ich you might 
ma ke a move or a pass that surprised even you, so that even the guy guarding you had to smile, as if to say, ¡°Da mn ¡­¡±  
 
My wife will ro ll her eyes right about now. She grew up with a basketball star for a brother, and when she wants to 
wind e ither of us up she will insist that she¡¯d rather see her son play the cello. She¡¯s right, of course; I was liv ing out a  
caricature of b lack ma le adolescence, itself a ca ricature of swaggering Ame rican manhood. Yet at a  time  when boys 
aren¡¯t supposed to want to follow their fathers¡¯ tired footsteps, when the imperatives of harvest or work in the factory 
aren¡¯t supposed to dictate identity, so that how to live is bought off the rack or found in magazines, the principal 
diffe rence between me and most of the man-boys around me-the surfers, the football players, the would -be rock-and-
roll guitarists-resided in the limited number of options at my disposal. Each of us chose a costume, a rmor aga inst 
uncertainty. At least on the basketball court I could find a commun ity of sorts, with an inner life  all its own. It was there  
that I would ma ke my c losest white friends, on turf where blac kness couldn¡¯t be a disadvantage. And it was there that I 
would meet Ray and the other blacks close to my age who had begun to trickle into the islands, teenagers whose 
confusion and anger would help shape my own.  
 
¡°That¡¯s just how white folks will do you,¡± one of them might say when we were alone. Everybody would chuckle and shake 
their heads, and my mind would run down a ledger of slights: the first boy, in seventh grade, who called me a  
 
 
 
 
coon; his tears of surprise-¡°Why¡¯dya do that?¡±-when I gave him a b loody nose. The tennis pro who told me during a 
tournament that I shouldn¡¯t touch the schedule of matches pinned up to the bulletin board because my color might rub 
off; his thin-lipped, red-faced smile -¡° Can¡¯t you take a joke?¡±-when I threatened to report him. The o lder wo man in my  
grandparents¡¯ apartment building who became  agitated when I got on the elevator behind her and ran out to tell the 
manager that I was following her; her refusal to apolog ize  when she was told that I lived in the build ing. Ou r assistant 
basketball coach, a young, wiry man fro m Ne w York with a n ice ju mper, who, afte r a pic k -up game with some 
talkative b lack men, had muttered within earshot of me and three of my tea mmates tha t we shouldn¡¯t have lost to a 
bunch of niggers; and who, when I told him-with a fury that surprised even me-to shut up, had calmly e xpla ined the 
apparently obvious fact that ¡°there are black people, and there are n iggers. Those guys were niggers.¡±  
 
That¡¯s just how white folks will do you. It wasn¡¯t mere ly the cruelty involved; I was learn ing that black people 
could be mean and then some. It was a particula r brand of a rrogance, an obtuseness in otherwise sane people that 
brought forth our bitter laughter. It was as if wh ites didn¡¯t know they were be ing cruel in the first place. Or at least 
thought you deserving of their scorn. 
 
White folks. The term itself was uncomfortable in my mouth at first; I felt like  a non -native speaker tripping over a 
difficult phrase. So met imes I would find myself ta lking to Ray about white folks this or white folks that, and I would 
suddenly reme mbe r my mother¡¯s smile, and the words that I spoke would seem awkward and fa lse. Or I would be 
helping Gra mps dry the dishes after dinner and Toot would come  in to say she was going to sleep, and those same 
words-white fo lks-would flash in my head like a bright neon sign, and I would suddenly grow quiet, as if I had secrets 
to keep. 
 
Later, when I was a lone, I would try to untangle these difficult thoughts. It was obvious that certain whites could be 
e xe mpted fro m the general category of our distrust: Ray was always telling me how cool my grandparents were. The 
term wh ite was simply a  shorthand for him, I decided, a tag for what my mother would ca ll a bigot. And although I 
recognized the risks in his terminology-how easy it was to fall into the same sloppy thinking that my basketball 
coach had displayed (¡°There are white fo lks, and then there are ignorant motherfuckers like you,¡± I had fina lly to ld 
the coach before walking off the court that day)-Ray assured me that we  would never ta lk about whites as whites in 
front of wh ites without knowing e xactly what we were doing. W ithout knowing that there might be a price to pay.  
 
But was that right? Was there still a price to pay? That was the complicated part, the thing that Ray and I never could seem 
to agree on. There were times when I would listen to him tell some blond girl he¡¯d just met about life on L.A.¡¯s mean 
streets, or hear him explain the scars of racism to some eager young teacher, and I could swear that just beneath the sober 
expression Ray was winking at me, letting me in on the score. Our rage at the white world needed no object, he seemed to 
be telling me, no independent confirmation; it could be switched on and off at our pleasure. Sometimes, after one of his 
performances, I would question his judgment, if not his sincerity. We weren¡¯t living in the Jim Crow 
 
South, I would re mind him. We we ren¡¯t consigned to some heatless housing project in Ha rle m or the Bron x. We were 
in goddamned Hawa ii. We said what we p leased, ate where we  pleased; we sat at the front of the proverbial bus. 
None of our wh ite friends, guys like Jeff or Scott fro m the basketball tea m, treated us any differently than they treated 
each other. They loved us, and we loved them back. Shit, seemed like ha lf of ¡¯e m wanted to be black themselves -or at 
least Doctor J. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Well, that¡¯s true, Ray would ad mit. 
Maybe we could afford to give the bad-assed nigger pose a rest. Save it for when we really needed it. 
And Ray would shake his head. A pose, huh? Speak for your o wn self.  
And I would know that Ray had flashed his trump card, one that, to his credit, he ra rely p layed. I was different, 
after all, potentially suspect; I had no idea who my own self was. Unwilling to risk e xposure, I would quic kly retreat 
to safer ground. 
 
Perhaps if we had been liv ing in New Yo rk or L.A., I wou ld have been quicker to pic k up th e rules of the high-stake 
game we were p laying. As it was, I learned to slip back and forth between my blac k and white worlds, understanding 
that each possessed its own language and customs and structures of meaning, convinced that with a b it of translatio n 
on my part the two worlds would eventually cohere. Still, the feeling that something wasn¡¯t quite right stayed with me, 
a warn ing that sounded whenever a white girl mentioned in the middle of conversation how much she liked Stevie 
Wonder; or when a wo man in the superma rket asked me  if I played basketball; or when the school principa l told me  I 
was cool. I d id like Stevie Wonder, I d id love basketball, and I tried my best to be cool at all times. So why did such 
comments always set me on edge? There was a tric k there some where, a lthough what the trick was, who was doing 
the tricking, and who was being tricked, e luded my conscious grasp. 
 
One day in early spring Ray and I met up after class and began walking in the direction of the stone bench that circled 
a big banyan tree on Punahou¡¯s campus. It was called the Sen ior Bench, but it served main ly as a gathering place for 
the high school¡¯s popular crowd, the jocks and cheerleaders and partygoing set, with their jesters, attendants, and 
ladies-in-wa iting jostling for position up and down the circular steps. One of the seniors, a stout defensive tackle 
named Kurt, was there, and he shouted loudly as soon as he saw us. 
 
¡°Hey, Ray! Mah ma in man! Wha¡¯s happenin¡¯!¡± 
 
Ray went up and slapped Kurt¡¯s outstretched palm. But when Kurt repeated the gesture to me, I waved him off. 
¡°What¡¯s his problem?¡± I overheard Ku rt say to Ray as I wa lked a way. A few minutes later, Ra y caught up with me 
and asked me what was wrong. 
 
¡°Man, those folks are just ma king fun of us,¡± I 
said. ¡°What¡¯re you talking about?¡± 
¡°All that ¡®Yo  baby, give me five¡¯ bullshit.¡± 
¡°So who¡¯s mister sensitive all of a sudden? Kurt don¡¯t mean nothing by it.¡± 
¡°If that¡¯s what you think, then hey-¡± 
 
 
 
Ray¡¯s face suddenly glistened with anger. ¡°Look,¡± he said, ¡°I¡¯m just getting along, all right? Just like  I see you getting 
along, talking your game  with the teachers when you need them to do you a favor. All that stuff about ¡®Yes, Miss  
 
Snooty Bitch, I just find this novel so engaging, if I can just have one more day for that paper, I¡¯ll kiss your white ass.¡¯ 
It¡¯s their world, all right? They own it, and we in it. So just get the fuck outta my face .¡± 
 
By the following day, the heat of our argument had dissipated, and Ray suggested that I invite our friends Jeff and Scott to 
a party Ray was throwing out at his house that weekend. I hesitated for a moment-we had never brought white friends along 
to a black party-but Ray insisted, and I couldn¡¯t find a good reason to object. Neither could Jeff or Scott; they both agreed to 
come so long as I was willing to drive. And so that Saturday night, after one of our games, the three 
 
 
 
 
of us piled into Gra mps¡¯s old Ford Granada and rattled our way out to Schofie ld Barrac ks, maybe thirty miles 
out of town. 
 
When we arrived the party was well on its way, and we steered ourselves toward the refreshments. The presence of 
Jeff and Scott seemed to ma ke no waves; Ray introduced them around the room, they made some s mall ta lk, they 
took a couple of the girls out on the dance floor. But I could see right away that the scene had taken my white friends 
by surprise. They kept smiling a lot. They huddled together in a corner. They nodded self-consciously to the beat of 
the music and said ¡°Excuse me¡±  every fe w minutes. After maybe an hour, they asked me if I¡¯d be willing to take 
them ho me. 
 
¡°They¡¯re not into it, I guess.¡± 
 
¡°What¡¯s the matter?¡± Ray shouted over the music when I went to let him know we we re leaving. ¡°Things just starting 
to heat up.¡± 
 
Our eyes met, and for a  long stretch we just stood there, the noise and laughter pulsing around us. There were  no 
traces of satisfaction in Ray¡¯s eyes, no hints of disappointment; just a steady gaze, as unblinking as a snake¡¯s. Finally 
he put out his hand, and I grabbed hold of it, our eyes still fixed on each other. ¡°Later, then,¡± he said, his hand 
slipping free fro m mine, and I watched him wa lk away through the crowd, asking about the girl he¡¯d been talking to 
just a few minutes before. 
 
Outside the air had turned cool. The street was absolutely empty, quiet except for the fading tremor of Ray¡¯s stereo, the 
blue lights flickering in the windows of bungalows that ran up and down the tidy lane, the shadows of trees stretching 
across a baseball field. In the car, Jeff put an arm on my shoulder, looking at once contrite and relieved. 
 
¡° You know, man,¡± he said, ¡°that really taught me so mething. I mean, I can see how it must be tough for you and Ray 
sometimes, at school parties¡­being the only black guys and all.¡±  
 
I snorted. ¡°Yeah. Right.¡± A part of me  wanted to punch him right there. We started down the road toward town, and 
in the silence, my mind began to rework Ray¡¯s words that day with Kurt, all the discussions we had had before that, the 
events of that night. And by the time I had dropped my friends off, I had begun to see a new map of the world, one that 
was frightening in its simplicity, suffocating in its imp lications. We were a lways playing on the white man ¡¯s court, 
Ray had told me, by the wh ite man¡¯s ru les. If the principa l, or the coach, or a teacher, or Kurt, wanted to spit in your 
face, he could, because he had power and you didn¡¯t. If he decided not to, if he treated you like a  man or ca me to your 
defense, it was because he knew that the words you spoke, the clothes you wore, the books you read, your amb itions 
and desires, were  already his. Whatever he decided to do, it was his decision to make , not yours, and because of that 
fundamental power he held over you, because it preceded and would outlast his individual mo tives and inclinations, 
any distinction between good and bad whites held negligible meaning. In fact, you couldn¡¯t even be sure that 
everything you had assumed to be an e xpression of your black, unfettered self-the hu mor, the song, the behind-the-
back pass-had been freely chosen by you. At best, these things were a refuge; at worst, a trap. Following this 
maddening logic , the only thing you could choose as your own was withdrawa l into a sma lle r and sma ller co il of rage, 
until being blac k meant only the knowledge of your own powerlessness, of your own defeat. And the final irony: 
Should you refuse this defeat and lash out at your captors, they would have a name for that, too, a name that could cage 
you just as good. Paranoid. Militant. Violent. Nigger.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Over the ne xt fe w months, I looked to corroborate this nightmare v ision. I gathered up books from the library -
Ba ldwin, Ellison, Hughes, Wright, DuBo is. At night I would close the d oor to my roo m, telling my g randparents I had 
homework to do, and there I would sit and wrestle with words, locked in  suddenly desperate argument, trying to 
reconcile the wo rld as I¡¯d found it with the terms of my b irth. But there was no escape to be had. In every page of 
every book, in Bigger Tho mas and invisible men, I kept finding the same anguish, the same doubt; a self-contempt that 
neither irony nor intellect see med able to deflect. Even Du Bois¡¯s learn ing and Ba ldwin¡¯s love and Langston¡¯s humor 
eventually succumbed to its corrosive force, each man finally forced to doubt art¡¯s redemptive power, each man finally 
forced to withdra w, one to Africa, one to Europe, one deeper into the bowels of Ha rle m, but all of them in the sa me 
weary flight, all of them e xhausted, bitter men, the devil at their heels. 
 
Only Ma lcolm X¡¯s autobiography seemed to offer something different. His repeated acts of self-creat ion spoke to me; 
the blunt poetry of his words, his unadorned insistence on respect, promised a new and uncompro mising order, ma rtia l 
in its discipline, forged through sheer force of will. A ll the other stuff, the talk of blue -eyed devils and apocalypse, was 
incidental to that program, I decided, re ligious baggage that Malcolm h imself seemed to have safely abandoned toward 
the end of his life . And yet, even as I imagined myself fo llo wing Malco lm¡¯s call, one line in the book stayed me. He  
spoke of a wish he¡¯d once had, the wish that the white blood that ran through him, there by an act of vio lence, might 
somehow be e xpunged. I kne w that, for Malcolm, that wish would never be incidental. I knew as we ll that traveling 
down the road to self-respect my own white blood would never recede into mere abstraction. I was le ft to wonder what 
else I wou ld be severing if and when I left my  mother and my grandparents at some uncharted border. 
 
And, too: If Malco lm¡¯s discovery toward the end of his life, that some wh ites might live beside h im as brothers in 
 
Isla m, see med to offer some hope of eventual reconciliation, that hope appeared in a distant future, in a fa r-off land. 
In the meantime, I looked to see where the people would co me fro m who we re willing to work toward this future 
and populate this new world. After a  basketball ga me at the university gym one day, Ray and I happened to strike up 
a conversation with a tall, gaunt man na med Malik who played with us now and again. Malik mentioned that he was 
a follower of the Nation of Isla m but that since Malcolm had died and he had moved to Hawa ii he no longer went to 
mosque or politica l meetings, although he still sought comfort in solitary prayer. One of the guys sitting nearby must 
have overheard us, for he leaned over with a sagacious exp ression on his face. 
 
¡° You all talking about Malcolm, huh? Malcolm tells it like  it is, no doubt about it.¡± 
 
¡° Yeah,¡±  another  guy said.  ¡°But  I  tell  you  what-you  won¡¯t see  me  moving  to  no African  jungle  anytime  soon.  Or 
some goddamned desert somewhere, sitting on a ca rpet with a bunch of Arabs.  No sir. And you won¡¯t see  me  stop 
eating no ribs.¡± 
 
¡° Gotta have them ribs.¡± 
 
 
¡°And pussy, too. Don¡¯t Malcolm talk about no pussy? Now you know that ain¡¯t gonna work.¡±  
I noticed Ray laughing and looked at him sternly. ¡°What are you laughing at?¡± I said to him. ¡° You ¡¯ve never 
read Malcolm. You don¡¯t even know what he says.¡± 
 
 
 
 
Ray grabbed the basketball out of my hand and headed for the opposite rim. ¡°I don¡¯t need no books to tell me how 
to be black,¡± he shouted over his head. I started to answer, then turned to Malik, e xpecting some words of support. 
But the Muslim said nothing, his bony face set in a faraway s mile.  
 
I decided to keep my o wn counsel after that, learning to disguise my feverish mood. A fe w weeks later, though, I 
awoke to the sound of an argument in the kitchen -my grand mother¡¯s voice barely audib le, followed by my 
grandfather¡¯s deep growl. I opened my door to see Toot entering their bedroo m to get dressed for work. I asked her 
what was wrong. 
 
 
¡°Nothing. Your grandfather just doesn¡¯t want to drive me to work this morning, that¡¯s all.¡±  
When I entered the kitchen, Gra mps was muttering under his breath. He  poured himself a cup of coffee as I to ld 
him that I would be willing to give Toot a ride to work if he was tired. It was a bold offe r, for I didn¡¯t like  to wa ke up 
early. He scowled at my  suggestion. 
 
¡°That¡¯s not the point. She just wants me to 
feel bad.¡± ¡° I¡¯m sure that¡¯s not it, Gra mps.¡± 
¡°Of course it is.¡± He  sipped fro m his coffee . ¡°She¡¯s been catching the bus ever since she started at the bank. She 
said it was more convenient. And now, just because she gets pestered a little, she wants to change everything.¡±  
 
Toot¡¯s diminutive figure  hovered in the hall, peering at us fro m behind 
her bifocals. ¡°That¡¯s not true, Stanley.¡±  
I took her into the other room and asked her what had happened. 
¡°A man asked me  for money yesterday. While I was wa iting fo r the 
bus.¡± ¡°That¡¯s all?¡±  
Her lips pursed with irritation. ¡° He was very aggressive, Barry. Very aggressive. I gave him a dollar and he kept 
asking. If the bus hadn¡¯t come, I think he might have hit me  over the head.¡± 
 
I returned to the kitchen. Gra mps was rinsing his cup, his back turned to me. ¡° Listen,¡± I said, ¡° why don¡¯t you 
just let me give her a ride. She seems pretty upset.¡± 
 
¡°By a panhandler?¡± 
¡°Yeah, I know-but it¡¯s probably a little scary for her, seeing some big man block her way. It¡¯s really no big deal.¡±  He 
turned around and I saw now that he was shaking. ¡° It is a big deal. It¡¯s a big deal to me. She¡¯s been bothered by men 
before. You know why she¡¯s so scared this time? I¡¯ll tell you why. Before you came in, she told me the fella was black.¡± 
He whispered the word. ¡°That¡¯s the real reason why she¡¯s bothered. And I just don¡¯t think that¡¯s right.¡± 
 
The words were like  a fist in my stomach, and I wobbled to rega in my co mposure. In my steadiest voice, I told him 
that such an attitude bothered me, too, but assured him that Toot¡¯s fears would pass and that we should give her a ride 
in the meantime. Gra mps slumped into a chair in the living roo m and said he was sorry he had told me. Befo re my eyes, 
he grew sma ll and old and very sad. I put my hand on his shoulder and told him that it was all right, I understood. 
 
We remained like that for several minutes, in painful silence. Finally he insisted that he drive Toot after all, and 
struggled up from his seat to get dressed. After they left, I sat on the edge of my bed and thought about my 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
grandparents. They had sacrificed again and again for me . They had poured all their lingering hopes into my success. 
Never had they given me reason to doubt their love; I doubted if they ever would. And yet I kne w that men who might 
easily have been my brothers could still inspire their ra west fears. 
 
That night, I drove into Waikiki, past the bright-lit hotels and down toward the Ala-Wai Cana l. It took me a  wh ile  to 
recognize the house, with its wobbly porch and low -pitched roof. Inside, the light was on, and I could see Frank sitting 
in his overstuffed chair, a book of poetry in his lap, his reading glasses slipping down his nose. I sat in the car, 
watching him for a t ime , then fina lly got out and tapped on the door. The old man barely looked up as he rose  to undo 
the latch. It had been three years since I¡¯d seen him. 
 
¡°Want a drink?¡± he asked me. I nodded and watched him pull down a  bottle of whiskey and two plastic cups fro m the 
kitchen cupboard. He looked the sa me, his  mustache a litt le wh iter, dangling  like dead ivy over his heavy upper lip, 
his cut-off leans with a fe w more  holes and tied at the waist with a length of rope.  
 
¡°How¡¯s your grandpa?¡± 
¡°He¡¯s all right.¡± 
¡°So what are you doing here?¡± 
 
 
 
 
I wasn¡¯t sure. I told Fran k some of what had happened. He nodded and poured us each a shot. ¡°Funny cat, 
your grandfather,¡± he said. ¡° You know we gre w up maybe fifty miles apart?¡± 
 
I shook my head. 
¡°We sure did. Both of us lived near W ichita. We didn¡¯t know each other, of course. I was long gone by the time  he 
was old enough to re me mber anything. I might have seen some of h is people, though. Might¡¯ve passed ¡¯em on the 
street. If I did, I would¡¯ve had to step off the sidewalk to give ¡¯e m room. You r grandpa ever tel l you about things 
like that?¡± 
 
I threw the whiskey down my throat, shaking my head again.  
¡°Naw,¡±  Frank said, ¡° I don¡¯t suppose he would have. Stan doesn¡¯t like to talk about that part of Kansas much. Makes 
him uncomfortable. He to ld me once about a black g irl they hired to loo k after your mother. A preacher¡¯s daughter, I 
think it  was. Told me how she became  a regula r part of the fa mily. That¡¯s how he re me mbers it, you understand -this 
girl co ming in to look after so mebody else¡¯s children, her mother co ming to do somebody else¡¯s laundry. A regular 
part of the fa mily.¡±  
 
I reached for the bottle, this time  pouring my own. Frank wasn¡¯t watching me; his eyes were closed now, his head 
leaning against the back of his chair, his big wrinkled face like  a carving of s tone. ¡°You can¡¯t bla me  Stan for what he 
is,¡± Fran k said quietly. ¡° He¡¯s basically a good man. But he doesn¡¯t know me. Any more  than he knew that girl that 
looked after your mother. He  can¡¯t know me, not the way I know him. Maybe some of these Hawaiians can,  or the 
Indians on the reservation. They¡¯ve seen their fathers humiliated. Their mothers desecrated. But your grandfather 
will never know what that feels like . That¡¯s why he can come  over here and drin k my whiskey and fa ll asleep in that 
chair you¡¯re sitting in right now. Sleep like a baby. See , that¡¯s something I can never do in his house. Never. Doesn¡¯t 
matter how tired I get, I still have to watch myself. I have to be vigilant, for my o wn survival.¡±  
 
 
 
 
Frank opened his eyes. ¡°What I¡¯m try ing to tell you is, your grandma¡¯s right to be scared. She¡¯s at least as right as 
 
Stanley is. She understands that black people have a reason to hate. That¡¯s just how it is. Fo r your sake, I wish it 
were otherwise. But it¡¯s not. So you might as well get used to it.¡± 
 
Frank closed his eyes again. His breathing slowed until he seemed to be asleep. I thought about waking him, then 
decided against it and walked back to the car. The ea rth shook under my feet, ready to crack open at any mo ment. I 
stopped, trying to steady myself, and knew for the first time  that I was utterly a lone. 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER FIVE 
 
 
T HREE O¡¯CLOCK IN THE morn ing. The moon -washed streets empty, the growl of a ca r pic king up speed 
down a distant road. The revelers would be tucked away by now, pa ired off or a lone, in deep, beer-heavy sleep, 
Hasan at his new lady¡¯s place-don¡¯t stay up, he had said with a wink. And now just the two of us to wait for the 
sunrise, me and Billie  Ho liday, her voice warbling through the darkened room, reaching toward me like a lover.  
I¡¯m a fool¡­to want you. 
Such a fool¡­to want you. 
 
 
 
 
I poured myself a drink and let my eyes skip across the room: bow ls of pret zel cru mbs, overflo wing ashtrays, empty 
bottles like a  skyline aga inst the wall. Great party. That¡¯s what everybody had said: Count on Barry and Hasan to 
rock the house. Everybody except Reg ina. Regina hadn¡¯t enjoyed herself. What was it that she ¡¯d said before she left? 
You a lways think it¡¯s about you. And then that stuff about her grandmother. Like I was somehow responsible for the 
fate of the entire b lack race. As if it was me who had kept her grand ma on her knees all her life. To he ll with Regina. 
To hell with her high-horse, holie r-than-thou, you-let-me-down look in her eyes. She didn¡¯t know me . She d idn¡¯t 
understand where I was co ming fro m. 
 
I fe ll back on the couch and lit a c igarette, watching the match burn down until it tic kled my fingertips, then feeling 
the prick on the skin as I p inched the fla me dead. What¡¯s the trick? the man asks. The tric k is not caring that it hurts. I 
tried to re me mbe r where I¡¯d heard the line, but it was lost to me now, like a forgotten face. No matter. Billie knew the 
same trick; it was in that torn-up, tre mbling voice of hers. And I had lea rned it, too; that¡¯s what my last two years in 
high school had been about, after Ray went off to junior co llege some where and I had set the books aside; after I had 
stopped writing to my father and he¡¯d stopped writ ing back. I had grown t ired of t rying to untangle a mess that 
wasn¡¯t of my ma king. 
 
I had learned not to care. 
 
I blew a few smoke rings, remembering those years. Pot had helped, and booze; maybe a little blow when you could 
afford it. Not smack, though-Micky, my potential initiator, had been just a little too eager for me to go through with that. 
Said he could do it blindfolded, but he was shaking like a faulty engine when he said it. Maybe he was just cold; 
 
 
 
 
we were standing in a meat free zer in the back of the deli where he worked, and it could n¡¯t have been more than twenty 
degrees in there. But he didn¡¯t look like he was shaking fro m the cold. Looked more like he was sweating, his face 
shiny and tight. He had pulled out the needle and the tubing, and I¡¯d looked at him standing there, surrounded  by big 
slabs of salami and roast beef, and right then an image popped into my head of an air bubble, shiny and round like a  
pearl, rolling quietly through a vein and stopping my heart¡­.  
 
Junkie. Pothead. That¡¯s where I¡¯d been headed: the final, fatal role  of the young would -be black man. Except the 
highs hadn¡¯t been about that, me t rying to prove what a down brother I was. Not by then, anyway. I got high for just 
the opposite effect, something that could push questions o f who I was out of my mind, something that could flatten out 
the landscape of my heart, blur the edges of my me mo ry. I had discovered that it didn¡¯t ma ke any difference whether 
you smoked reefer in the white c lassmate¡¯s sparkling new van, or in the dorm ro o m of so me brother you¡¯d met down 
at the gym, or on the beach with a couple of Ha wa iian kids who had dropped out of school and now spent most of their 
time looking for an e xcuse to brawl. Nobody asked you whether your father was a fat -cat e xecutive who cheated on his 
wife or so me laid-o ff joe who slapped you around whenever he bothered to come home. You might just be bored, or 
alone. Everybody was welco me into the club of disaffection. And if the high didn¡¯t solve whatever it was that was 
getting you down, it could at least help you laugh at the world¡¯s ongoing folly and see through all the hypocrisy and 
bullshit and cheap mora lis m. 
 
That¡¯s how it had seemed to me then, anyway. It had taken a couple of years before I saw how fates were beginning 
to play themselves out, the difference that color and money made after all, in who survived, how soft or hard the 
landing when you finally fell. Of course, either way, you needed some luck. That¡¯s what Pablo had lac ked, mostly, 
not having his driver¡¯s license that day, a cop with nothing better to do than to check the trunk of his car. Or Bruce, 
not finding his way back fro m too many bad acid trips and winding up in a funny farm. Or Duke, not walking away 
fro m the car wreck¡­. 
 
I had tried to e xp lain so me of th is to my  mother once, the ro le of luck in the world, the spin of the wheel. It was at the 
start of my senior year in high school; she was back in Ha waii, her fie ld wo rk co mpleted, and one day she had 
ma rched into my roo m, wanting to know the details of Pab lo¡¯s arrest. I had given her a reassuring smile and patted her 
hand and told her not to worry, I wouldn¡¯t do anything stupid. It was usually an effect ive tactic, another one of those 
tricks I had learned: People were  satisfied so long as you were courteous and smiled and made no sudden moves. They 
were mo re than satisfied; they were relieved-such a pleasant surprise to find a well-mannered young black man who 
Except my mother hadn¡¯t looked satisfied. She had just sat there, studying my eyes, her face as grim as a hearse. 
¡°Don¡¯t you think you¡¯re being a little  casual about your future?¡± she said. 
didn¡¯t seem angry all the time. 
 
 
 
¡°What do you mean?¡± 
¡° You know e xactly what I mean. One of your friends was just arrested for drug possession. Your g rades are slipping. 
You  haven¡¯t even started on your college applications. Whenever I try  to talk to you about it you act like I¡¯m just this 
great big bother.¡± 
 
I didn¡¯t need to hear all this. It wasn¡¯t like I was flunking out. I started to tell her how I¡¯d been thinking about maybe 
not going away for college, how I could stay in Hawaii and take some classes and work part -time. She cut me off 
 
 
 
 
before I could fin ish. I could get into any school in the country, she said, if I just put in a little  effort. ¡° Re me mber what  
that¡¯s like? Effort? Da mn it, Ba r, you can¡¯t just sit around like some good -time  Cha rlie, wa iting for luc k to see you 
through.¡± 
 
¡°A good-time what?¡± 
¡°A good-time Charlie . A loafer.¡±  
 
 
I looked at her sitting there, so earnest, so certain of her son¡¯s destiny. The idea that my survival depended on luck 
re mained a heresy to her; she insisted on assigning responsibility some where -to herself, to Gra mps and Toot, to me . I 
suddenly felt like puncturing that certainty of hers, letting her know that her e xperiment with me had fa iled. Instead of 
shouting, I laughed. ¡°A good-time Charlie, huh? Well, why not? Maybe that¡¯s what I want out of life. I mean, look at 
Gra mps. He didn¡¯t even go to college.¡±  
 
The comparison caught my mother by surprise. He r face  went slack, her eyes wavered. It suddenly dawned on me, 
her greatest fear. ¡°Is that what you¡¯re worried about?¡± I asked. ¡°That I¡¯ll end up like  Gra mps?¡± 
 
She shook her head quickly. ¡° You¡¯re a lready much better educated than your grandfather,¡± she said. But the 
certainty had finally dra ined fro m her voice. Instead o f pushing the point, I stood up and left the room. 
 
Billie had stopped singing. The silence felt oppressive, and I suddenly felt very sober. I rose fro m the couch, flipped 
the record, drank what was le ft in my  glass, poured myself another. Upstairs, I could hear someone flushing a toilet, 
walking across a room. Another insomniac, probably, listening to his life  tic k a way. That was the proble m with 
booze and drugs, wasn¡¯t it? At some point they couldn¡¯t stop that ticking sound, the sound of certain e mptiness . And 
that, I suppose, is what I¡¯d been try ing to tell my  mother that day: that her faith in justice and rationality was 
misplaced, that we couldn¡¯t overcome  after a ll, that all the education and good intentions in the world couldn¡¯t help 
plug up the holes  in the universe or give you the power to change its blind, mindless course. 
 
Still, I¡¯d fe lt bad after that particula r episode; it was the one trick my mother a lways had up her sleeve, that way she  
had of ma king me fee l guilty. She made no bones about it, either. ¡° You can¡¯t he lp it,¡±  she told me once. ¡° Slipped it into 
your baby food. Don¡¯t worry, though,¡± she added, smiling like the Cheshire cat. ¡°A healthy, dose of guilt never hurt 
anybody. It¡¯s what civilizat ion was built on, guilt. A h ighly underrated emot ion.¡± 
 
We could joke about it by then, for her worst fears hadn¡¯t come to pass. I had graduated without mishap, was accepted into 
several respectable schools, and settled on Occidental College in Los Angeles mainly because I¡¯d met a girl from 
 
Brentwood wh ile  she was vacationing in Hawa ii with her fa mily. But I was still just going through the motions, as 
indifferent toward college as toward most everything else. Even Fran k thought I had a bad att itude, although he was 
less than clear about how I should change it. 
 
What had Frank called college? An advanced degree in compro mise. I thought back to the last time I had seen the old 
poet, a few days before I left Hawa ii. We had made s ma ll talk for a wh ile; he co mp lained about his feet, the corns and 
bone spurs that he insisted were a direct result of try ing to force African feet into European shoes. Fina lly he had asked 
me  what it was that I e xpected to get out of college. I told him I didn¡¯t know. He s hook his big, hoary head. 
 
¡°Well,¡± he said, ¡°that¡¯s the problem, isn¡¯t it? You don¡¯t know. You¡¯re just like the rest of these young cats out here. All 
you know is that college is the next thing you¡¯re supposed to do. And the people who are old enough to know 
 
 
 
 
better, who fought all those years for your right to go to college-they¡¯re just so happy to see you in there that they won¡¯t 
tell you the truth. The real price  of ad mission.¡± 
 
¡°And what¡¯s that?¡± 
¡°Leaving your race at the door,¡± he said. ¡° Leaving your people behind.¡± He studied me over the top of his reading 
glasses. ¡°Understand something, boy. You¡¯re not going to college to get educated. You¡¯re go ing there to get trained. 
They¡¯ll train you to want what you don¡¯t need. They¡¯ll tra in you to manipulate words so they don¡¯t mean anything 
anymore. They¡¯ll tra in you to forget what it is that you already know. They¡¯ll t rain you so good, you¡¯ll start believing 
what they tell you about equal opportunity and the American way and all that shit. They¡¯ll give you a corner office and 
invite you to fancy dinners, and tell you you¡¯re a credit to your race. Until you want to actually start running things, 
and then they¡¯ll yank on your chain and let you know that you may be a we ll-tra ined, well-pa id nigger, but you¡¯re a 
nigger just the same.¡± 
 
¡°So what is it you¡¯re telling me-that I shouldn¡¯t be going to college?¡± 
Frank¡¯s shoulders slumped, and he fell back in h is chair with a sigh. ¡°No. I didn¡¯t sa y that. You¡¯ve got to go. I¡¯m just 
telling you to keep your eyes open. Stay awake.¡±  
 
It made me s mile , thinking back on Frank and his old Black Powe r, dashiki self. In some ways he was as incurable as 
my mother, as certain in his fa ith, living in the same sixt ies time  wa rp that Hawa ii had created. Keep your eyes open, he 
had warned. It was n¡¯t as easy as it sounded. Not in sunny L.A. Not as you strolled through Occidental¡¯s campus, a fe w 
miles fro m Pasadena, tree-lined and Spanish-tiled. The students were friendly, the teachers encouraging. In the fall of 
1979, Ca rter, gas lines, and breast-beating were a ll on their way out. Reagan was on his way in, mo rning in A me rica . 
When you left ca mpus, you drove on the freeway to Venice  Beach or over to Westwood, passing East L.A. or South 
Central without even knowing it, just more  palm trees peeking ou t like  dandelions over the high concrete walls. L.A. 
wasn¡¯t all that diffe rent fro m Ha waii, not the part you saw. Just bigger, and easier to find a barber who knew how to cut 
your hair. 
 
Anyway, most of the other black students at Oxy didn¡¯t seem all that worried about compromise. There were enough of us 
on campus to constitute a tribe, and when it came to hanging out many of us chose to function like a tribe, staying close 
together, traveling in packs. Freshman year, when I was still living in the dorms, there¡¯d be the same sort of bull sessions that 
I¡¯d had with Ray and other blacks back in Hawaii, the same grumblings, the same list of complaints. 
 
Otherwise, our worries seemed indistinguishable fro m those of the white kids around us. Surviving c lasses. Finding a 
well-paying gig a fter graduation. Trying to get laid. I had stumbled upon one of the well-kept secrets about black 
people: that most of us weren¡¯t interested in revolt; that most of us were tired of thinking about race all the time; that if  
we prefe rred to keep to ourselves it was ma inly because that was the easiest way to stop thinking about it, easier than 
spending all your time mad or trying to guess whatever it was that white fo lks were thin king about you. 
 
So why couldn¡¯t I let it go? 
I don¡¯t know. I didn¡¯t have the luxury, I suppose, the certainty of the tribe. Grow up in Compton and survival becomes a 
revolutionary act. You get to college and your family is still back there rooting for you. They¡¯re happy to see you escape; 
there¡¯s no question of betrayal. But I hadn¡¯t grown up in Compton, or Watts. I had nothing to escape from except my own 
inner doubt. I was more like the black students who had grown up in the suburbs, kids whose parents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
had already paid the price of escape. You could spot them right away by the way they talked, the people they sat with 
in the cafeteria . When pressed, they would sputter and expla in that they refused to be categorized. They weren¡¯t  
defined by the color of their skin, they would tell you. They were  indiv iduals. 
 
That¡¯s how Joyce liked to talk. She was a good-looking wo man, Joyce was, with her green eyes and honey skin and 
pouty lips. We lived in the same  dorm my  fresh man year, and al l the brothers were a fter her. One day I asked her if she 
was going to the Black Students¡¯ Association meeting. She looked at me funny, then started shaking her head like a 
baby who doesn¡¯t want what it sees on the spoon. 
 
¡°I¡¯m not black,¡± Joyce said. ¡°I¡¯m mu ltirac ia l.¡± Then she started telling me about her father, who happened to be 
Italian and was the sweetest man in the world; and her mother, who happened to be part African and part French and 
part Native A merican and part something else. ¡°Why should I h ave to choose between them?¡± she asked me . He r voice 
cracked, and I thought she was going to cry. ¡°It¡¯s not white people who are ma king me choose. Maybe it used to be that 
way, but now they¡¯re willing to treat me like  a person. No -it¡¯s black people who always have to make everything rac ial. 
They¡¯re the ones making me choose. They¡¯re the ones who are telling me  that I can¡¯t be who I a m¡­.¡±  
 
They, they, they. That was the problem with people like Joyce. They talked ab out the richness of their mult icultura l 
heritage and it sounded real good, until you noticed that they avoided black people. It wasn¡¯t a matter of conscious 
choice, necessarily, just a matter of grav itational pull, the way integration always worked, a one -way street. The 
minority assimilated into the dominant culture, not the other way around. Only white culture could be neutral and 
objective. On ly wh ite culture could be nonracial, willing to adopt the occasional e xotic into its ranks. On ly wh ite 
culture had individuals. And we, the half-breeds and the college-degreed, take a survey of the situation and think to 
ourselves, Why should we get lu mped in with the losers if we don¡¯t have to? We become only so grateful to lose 
ourselves in the crowd, A merica¡¯s happy, faceless ma rketplace; and we ¡¯re never so outraged as when a cabbie drives 
past us or the woman in the e levator clutches her purse, not so much because we¡¯re bothered by the fact that such 
indignities are what less fortunate coloreds have to put up with  every single day of their lives -although that¡¯s what we 
tell ourselves-but because we¡¯re wea ring a Brooks Brothers suit and speak impeccable  English and yet have 
somehow been mistaken for an ord inary nigger. 
 
Don¡¯t you know who I a m? I¡¯m an individual! 
 
 
I sat up, lit another cigarette, e mpt ied the bottle into my g lass. I kne w I was being too hard on poor Joyce. The truth 
was that I understood her, her and all the other black kids who fe lt the way she did. In their mannerisms, their speech, 
their mixed -up hearts, I kept recognizing p ieces of myself. And that¡¯s exactly what scared me . The ir confusion made 
me  question my own rac ial credentials a ll over again, Ray¡¯s tru mp card still lurking in the back of my mind. I needed 
to put distance between them and myself, to convince myself that I wasn¡¯t compro mised-that I was indeed still awa ke. 
To avoid being mistaken for a  sellout, I chose my friends carefully. The mo re politica lly active blac k students. The 
foreign students. The Chicanos. The Marxist professors and structural fe min ists and punk-rock performance poets. We 
smoked ciga rettes and wore leather jac kets. At night, in the dorms, we d iscussed neocolonialism, Franz Fanon, 
Eurocentris m, and patriarchy. When we ground out our cigarettes in the hallway carpet or set our stereos so loud that 
 
 
 
 
the walls began to shake, we were resisting bourgeois society¡¯s stifling constraints. We weren¡¯t indifferent or 
careless or insecure. We were a lienated. 
 
But this strategy alone couldn¡¯t provide the distance I wanted, fro m Joyce or my  past. After a ll, there  we re thousands 
of so-called ca mpus radicals, most of the m white and tenured and happily tolerated. No, it re mained necessary to prove 
which side you were on, to show your loyalty to the black masses, to strike out and name  na mes. 
 
I thought back to that time  when I was still liv ing in the dorms, the three of us in Reggie¡¯s roo m-Reggie, Marcus, and 
myself-the patter of ra in against the windowpane. We were drinking a few beers and Marcus was telling us about his 
run-in with the L.A.P.D. ¡°They had no reason to stop me,¡± he was saying. ¡°No reason ¡¯cept I was wa lking in  a wh ite 
neighborhood. Made me spread-eagle against the car. One of ¡¯e m pulled out his piece. I d idn¡¯t let ¡¯e m scare me , 
though. That¡¯s what gets these storm troopers off, seeing fear in a b lack man ¡­.¡±  
 
I watched Marcus as he spoke, lean and dark and straight-backed, his long legs braced apart, co mfortable  in a  wh ite T-
shirt and blue denim overalls. Marcus was the most conscious of brothers. He could tell you about his grandfather the 
Garveyite; about his  mother in St. Louis who had raised her kids alone while working as a nurse; about his older sister 
who had been a founding me mber of the local Panther party; about his friends in the joint. His lineage was pure, his 
loyalties clear, and for that reason he always made me feel a little  off-balance, like a  younger brother who, no matter 
what he does, will a lways be one step behind. And that¡¯s just how I was feeling at that mo ment, listening to Marcus 
pronounce on his authentic black e xperience, when Tim walked into the roo m. 
 
¡°Hey, guys,¡± Tim had said, waving cheerfully. He turned to me. ¡° Listen, Barry -do you have that 
assignment for Econ?¡±  
 
Tim was not a conscious brother. Tim wore argyle  sweaters and pressed jeans and talked like  Beaver Cleaver. He  
planned to major in business. His white g irlfriend was probably waiting for him up in h is roo m, listening to 
country music. He  was happy as a clam, and I wanted nothing more than for him to go away. I got up, wa lked with 
him down the hall to my room, gave him the assignment he needed. As soon as I got back to Reggie¡¯s room, I 
somehow fe lt obliged to e xp lain. 
 
¡°Tim¡¯s a trip, ain¡¯t he,¡±  I said, shaking my head. ¡°Should change his name fro m Tim to To m.¡± 
Reggie laughed, but Marcus didn¡¯t. Marcus said, ¡°W hy you say that, man?¡± 
The question caught me by surprise. ¡°I don¡¯t know. The dude¡¯s just goofy, that¡¯s all.¡±  
 
 
Marcus took a sip of his beer and looked me straight in the eye. ¡°Tim see ms all right to me,¡± he said. ¡° He¡¯s going 
about his business. Don¡¯t bother nobody. Seems to me we  should be worrying about whether our own stuff¡¯s 
together instead of passing judgment on how other folks are supposed to act.¡± 
 
A year later, and I still burned with the me mory, the anger and resentment I¡¯d fe lt at that mo ment, M a rcus calling 
me  out in front of Reggie  like that. But he¡¯d been right to do it, hadn¡¯t he? He had caught me in a lie . Two lies, rea lly -
the lie I had told about Tim and the lie I was telling about myself. In fact, that whole first year seemed like  one long  
lie , me  spending all my energy running around in circles, try ing to cover my tracks.  
 
Except with Reg ina. That¡¯s probably what had drawn me to Regina, the way she made me  fee l like I didn¡¯t have to lie.  
 
Even that first time we met, the day she walked into the coffee shop and found Marcus giving me grief about my choice 
of reading materia l. Marcus had waved her over to our table, rising slightly to pull out a chair.  
 
 
 
 
¡°Sister Regina,¡± Marcus said. ¡° You know Barac k, don¡¯t you? I¡¯m trying to tell Brother Barac k here about this racist 
tract he¡¯s reading.¡± He held up a copy of Heart of Darkness, evidence for the court. I reached over to sna tch it out of 
his hands. 
 
¡°Man, stop waving that thing around.¡± 
¡°See there,¡± Marcus said. ¡°Makes you embarrassed, don¡¯t it-just being seen with a book like th is. I¡¯m telling you, 
man, this stuff will poison your mind.¡± He  looked at h is watch. ¡°Da mn , I¡¯m late for c lass.¡± He leaned over and 
pecked Regina on the cheek. ¡°Ta lk to this brother, will you? I think he can still be saved.¡± 
 
Regina s miled and shook her head as we watched Marcus stride out the door. ¡°Marcus is in one of 
his preaching moods, I see.¡± 
 
I tossed the book into my backpack. ¡°Actually, he¡¯s right,¡± I said. ¡° It is a racist book. The way Conrad sees it, Africa¡¯s 
the cesspool of the world, blac k fo lks are savages, and any contact with them breeds infection.¡±  
 
Regina b lew on her coffee. ¡° So why are  you reading it?¡±  
¡°Because it¡¯s assigned.¡± I paused, not sure if I should go on. ¡°And because - 
¡± ¡°Because¡­¡± 
¡°And because the book teaches me things,¡± I said. ¡°About white people, I mean. See , the book¡¯s not really about 
Africa. Or b lack people. It¡¯s about the man who wrote it. The European. The A merican. A particu lar way of looking at 
the world. If you can keep your distance, it¡¯s all there, in what¡¯s said and what¡¯s left unsaid. So I read the book to help 
me  understand just what it is that ma kes white people so afra id. Their de mons. The way ideas get twisted around. It 
helps me understand how people learn to hate.¡± 
 
¡°And that¡¯s important to you.¡± 
My life depends on it, I thought to myself. But I didn¡¯t tell Reg ina that. I just smiled and said, ¡°Tha t¡¯s the only way 
to cure an illness, right? Diagnose it.¡±  
 
She smiled back and sipped her coffee. I had seen her around before, usually sitting in the library with a book in hand, a 
big, dark woman who wore stockings and dresses that looked homemade, along  with tinted, oversized glasses and a scarf 
always covering her head. I knew she was a junior, helped organize black student events, didn¡¯t go out much. She stirred 
her coffee idly and asked, ¡°What did Marcus call you just now? Some African name, wasn¡¯t it ?¡± 
 
 
¡°Barac k.¡± 
¡°I thought your name was Barry.¡±  
¡°Barac k¡¯s my given na me. My father¡¯s name . He was Kenyan.¡± 
¡°Does it mean something?¡± 
¡°It means ¡®Blessed.¡¯ In Arabic. My grandfather was a Muslim.¡±  
Regina repeated the name to herself, testing out the sound. ¡°Barack. It ¡¯s beautiful.¡± She leaned forward 
across the table. ¡°So why does everybody call you Barry?¡± 
 
¡°Habit, I guess. My father used it when he arrived in the States. I don¡¯t know whether that was his idea or somebody 
else¡¯s. He probably used Barry because it was easier to pronounce. You know-he lped him fit in. Then it got passed on 
to me. So I could fit in.¡±  
 
¡°Do you mind if I call you Barac k?¡± 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I smiled. ¡° Not as long as you say it right.¡± 
She tilted her head impatiently, her mouth set in moc k offense, her eyes ready to surrender to laughter. We ended up 
spending the afternoon together, talking and drinking coffee. She told me  about her childhood in Ch icago, the absent 
father and struggling mother, the South Side six-flat that never seemed warm enough in winter and got so hot in the 
summer that people went out by the lake to sleep. She told me about the neighbors on her block, about walking past the 
taverns and pool halls on the way to church on Sunday. She told me  about evenings in the kitchen with uncles and 
cousins and grandparents, the stew of voices bubbling up in laughter. Her voice evoked a vision of b lack life in a ll its 
possibility, a  vision that filled me with longing-a longing for p lace, and a fixed and defin ite history. As we were  
getting up to leave, I told Reg ina I envied her. 
 
 
¡°For what?¡± 
¡°I don¡¯t know. For your me mories, I guess.¡± 
 
 
Regina looked at me and started to laugh, a round, full sound from deep in 
her belly. ¡°What¡¯s so funny?¡± 
¡°Oh, Barac k,¡± she said, catching her breath, ¡°isn¡¯t life  something? And here I was all this time wishing I¡¯d grown up 
in Ha wa ii.¡± 
 
Strange how a single conversation can change you. Or maybe it only see ms that way in retrospect. A year passes 
and you know you feel differently, but you¡¯re not sure what or why or how, so your mind casts back for something 
that might give that difference shape: a word, a glance, a  touch. I know that after what seemed like  a long absence, I 
had felt my voice returning to me that afternoon with Regina. It re ma ined shaky afterwa rd, subject to distortion. But 
entering sophomore year I could fee l it growing stronger, sturdier, that constant, honest portion of myself, a  bridge 
between my future and my past. 
 
It was around that time that I got involved in the divestment campa ign. It had started as something of a la rk, I 
suppose, part of the radical pose my friends  and I sought to maintain, a  subconscious end run around issues closer to 
home. But as the months passed and I found myself dra wn into a larger role -contacting representatives of the African 
National Congress to speak on campus, drafting letters to the faculty, printing up flyers, arguing strategy-I noticed that 
people had begun to listen to my opinions. It was a discovery that made me hungry for words. Not words to hide 
behind but words that could carry a message, support an idea. When we started planning the rally for the trustees¡¯ 
meet ing, and somebody suggested that I open the thing, I quickly agreed. I figured I was ready, and could reach people 
where it counted. I thought my voice wouldn¡¯t fa il me.  
 
Let¡¯s see, now. What was it that I had been thinking in those days leading up to the rally? The agenda had been carefully 
arranged beforehand-I was only supposed to make a few opening remarks, in the middle of which a couple of white 
students would come onstage dressed in their paramilitary uniforms to drag me away. A bit of street theater, a way to 
dramatize the situation for activists in South Africa. I knew the score, had helped plan the script. Only, when I sat down to  
prepare a few notes for what I might say, something had happened. In my mind it somehow became more than just a two-
minute speech, more than a way to prove my political orthodoxy. I started to remember my father¡¯s visit to Miss Hefty¡¯s 
class; the look on Coretta¡¯s face that day; the power of my father¡¯s words to transform. If I could just 
 
 
 
 
find the right words, I had thought to myself. W ith the right words everything could change -South Africa, the lives 
of ghetto kids just a few miles away, my o wn tenuous place in the world.  
 
I was still in that trancelike state when I mounted the stage. For I don¡¯t know how long, I just stood there, the sun 
in my eyes, the crowd of a few hundred restless after lunch. A couple of students were throwing a Frisbee on the 
lawn; others were standing off to the side, ready to break off to the lib rary at any mo ment . Without wait ing for a cue, 
¡°There¡¯s a struggle going on,¡± I said. My voice barely carried beyond the first few rows. A few people looked up, and 
I stepped up to the microphone. 
 
 
I wa ited for the crowd to quiet. 
 
¡°I say, there¡¯s a struggle going 
on!¡± The Frisbee players stopped. 
¡°It¡¯s happening an ocean away. But it ¡¯s a struggle that touches each and every one of us. Whether we know it or not.  
 
Whether we want it or not. A struggle that demands we choose sides. Not between black and white. Not between rich 
and poor. No-it¡¯s a harder choice than that. It¡¯s a choice between dignity and servitude. Between fairness and 
injustice. Between co mmit ment and indifference. A choice between right and wrong ¡­¡±  
 
I stopped. The crowd was quiet now, watching me. So mebody started to clap. ¡° Go on with it, Barac k,¡± so mebody 
else shouted. ¡°Tell it like it is.¡± Then the others started in, clapping, cheering, and I knew that I had them, that the 
connection had been made. I took hold o f the mike , ready to plunge on, when I felt so meone¡¯s hands grabbing me 
fro m behind. It was just as we¡¯d planned it, Andy and Jonathan looking grim-faced behind their dark g lasses. They 
started yanking me off the stage, and I was supposed to act like I was trying to break free , e xcept a part o f me  wasn¡¯t 
acting, I rea lly wanted to stay up there, to hear my voice bouncing off the crowd and returning back to me  in 
applause. I had so much left to say. 
 
But my part was over. I stood on the side as Marcus stepped up to the mike  in h is white T -shirt and denims, lean and 
dark and straight-backed and righteous. He e xp la ined to the audience what they had just witnessed, why the 
administration¡¯s waffling on the issue of South Africa was unacceptable. Then Reg ina got up and testified, about the 
pride her fa mily had fe lt in seeing her at college and the shame she now felt  knowing that she was a part of an 
institution that paid for its privilege with the profits of oppression. I should have been proud of the two of them; they 
were e loquent, you could tell the crowd was moved. But I wasn¡¯t really listening anymore. I was on the outside again, 
watching, judging, skeptical. Through my eyes, we suddenly appeared  like the sleek and we ll-fed a mateurs we were , 
with our b lack ch iffon armbands and hand-painted signs and earnest young faces. The Frisbee players had returned to 
their ga me. When the trustees began to arrive for the ir meeting, a few of the m paused behind the glass walls of the 
administration build ing to watch us, and I noticed the old white men chuckling to themselves, one old geezer even 
waving in our d irect ion. The whole  thing was a farce , I thought to myself-the ra lly, the banners, everything. A pleasant 
afternoon diversion, a school play without the parents. And me and my one -minute oration-the biggest farce of all. 
 
At the party that night, Regina ca me up to me and offe red her congratulations. I asked what for.  
 
 
 
¡°For that wonderful speech you gave.¡± 
I popped open a beer. ¡°It was short, anyway.¡± 
 
 
 
 
Regina ignored my sarcasm. ¡°That¡¯s what made it so effective,¡± she said. ¡° You spoke fro m the heart, Ba rack. It 
made people want to hear more. When they pulled you away, it was as if -¡± 
 
¡°Listen, Regina,¡± I said, cutting her off, ¡°you are a very sweet lady. And I¡¯m happy you enjoyed my little  performance 
today. But that¡¯s the last time you will ever hear another speech out of me. I¡¯m going t o leave the preaching to you. 
And to Marcus. Me, I¡¯ve decided I¡¯ve got no business speaking for blac k folks.¡± 
 
¡°And why is that?¡± 
I sipped on my beer, my eyes wandering over the dancers in front of us. ¡°Because I¡¯ve got nothing to say, Regina. I 
don¡¯t believe we made any diffe rence by what we d id today. I don¡¯t believe that what happens to a kid in So weto 
ma kes much difference to the people we were ta lking to. Pretty wo rds don¡¯t make it so. So why do I pretend 
otherwise? I¡¯ll tell you why. Because it  ma kes me  fee l important. Because I like the applause. It gives me a n ice, 
 
 
cheap thrill. That¡¯s all.¡±  
 
¡°You don¡¯t really believe 
that.¡± ¡°That¡¯s what I believe.¡± 
She stared at me, pu zzled, trying to figure out whether I was pulling her leg. ¡°Well, you could  have fooled me,¡± she 
said finally, try ing to match my tone. ¡°See med to me like I heard a man speak who believed in something. A b lack 
man who cared. But hey, I guess I¡¯m stupid.¡± 
 
I took another swig of beer and waved at someone coming through the door. ¡° Not stupid, Reg ina. Naive.¡±  
 
She took a step back, her hands on her hips. ¡°Naive? You¡¯re calling me naive? Uh -uh. I don¡¯t think so. If anybody¡¯s 
naive, it¡¯s you. You¡¯re the one who seems to think he can run away from himself. You¡¯re the one who thinks he c an avoid 
what he feels.¡± She stuck a finger in my chest. ¡°You wanna know what your real problem is? You always think 
everything¡¯s about you. You¡¯re just like Reggie and Marcus and Steve and all the other brothers out here. The rally is about 
you. The speech is about you. The hurt is always your hurt. Well, let me tell you something, Mr. Obama. It¡¯s not just about 
you. It¡¯s never just about you. It¡¯s about people who need your help. Children who are depending on you. They¡¯re not 
interested in your irony or your sophistication or your ego getting bruised. And neither am I.¡± 
 
Just as she was finishing, Reggie wandered out of the kitchen, drunker than I was. He ca me over and threw his arm 
around my shoulder. ¡°Oba ma! Great party, man!¡± He thre w Regina a sloppy grin. ¡° Let me tell you, Regina, Oba ma 
and me go way back. Should have seen our parties last year, back at the dorms. Man, you re me mber that time we 
stayed up the whole wee kend? Forty hours, no sleep. Started Saturday morning and d idn¡¯t stop till Monday.¡± 
 
I tried to change the subject, but Reggie was on a roll. ¡° I¡¯m telling you, Regina, it was wild. When the maids show 
up Monday morning, we were a ll still sitting in the hallway, looking like zo mbies. Bottles everywhere. Cigarette b utts. 
 
Newspapers. That spot where Jimmy thre w up ¡­¡±  Reggie turned to  me and started to laugh, spilling  more beer on 
the rug. ¡° You re me mber, don¡¯t you, man?  Shit  was so bad, those little  old Me xican  lad ies started to cry. ¡®Dios M io,¡¯ 
one of ¡¯e m says, and the other one starts patting her on the back. Oh shit, we were c ra zy ¡­.¡±  
 
I smiled wea kly, fee ling Regina stare me  down like the bum that I was. When she finally spoke it was as if Reggie 
weren¡¯t there. 
 
 
 
 
¡° You think that¡¯s funny?¡± she said to me . Her voice was shaking, barely a  wh isper. ¡°Is that what¡¯s real to you,  
Barac k-making a mess for somebody else to clean up? That could have been my grand mother, you know. She had to 
clean up behind people for most of her life. I¡¯ll bet the people she worked for thought it was funny, too.¡± 
 
She grabbed her purse off the coffee table and headed for the door. I thought about running after her, but I 
noticed a few people staring at me and I didn¡¯t want a scene. Reggie pulled on my arm, looking hurt and confused, 
like a  lost child. 
 
¡°What¡¯s her proble m?¡± he said. 
 
¡°Nothing,¡± I said. I took the beer out of Reggie¡¯s hand and set it on top of the bookshelf. ¡°She just believes in 
things that aren¡¯t really there.¡±  
 
I rose fro m the couch and opened my front door, the pent -up smoke trailing me out of the roo m like a  spirit. Up above, 
the moon had slipped out of sight, only its glow still v isible a long the rim of high c louds. The sky had begun to lighten; 
the air tasted of dew. 
 
Look at yourself before you pass judgment. Don¡¯t ma ke so meone else clean up your mess. It¡¯s not about you. They 
were such simp le points, homilies I had heard a thousand times before, in a ll their variations, fro m TV sitco ms and 
philosophy books, fro m my  grandparents and fro m my mother. I had stopped listening at a certain point, I now 
realized, so wrapped up had I been in my own perce ived in juries, so eager was I to escape the imagined traps that white 
authority had set for me. To that wh ite world, I had been willing to cede the values of my childhood, as if those values 
were somehow irreversib ly soiled by the endless falsehoods that white spoke about black.  
 
Except now I was hearing the same  thing fro m b lack people I respected, people with mo re e xcuses for bitterness than 
I  might ever cla im  for  myself. Who told you that being honest was a white thing? they asked me. Who sold you this 
bill of goods, that your situation exe mpted you fro m be ing thoughtful or diligent or kind, or that mora lity had a co lor? 
 
You¡¯ve lost your way, brother. Your ideas about yourself-about who you are and who you might become-have grown 
stunted and narrow and small. 
 
I sat down on the doorstep and rubbed the knot in the back of my neck. Ho w had that happened? I started to a sk 
myself, but before the question had even formed in my mind, I a lready knew the answer. Fea r. The sa me fea r that 
had caused me to push Coretta away back in g ra mma r school. The same fear that had caused me to rid icule Tim in 
front of Marcus and Reggie. The constant, crippling fea r that I didn¡¯t be long somehow, that unless I dodged and hid 
and pretended to be something I wasn¡¯t I would forever re main an outsider, with the rest of the world, b lack and 
white, a lways standing in judgment. 
 
So Reg ina was right; it had been just about me. My fear. My needs. And now? I imagined Regina¡¯s grandmother 
somewhere, her back bent, the flesh of her arms shaking as she scrubbed an endless floor. Slowly, the old wo man lifted 
her head to look straight at me , and in her sagging face I saw that what bound us together went beyond anger or despair 
or pity. 
 
What was she asking of me , then? Determination, mostly. The determination to push against whatever power kept her 
stooped instead of standing straight. The determination to resist the easy or the expedient. You might be locked into a  
 
 
 
 
world not of your own making, her eyes said, but you still have a cla im on how it is shaped. You still have 
responsibilit ies. 
 
The old wo man¡¯s face d issolved from my  mind, only to be replaced by a series of others. The copper-skinned face 
of the Me xican ma id, strain ing as she carries out the garbage. The face of Lolo ¡¯s mother dra wn with grief as she 
watches the Dutch burn down her house. The tight-lipped, chalk-colo red face of Toot as she boards the six-thirty 
A.M. bus that will take her to work. On ly a lac k of imagination, a fa ilure  of nerve, had made me  think that I had to 
choose between them. They all asked the same thing of me, these grandmothers of mine.  
 
My identity might begin with the fact of my race, but it d idn¡¯t, couldn¡¯t, 
end there. At least that¡¯s what I would choose to believe. 
 
For a few minutes mo re I sat still in my doorway, watching the sun glide into place, thin king about the call to Regina  
 
I¡¯d be ma king that day. Beh ind me, Billie was on her last song. I pic ked up the refra in, hu mming a few bars. Her voice 
sounded different to me now. Beneath the layers of hurt, beneath the ragged laughter, I heard a willingness to endure. 
Endure-and ma ke music that wasn¡¯t there before. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER SIX 
 
 
I SPENT M Y FIRST NIGHT in Manhattan curled up in an alleyway. It wasn¡¯t intentional; wh ile  still in L.A., I had 
heard that a friend of a friend would be vacating her apart ment in Spanish Harle m, near Colu mb ia, and that given New 
 
Yo rk¡¯s real estate market I¡¯d better grab it while I could. An agree ment was reached; I wired ahead with the date of my 
August arrival; and after dragging my luggage through the airport, the subways, Times Square, and across 109th fro m 
Broadway to A msterdam, I finally stood at the door, a few minutes past ten P.M. 
 
I pressed the buzzer repeatedly, but no one answered. The street was empty, the build ings on either side boarded up, 
a bulk of rectangular shadows. Eventually, a young Puerto Rican wo man e merged fro m the build ing, throwing a 
nervous look my way before heading down the street. I rushed to catch the door before it sla mmed shut, and, pulling 
my luggage behind me, proceeded upstairs to knock, and then bang, on the apartment door. Again, no answer, just a 
sound down the hall of a deadbolt thrown into place.  
 
New York. Just like I pictured it. I checked my wallet-not enough money for a motel. I kne w one person in New Yo rk, 
a guy named Sadik who m I¡¯d met in L.A., but he¡¯d told me that he worked all n ight at a bar some where. With nothing 
to do but wait, I carried my luggage back downstairs and sat on the stoop. After a wh ile , I reached into my back pocket, 
pulling out the letter I¡¯d been carrying since leaving L.A. 
 
 
Dear Son, 
It was such a pleasant surprise to hear fro m you after so long. I a m fine and doing all those things which you know 
are e xpected of me in this country. I just came back fro m London where I was attending to Gov ern ment business, 
negotiating finances, etc. In fact it is because of too much travel that I rare ly write to you. In any case, I think I shall  do 
better fro m now on. 
 
 
 
 
You will be p leased to know that all your brothers and sisters here are fine, and send their greetings. Like me, 
they approve of your decision to come home  after graduation. When you come, we shall, together, decide on how 
long you may wish to stay. Barry, even if it is only for a few days, the important thing is that you know your 
people, and also that you know where you belong. 
 
Please look a fter yourself, and say hallo to your mu m, Tutu, and Stanley. I hope to hear fro m 
you soon. Love, 
Dad 
 
 
 
 
 
I fo lded the letter along its seams and stuffed it back into my pocket. It hadn¡¯t been easy to write h im; our 
correspondence had all but died over the past four years. In fact, I had gone through several drafts, crossing out 
lines, struggling for the appropriate tone, resisting the impulse to e xpla in too much. ¡° Dear Father.¡± ¡° Dear Dad.¡± 
¡°Dear Dr. Oba ma.¡± And now he had answered me , cheerfu l and calm. Know where you belong, he advised. He 
made it sound simp le, like calling directory assistance. 
 
¡°Information-what city, please?¡± 
¡°Uh ¡­I¡¯m not sure. I was hoping you could tell me. The name ¡¯s Oba ma. Where do I belong?¡±  
Maybe it really was that simple for him. I imag ined my father sitting at his desk in Nairobi, a big man in 
government, with clerks and secretaries bringing him papers to sign, a minister calling him for advice, a loving wife 
and children wa iting at ho me, h is own father¡¯s village only a  day¡¯s drive away. The image made me vaguely angry, 
and I tried to set it aside, concentrating instead on the sound  of salsa coming fro m an open window so mewhere down 
the block. The sa me thoughts kept returning to me, though, as persistent as the beat of my heart.  
 
Where did I belong? My conversation with Regina that night after the ra lly might have triggered a change  in me , left 
me  wa rm with good intentions. But I was like  a drunk co ming out of a long, painfu l b inge, and I had soon felt my  
newfound resolve slipping away, without object or direction. Two years fro m graduation, I had no idea what I was 
going to do with my life , or even where I would live. Hawa ii lay behind me like a ch ildhood dream; I could no longer 
imagine settling there. Whatever my father might say, I knew it was too late to ever truly cla im Africa as my home . 
And if I had come to understand myself as  a black A merican, and was understood as such, that understanding remained 
unanchored to place. What I needed was a community, I rea lized, a co mmunity that cut deeper than the common 
despair that black friends and I shared when reading the latest crime  statistics, or the high fives I might e xchange on a 
basketball court. A place where I could put down stakes and test my co mmit ments. 
 
And so, when I heard about a transfer program that Occidental had arranged with Colu mbia  Un iversity, I¡¯d been 
quick to apply. I figured that if there weren¡¯t  any more blac k students at Columb ia than there were  at Oxy, I¡¯d at least 
be in the heart of a true c ity, with blac k neighborhoods in close pro ximity. As it was, there wasn¡¯t much in L.A. to 
hold me  back. Most of my friends were graduating that year: Hasan off to wo rk with his fa mily in London, Reg ina on 
her way to Andalusia to study Spanish Gypsies. 
 
And Marcus? I wasn¡¯t sure what had happened to Marcus. He should have had one more year left, but something had  
gotten to him midway through his junior year, something that I recognized, even if I couldn¡¯t quite name it. I thought 
back to one evening, sitting with him in the library, before he¡¯d decided to drop out of school. An Iranian student, an 
 
 
 
 
older bald ing man with a glass eye, was sitting across the table fro m us, and he had noticed Marcus reading a book on 
the  economics  of  slavery.  Although  the  drift  of  his  eye  gave  the  Iranian  a   menacing  look,  he  was  a  friendly  and 
curious man, and eventually he leaned over the table and asked Marcus a question about the book. 
 
¡°Tell me, please,¡± the man said. ¡°Ho w do you think such a thing as slavery was permitted to last for so many years?¡± 
¡°White people don¡¯t see us as human beings,¡± Marcus said. ¡°Simp le as that. Most of ¡¯e m still don¡¯t.¡± 
 
 
¡°Yes, I see. But what I mean to ask is, why didn¡¯t black people 
fight?¡± ¡°They did fight. Nat Turner, Denmark Vescey-¡± 
¡°Slave rebe llions,¡± the Iranian interrupted. ¡° Yes, I have read something about them. These were  very brave men. But 
they were so few, you see. Had I been a slave, watching these people do what they did to my wife, my children ¡­well, I 
would have preferred death. Th is is what I don¡¯t understand -why so many men did not fight at all. Unt il death, you 
see?¡± 
 
I looked at Ma rcus, wait ing for h im to answer. But he re mained silent, his face not angry as much as withdrawn, eyes 
fastened to a spot on the table. His lack of response confused me, but after a pause I took up the attack, asking the 
Iranian if he knew the names of the untold thousands who had leaped into shark-infested waters before their p rison 
ships had ever reached American ports; asking if, once the ships had landed, he would have still pre ferred d eath had he 
known that revolt might only visit more suffering on wo men and child ren. Was the collaboration of some slaves any 
diffe rent than the silence of some  Iran ians who stood by and did nothing as Savak thugs murdered and tortured 
opponents of the Shah? How could we judge other men until we had stood in their shoes? 
 
This last re mark seemed to catch the man off guard, and Marcus finally re joined the conversation, repeating one of 
 
Malcolm X¡¯s old saws about the difference between house Negroes and field Negroes. But he spoke as if he 
weren¡¯t convinced of his own words, and after a fe w minutes he abruptly stood up and walked toward the door.  
 
We never did talk about that conversation, Marcus and I. Maybe it didn¡¯t explain anything; there were more than enough 
reasons for someone like Marcus to feel restless in a place like Occidental. I know that in the months that followed, I began  
to notice changes in him, as if he were haunted by specters that had seeped throug h the cracks of our safe, sunny world. 
Initially, he became more demonstrative in his racial pride: He took to wearing African prints to class and started lobbying 
the administration for an all-black dormitory. Later, he grew uncommunicative. He began to s kip classes, hitting the reefer 
more heavily. He let his beard grow out, let his hair work its way into dreadlocks. Finally he told me that he was going to 
take a leave from school for a while. ¡°Need a break from this shit,¡± he said. We were walking through a park in Compton, 
hanging out at an all-day festival there. It was a beautiful afternoon, everybody in shorts, children screeching as they ran 
through the grass, but Marcus seemed distracted and barely spoke. Only when we passed a group of bongo players  did he 
seem to come to life. We sat beside them under a tree, transfixed by the sound, watching the dark, barely cupped hands dance 
low off the hide. After a while I started to get bored and wandered off to talk to a pretty young woman selling meat pies. 
When I returned, Marcus was still there, except he was playing now, his long legs crossed, borrowed bongos nestling in his 
lap. Through the haze of smoke that surrounded him, his face was expressionless; his eyes were narrow, as if he were trying 
to shut out the sun. For almost an hour I watched him play without rhythm or nuance, just pounding the hell out of those 
drums, beating back untold memories. 
 
 
 
 
And right then I realized that Marcus needed my help as much as I needed his, that I wasn¡¯t the only one 
searching for answers. 
 
I  looked  down  now  at  the  abandoned  New  Yo rk  street.  Did  Marcus  know  where  he  belonged?  Did  any  of  us? 
Where were  the fathers, the uncles and grandfathers, who could help  e xp lain th is gash in our hearts? Where were  the 
healers who might help us rescue meaning fro m defeat? They were gone, vanished, swallo wed up by time. On ly their 
cloudy images re mained, and their once-a-year letters fu ll of dime store advice¡­. 
 
It was we ll past midnight by the time  I c rawled through a fence that led to an alleyway. I found a dry spot, propped 
my luggage beneath me, and fell asleep, the sound of drums softly shaping my drea ms. In the morn ing, I woke  up to 
find a white hen pecking at the garbage near my feet. Across the street, a homeless man was washing himself at an 
open hydrant and didn¡¯t object when I joined him. There  was still no one home at the apart ment, but Sadik 
answered his phone when I called him and told me to catch a cab  to his place on the Upper East Side. 
 
He greeted me on the street, a short, well-built Pa kistani who had come to New York fro m London two years earlier 
and found his caustic wit and unabashed desire to ma ke money perfectly p itched to the city¡¯s mood. He had overstayed 
his tourist visa and now made a  living in Ne w York¡¯s high -turnover, illegal immig rant workforce, wa iting on tables. As 
we entered the apartment I saw a wo man in her underwear sitting at the kitchen table, a mirror and a ra zor blad e 
pushed off to one side. 
 
¡°Sophie,¡± Sadik started to say, ¡°this is Barry-¡± 
 
¡°Barac k,¡±  I  corrected,  dropping  my  bags on  the  floor.  The  wo man  waved  vaguely,  then told  Sadik  that  she¡¯d be 
gone  by  the time  he  got  back.  I  fo llo wed  Sadik  back  downstairs  and  int o  a  Greek  coffee  shop  across  the street.  I 
apologized again about having called so early. 
 
¡°Don¡¯t worry about it,¡± Sadik said. ¡° She seemed much prettie r last night.¡± He studied the menu, then set it 
aside. ¡°So tell me, Bar-sorry. Ba rack. Te ll me, Barac k. What brings you to our fair c ity?¡± 
 
I tried to e xpla in. I had spent the summe r brooding over a misspent youth, I said -the state of the world and the state of 
my soul. ¡° I want to ma ke a mends,¡± I said. ¡°Ma ke myself of some  use.¡± 
 
Sadik broke open the yolk o f an egg with his fork. ¡°Well, a migo¡­you can talk a ll you want about saving the world, 
but this city tends to eat away at such noble sentiments. Look out there.¡± He gestured to the crowd along First Avenue. 
¡°Everybody looking out for nu mber one. Survival of the fittest. Tooth and claw. Elbow the other guy out of the way. 
 
That, my  friend, is New Yo rk. But¡­¡±  He  shrugged and mopped up some egg with his toast. ¡°Who knows? 
Maybe you¡¯ll be the e xception. In which case I will doff my hat to you.¡± 
 
Sadik tipped his coffee cup toward me  in moc k salute, his eyes searching for any immed iate signs of change. And in 
the coming months he would continue to observe me as I traveled, like a large lab rat, through the byways of 
Manhattan. He would suppress a grin when the seat I had offered to a middle-aged wo man on the subway was snatched 
up by a burly young man. At Bloomingdale¡¯s, he would lead me  past human mannequins who spritzed perfu me  into 
the air and watch my reaction as I checked over the eye-popping price tags on winter coats. He would offer me lodging 
again when I gave up the apartment on 109th for lack of heat, and accompany me to Housing Court when it turned out 
that the sublessors of my second apartment had failed to pay the rent and ru n off with my deposit. 
 
 
 
 
¡°Tooth and claw, Ba rack. Stop wo rrying about the rest of these bums out here and figure out how you¡¯re going to 
ma ke some  money out of this fancy degree you¡¯ll be getting.¡± 
 
When Sadik lost his own lease, we moved in together. And after a fe w months of closer scrutiny, he began to 
realize that the city had indeed had an effect on me, although not the one he¡¯d expected. I stopped getting high. I ran 
three miles a day and fasted on Sundays. For the first time in years, I applied myself to my studies and started 
keeping a journal of da ily reflections and very bad poetry. Whenever Sadik tried to talk me into hitting a bar, I¡¯d beg 
off with some tepid e xcuse, too much wo rk or not enough cash. One day, before leaving the apart ment in search of 
better company, he turned to me and offered h is most scathing indictment.  
 
¡° You¡¯re beco ming a bore.¡±  
 
I kne w he was right, a lthough I wasn¡¯t sure myself what e xactly had happene d. In a way, I was confirming Sadik¡¯s 
estimation of the c ity¡¯s allure , I suppose; its consequent power to corrupt. With the Wall Street boom, Manhattan was 
humming, new develop ments cropping up everywhere; men and wo men bare ly out of their t wenties already  enjoying 
rid iculous wealth, the fashion merchants fast on their heels. The beauty, the filth, the noise, and the e xcess, all of it 
dazzled my senses; there seemed no constraints on originality of lifestyles or the manufacture of desire -a mo re 
e xpensive restaurant, a finer suit of clothes, a more e xclusive nightspot, a more beautifu l wo man, a mo re potent high. 
Uncertain of my  ability to steer a course of moderation, fearful of fa lling into old habits, I took on the tempera ment if 
not the convictions of a street corner preacher, prepared to see temptation everywhere, ready to overrun a fragile will. 
My reaction was more than just an attempt to curb an excessive appetite, though, or a response to sensory overload. 
Beneath the hum, the motion, I was seeing the steady fracturing of the world taking place. I had seen worse poverty in 
Indonesia and glimpsed the violent mood of inner-c ity kids in L.A.; I had grown accustomed, everywhere, to suspicion 
between the races. But whether because of New Yo rk¡¯s density or because of its scale, it was only now that I began to 
grasp the almost mathe matica l prec ision with which A me rica ¡¯s race and class problems jo ined; the depth, the ferocity, 
of resulting triba l wars; the bile that flowed freely not just out on the streets but in the stalls of Co lu mbia¡¯s bathrooms 
as well, where, no matter how many times the ad min istration tried to paint them over, the wa lls re mained scratched 
with blunt correspondence between niggers and kikes. 
 
It was as if a ll middle  ground had collapsed, utterly. And nowhere, it see med, was that collapse more apparent than 
in the black co mmunity I had so lovingly imagined and within which I had hoped to find refuge. I might meet a b lack 
friend at his Midtown la w firm, and before heading to lunch at the MoMA, I would look out across the city toward the 
East River fro m his high-rise office , imagin ing a satisfactory life  for myself-a  vocation, a fa mily, a ho me. Until I 
noticed that the only other blacks in the office  we re messengers or clerks, the only other blac ks in the museum the 
blue-jac keted security guards who counted the hours before they could catch their train ho me to Brooklyn or Queens. 
 
I might wander through Harle m-to play on courts I¡¯d once read about or to hear Jesse Jackson make a  speech on 
 
125th; or, on a rare Sunday morning, to sit in the back pews of Abyssinian Baptist Church, lifted by the gospel choir¡¯s 
sweet, sorrowful song-and catch a fleeting glimpse of that thing which I sought. But I had no guide that might show 
me  how to jo in this troubled world, and when I looked for an apart ment there, I found Sugar Hill¡¯s elegant 
brownstones occupied and out of reach, the few decent rental buildings with ten -year-long wa iting lists, so that all that 
re mained  
 
 
 
 
were the ro ws and rows of uninhabitable tenements, in front of wh ich young men counted out their rolls of la rge bills, 
and winos slouched and stumbled and wept softly to themselves. 
 
I took all this as a personal affront, a mocke ry of my tender a mb itions -although, when I brought up the subject with 
people who had lived in Ne w Yo rk for a while, I was told there was nothing original about my observations. The city 
was out of control, they said, the polarization a natural ph enomenon, like monsoons or continental drift. Politica l 
discussions, the kind that at Occidental had once seemed so intense and purposeful, ca me to take on the flavor of the 
socialist conferences I sometimes attended at Cooper Union or the African cu ltural fairs that took place in Harle m and 
Brooklyn during the summe rs -a few of the many diversions New York had to offer, like go ing to a foreign film or ice -
skating at Rockefe ller Center. With a bit of money, I was free  to live like most middle -class blacks in Manhattan, free 
to choose a motif around which to organize my life, free to patch together a collage of styles, friends, watering holes, 
politica l affiliations. I sensed, though, that at some stage-maybe when you had children and decided that you could st ay 
in the city only at the cost of a private school, or when you began takings cabs at night to avoid the subways, or when 
you decided that you needed a doorman in your apart ment building -your choice was irrevocable, the divide was now 
impassable, and you would find yourself on the side of the line that you¡¯d never intended to be on. 
 
Unwilling to make that choice, I spent a year walking fro m one end of Manhattan to the other. Like a tourist, I 
watched the range of human possibility on display, trying to trace out my future in the lives of the people I saw, looking 
for some opening through which I could reenter. 
 
It was in this hu morless mood that my mother and sister found me when they ca me to visit during my first 
summer in New York. 
 
¡°He¡¯s so skinny,¡± Maya said to my mother. 
 
¡°He only has two towels!¡± my mother shouted as she inspected the bathroom. ¡°And three plates!¡± They both began 
to giggle. 
 
They stayed with Sadik and me for a few nights, then moved to a condominium on Park Avenue that a friend of my 
mother¡¯s had offered them while she was away. That summer I had found a job clearing a construction site on the 
 
Upper West Side, so my mother and sister spent most of their days exploring the city on their o wn. When we met for 
dinner, they would give me  a detailed report of their adventures: eating strawberries and cream at the Pla za , taking the 
ferry to the Statue of Liberty, visiting the  C&#233;zannes at the Met. I would eat in silence until they were  finished 
and then begin a long discourse on the problems of the city and the politics of the dispossessed. I scolded Maya for 
spending one evening watching TV instead of reading the novels I¡¯d bought for her. I instructed my mother on the 
various ways that foreign donors and international development organizations like the one she was working for b red 
dependence in the Third World. When the two of the m withdrew to the kitchen, I would overhear Maya co mp lain ing to 
my mother. 
 
¡°Barry¡¯s okay, isn¡¯t he? I mean, I hope he doesn¡¯t lose his cool and become one of those freaks you see on 
the streets around here.¡± 
 
 
 
 
One evening, while thu mbing through The Village Voice , my mother¡¯s eyes lit on an advertisement for a  movie,  
 
Black Orpheus, that was showing downtown. My mother insisted that we go see it that night; she said that it 
was the first fore ign film she had ever seen. 
 
¡°I was only sixteen then,¡± she told us as we entered the elevator. ¡°I¡¯d just been accepted to the University of Ch icago - 
 
Gra mps hadn¡¯t told me yet that he wouldn¡¯t let me go -and I was there for the summer, working as an au pair. It  was the 
first time that I¡¯d ever been rea lly on my own. Gosh, I fe lt like  such an adult. And when I saw this film, I thought it was 
the most beautiful thing I had ever seen.¡± 
 
We took a cab to the revival theater where the movie was playing. The film, a groundbreaker of sorts due  to its mostly 
black, Brazilian cast, had been made in the fifties. The story line was simple: the myth of the ill-fated lovers Orpheus and 
Eurydice set in the favelas of Rio during Carnival. In Technicolor splendor, set against scenic green hills, the bla ck and 
brown Brazilians sang and danced and strummed guitars like carefree birds in colorful plumage. About halfway through the 
movie, I decided that I¡¯d seen enough, and turned to my mother to see if she might be ready to go. But her face, lit by the b lue 
glow of the screen, was set in a wistful gaze. At that moment, I felt as if I were being given a window into her heart, the 
unreflective heart of her youth. I suddenly realized that the depiction of childlike blacks I was now seeing on the screen, the 
reverse image of Conrad¡¯s dark savages, was what my mother had carried with her to 
 
Hawa ii all those years before, a reflection of the simp le fantasies that had been forbidden to a white middle -c lass girl 
fro m Kansas, the promise of another life : warm, sensual, e xotic, d ifferent. 
 
I turned away, e mbarrassed for her, irritated with the people around me. Sitting there in the dark, I was re minded of a 
conversation I¡¯d had a few years earlier with a friend of my  mother¡¯s, an Englishman who had worked for an 
international aid o rganizat ion throughout Africa and Asia. He had told me  that of all the different peoples he had met 
in his travels, the Dik of Sudan were the strangest. 
 
¡°Usually, a fter a  month or two, you make  contact,¡± he had said. ¡° Even where you don¡¯t spe ak the language, there¡¯s a 
smile o r a jo ke, you know-some  semblance of recognition. But at  the end of a year with the Dik, they re mained utterly  
alien  to  me . They  laughed at the things that drove  me  to despair. What  I thought was funny seemed to  leave the m  
stone cold.¡± 
 
I had spared him the informat ion that the Dik were Nilotes, distant cousins of mine. I had tried to imag ine this pale 
Englishman in a parched desert somewhere, h is back turned away fro m a c irc le of na ked tribesmen, his eyes searching 
an empty sky, bitter in his solitude. And the same thought had occurred to me  then that I carried with me now as I le ft 
the movie theater with my mother and sister: The e motions between the races could never be pure; even love was 
tarnished by the desire to find in the other some ele ment that was missing in ourselves. Whether we sought out our 
demons or salvation, the other race would always re main just that: menacing, alien, and apart.  
 
¡°Kind of corny, huh,¡± Maya said as my mother went to the 
bathroom. ¡°What?¡± 
¡°The movie . It  was kind of corny. Just Mom¡¯s style.¡± 
 
 
For the ne xt several days, I tried to avoid situations where my mother and I might be forced to talk. Then, a few days 
before they were about to leave, I stopped by while  Maya was taking a nap. My mother noticed a lett er addressed to my 
father in my  hand. I asked her if she had an international postage stamp. 
 
 
 
 
 
¡° You guys arranging a visit?¡± 
I told her briefly of my plans as she dug out a stamp fro m the bottom of her purse. Actually she came  up with two 
stamps; they had melted together in the summer heat. She gave me  a sheepish grin and put water on to boil so we could 
steam them apart. 
 
¡°Well, I thin k it¡¯ll be wonderful for you two to fina lly get to know each other,¡± she said from the kitchen. ¡°He 
was probably a bit tough for a ten-year-old to take, but now that you¡¯re older¡­¡±  
 
I shrugged. ¡°Who knows?¡± 
 
 
She stuck her head out of the kitchen. ¡°I hope you don¡¯t feel resentful towards him.¡± 
¡°Why would I?¡± 
¡°I don¡¯t know.¡± She returned to the liv ing roo m and we sat there for a  wh ile , listening to the sounds of traffic be low.  
 
The teapot whistled, and I stamped my envelope. Then, without any prompting, my mother began to retell an o ld 
story, in a distant voice, as if she were telling it to herself.  
 
¡°It wasn¡¯t your father¡¯s fault that he left, you know. I divorced him. When the two of us got married, your 
grandparents weren¡¯t happy with the idea. But they said okay -they probably couldn¡¯t have stopped us anyway, and 
they eventually came  around to the idea that it was the right thing to do. Then Barack¡¯s father-your grandfather 
Hussein-wrote Gra mps this long, nasty letter saying that he didn¡¯t approve of the marriage. He didn¡¯t want the Oba ma 
blood sullied by a wh ite wo man, he said. Well, you can imag ine how Gra mps reacted to that. And then there was a 
problem with your father¡¯s first wife¡­he  had told me they were separated, but it was a village wedding, so there was 
no legal document that could show a divorce¡­.¡±  
 
Her ch in had begun to tremble, and she bit down on her lip, steadying herself. She said, ¡° Your father wrote back, 
saying he was going ahead with it. Then you were born, and we agreed that the three of us would return to Kenya 
after he finished his studies. But your grandfather Hussein was still writ ing to your father, threatening to have his 
student visa revoked. By this time Toot had become hysterical-she had read about the Mau-Mau rebellion in Kenya a 
few years earlier, wh ich the Western press really p layed up -and she was sure that I would have my head chopped off 
and you would be taken away. 
 
¡°Even then, it might have worked out. When your father graduated from UH, he rece ived two scholarship offers. 
 
One was to the New School, here in New York. The other one was to Harvard. The New School agreed to pay for 
everything-room and board, a job on campus, enough to support all three of us. Harvard just agreed to pay tuition. But 
 
Barac k was such a stubborn bastard, he had to go to Harvard. How can I refuse the best education? he told me . That¡¯s 
all he could think about, proving that he was the best¡­.¡±  
 
She sighed, running her hands through her hair. ¡°We were so young, you know. I was younger than you are now. 
He was only a few years older than that. Later, when he ca me to visit us in Hawa ii that time, he wanted us to come 
live with him. But I was still married to Lo lo then, and his third wife had just left him, and I just didn¡¯t think¡­¡±  
 
She stopped and laughed to herself. ¡° Did I ever te ll you that he was late for our first date? He asked me  to meet him 
in front of the university libra ry at one. When I go t there he hadn¡¯t arrived, but I figured I¡¯d give him a few minutes. It 
was a nice day, so I laid out on one of the benches, and before I knew it I had fa llen asleep. We ll, an hour later  -an 
hour!-he shows up with a couple of h is friends. I wo ke up and the three of them were  standing over me , and I heard  
 
 
 
 
your father saying, serious as can be, ¡®You see, gentle men. I told you that she was a fine g irl, and that she 
would wa it fo r me .¡¯ ¡±  
 
My mother laughed once more, and once again I saw her as the child she had been. Except this time I saw so mething 
else: In her smiling, slightly puzzled face, I saw what all children must see at some point if they are to grow up -their 
parents¡¯ lives revealed to them as separate and apart, reaching out beyond the point of their union or the birth of a ch ild, 
lives unfurling back to grandparents, great-grandparents, an infin ite nu mber of chance meetings, misunderstandings, 
projected hopes, limited c ircu mstances. My mother was that girl with the mov ie of beautifu l blac k people in her head, 
flattered by my father¡¯s attention, confused and alone, trying to break out of the grip of her own parents¡¯ lives. The 
innocence she carried that day, wait ing for my  father,  had been tinged with misconceptions, her own needs. But it was a 
guileless need, one without self-consciousness, and perhaps that¡¯s how any love begins, impulses and cloudy images 
that allow us to break across our solitude, and then, if we ¡¯re lucky, are fina lly t ransformed into something firme r. Wh at 
I heard fro m my mother that day, speaking about my father, was something that I suspect most Americans will never 
hear fro m the lips of those of another race, and so cannot be expected to believe might e xist between black and white: 
the love of someone who knows your life  in the round, a love that will survive disappointment. She saw my father as 
everyone hopes at least one other person might see him; she had tried to help the child who never kne w him see him  in 
the same way. And it was the look on her face that day that I would re me mbe r when a few months later I ca lled to tell 
her that my father had died and heard her cry out over the distance. 
 
After I spoke to my mother, I phoned my father¡¯s brother in Boston and we had a brief, a wkward conversation. I 
didn¡¯t go to the funeral, so I wrote my father¡¯s fa mily in Na irobi a letter e xpressing my condolences. I asked them to 
write back, and wondered how they were fa ring. But I fe lt no pain, only the vague sense of an opportunity lost, and I 
saw no reason to pretend otherwise. My plans to travel to Kenya were p laced on indefin ite hold.  
 
Another year would pass before I would meet him one night, in a co ld cell, in a  cha mber of my  drea ms. I drea med I 
was traveling by bus with friends whose names I¡¯ve forgotten, men and wo men with d iffe rent journeys to ma ke. We 
rolled across deep fields of grass and hills that bucked against an orange sky. 
 
An old white man, heavyset, sat beside me, and I read in a book that he held in h is hands that our treatment of 
the old tested our souls. He told me he was a union man, off to meet his daughter. 
 
We stopped at an old hotel, a grand hotel with chandeliers. There was a piano in the lobby and a lounge filled with 
cushions of soft satin, and I took one of the cushions and placed it on the piano bench, and the old white man sat down, 
retarded now, or senile , and when I looked again he was a sma ll blac k g irl, her feet bare ly reaching the pedals. She 
smiled and started to play, and then a waitress came in, a  young Hispanic wo man, and the wa itress frowned at us, but 
under the frown was a laugh, and she raised a finger to her lips as if we were sharing a secret.  
 
I dozed for the rest of the trip, and woke up to find everyone gone. The bus came to a halt, and I got off and sat down on 
the curb. Inside a building made of rough stone, a lawyer spoke to a judge. The judge suggested that perhaps my father had 
spent enough time in his jail, that perhaps it was time to release him. But the lawyer objected vigorously, citing precedent 
and various statutes, the need to maintain order. The judge shrugged and got up from the bench. 
 
 
 
 
I stood before the cell, opened the padlock, and set it carefully on a window ledge. My father was before me, with 
only a cloth wrapped around his waist; he was very thin, with his la rge head and slender fra me, h is hairless arms and 
chest. He looked pale, his black eyes luminous against an ashen face, but he smiled and gestured for the tall, mute 
guard to please stand aside. 
 
¡°Look at you,¡± he said. ¡°So ta ll-and so thin. Gray hairs, even!¡± And I saw that it was true, and I wa lked up to 
him and we  e mbraced. I began to weep, and felt ashamed, but could not stop myself.  
 
¡°Barac k. I a lways wanted to tell you how much I love you,¡± he said. He seemed s mall in my a rms now, the size 
of a boy. 
 
He sat at the corner of his cot and set his head on his clasped hands and stared away fro m me , into the wall. An 
implacab le sadness spread across his face. I tried to joke with h im; I told him that if I was thin it was only because 
I took after him. But he couldn¡¯t be budged, and when I wh ispered to him that we might leave together, he shook 
his head and told me  it would be best if I left. 
 
I awo ke still  weeping,  my  first real tears for him-and for  me, his ja ilo r, h is judge, his son. I turned on the light a nd 
dug out his old letters. I re me mbered h is only visit-the basketball he had given me and how he had taught me to dance. 
And I realized, pe rhaps for the first time, how even  in his absence his strong image had given  me so me bulwark on 
which to grow up, an image to live up to, or d isappoint. 
 
I stepped to the window and looked outside, listening to the first sounds of morning -the growl of the garbage trucks, 
footsteps in the apartment next door. I needed to search for him, I thought to myself, and talk with  him again. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER SEVEN 
I N 1983, I DECIDED to become a  co mmunity organizer.  
There wasn¡¯t much detail to the idea; I didn¡¯t know anyone ma king a living that way. When classmates in college 
asked me just what it was that a community organizer d id, I couldn¡¯t answer the m directly. Instead, I¡¯d pronounce on 
the need for change. Change in the White House, where Reagan and his min ions were carrying on their d irty deeds. 
Change in the Congress, compliant and corrupt. Change in the mood of the country, man ic and self-absorbed. 
Change won¡¯t co me fro m the top, I would say. Change will co me  fro m a mob ilized grass roots. 
 
That¡¯s what I¡¯ll do, I¡¯ll organize b lack folks. At the grass roots. For change. 
 
And my friends, black and white, would heart ily co mmend me for my ideals before heading toward the post 
office to ma il in their graduate school applications. 
 
I couldn¡¯t really blame them for being skeptical. Now, with the benefit of hindsight, I can construct a certain logic to my 
decision, show  how becoming  an organizer  was a  part of  that  larger narrative, starting  with  my  father  and his  father 
before him, my mother and her parents, my memories of Indonesia with its beggars and farmers and the loss of Lolo to 
 
 
 
 
power, on through Ray and Frank, Marcus and Reg ina; my move to Ne w Yo rk; my  father¡¯s deat h. I can see that my  
choices were never truly   mine a lone-and that that is how it  should be, that to assert otherwise is to chase after a  
sorry sort of freedom. 
 
But such recognition came only later. At the time , about to graduate from co llege, I was operat ing ma inly on impulse, 
like a  salmon swimming b lindly upstream toward the site of his own conception. In classes and seminars, I would 
dress up these impulses in the slogans and theories that I¡¯d discovered in books, thinking -falsely-that the slogans meant 
something, that they somehow made what I fe lt more  a menable to proof. But at night, lying in bed, I would let the 
slogans drift away, to be replaced with a series of images, ro mantic images, of a past I had never known.  
 
They were of the c ivil rights move ment, mostly, the grainy blac k-and-white footage that appears every February 
during Black History Month, the same images that my mother had offered me  as a child. A pair of co llege students, hair 
short, backs straight, placing their orders at a lunch counter teetering on the edge of riot. SNCC worke rs standing on a 
porch in some Mississippi backwater try ing to convince a fa mily of sharecroppers to register to vote. A county jail 
bursting with children, the ir hands clasped together, singing freedo m songs. 
 
Such images became a form of prayer for me, bolstering my  spirits, channeling my e motions in a way that words 
never could. They told me  (a lthough even this much understanding may have come later, is a lso a construct, 
containing its own falsehoods) that I wasn¡¯t alone in my part icular struggles, and that communities had never been a 
given in this country, at least not for blacks. Co mmun ities had to be created, fought for, tended like gardens. They 
e xpanded or contracted with the drea ms of men-and in the civil rights move ment those dreams had been large. In 
the sit-ins, the marches, the ja ilhouse songs, I saw the African-A merican commun ity becoming more than just the 
place where you¡¯d been born or the house where you¡¯d been raised. Through organizing, through shared sacrifice , 
me mbe rship had been earned. And because me mbership was earned -because this community I imagined was still in 
the ma king, built on the pro mise that the larger A me rican co mmun ity, black, white, and brown, could somehow 
redefine itself-I believed that it might, over time, ad mit  the uniqueness of my own life.  
 
That was my idea of organizing. It was a pro mise of rede mption.  
 
And so, in the months leading up to graduation, I wrote to every civ il rights organization I could thin k of, to any 
black e lected officia l in the country with a progressive agenda, to neighborhood councils and tenant rights groups. 
When no one wrote back, I wasn¡¯t discouraged. I decided to find more  conventional work for a year, to pay off my 
student loans and maybe even save a little b it. I would need the money later, I told myself. Organizers didn¡¯t ma ke 
any money; their poverty was proof of their integrity.  
 
Eventually a consulting house to multinational corporations agreed to hire me as a research assistant. Like a spy be hind 
enemy lines, I arrived every day at my mid-Manhattan office and sat at my computer terminal, checking the Reuters 
machine that blinked bright emerald messages from across the globe. As far as I could tell I was the only black man in the 
company, a source of shame for me but a source of considerable pride for the company¡¯s secretarial pool. They treated me 
like a son, those black ladies; they told me how they expected me to run the company one day. Sometimes, over lunch, I 
would tell them about all my wonderful organizing plans, and they would smile and say, 
 
¡°That¡¯s good, Barack,¡± but the look in their eyes told me they we re secretly disappointed. Only Ike, the gruff 
black security guard in the lobby, was willing to co me right out and tell me  I¡¯d be mak ing a mistake. 
 
 
 
 
 
¡°Organizing? That¡¯s some kinda politics, a in¡¯t it? Why you wanna do something like that?¡±  
I tried to e xpla in my politica l v iews, the importance of mobilizing the poor and giving back to the community. But Ike 
just shook his head. ¡°Mr. Ba rack,¡± he said, ¡°I hope you don¡¯t mind if I give you a little b it of advice. You don¡¯t have to 
take it, now, but I¡¯m gonna give it to you anyhow. Forget about this organizing business and do something that¡¯s gonna 
ma ke you some money. Not greedy, you understand. But enough. I¡¯m telling you this ¡¯cause I can see potential in you. 
Young man like you, got a nice voice -hell, you could be one a them announcers on TV. Or sales¡­got a nephew about 
your age ma king some real money there. That¡¯s what we need, see. Not more fo lks running around here, all rhy mes 
and jive. You can¡¯t help fo lks that ain¡¯t gonna ma ke it nohow, an d they won¡¯t appreciate you trying. Folks that wanna 
ma ke it, they gonna find a way to do it on they own. How o ld are you anyway?¡± 
 
¡°Twenty-two.¡± 
 
¡°See there. Don¡¯t waste your youth, Mr. Barac k. Wake  up one morn ing, an old man like me, and all you gonna be is 
tired, with nothing to show for it.¡±  
 
I didn¡¯t pay Ike much attention at the time; I thought he sounded too much like  my grandparents. Nevertheless, as the 
months passed, I fe lt the idea of beco ming an organize r slipping away fro m me . The co mpany promoted me to the 
position of financial writer. I had my own office, my  own secretary, money in the bank. So metimes, co ming out of an 
interview with Japanese financiers or Ge rman bond traders, I would catch my  reflection in the elevator doors -see 
myself in a  suit and tie, a briefcase in my  hand-and for a split second I would imagine myself as a captain of industry, 
barking out orders, closing the deal, before I re me mbered who it was that I had told myself I wanted to be and felt 
pangs of guilt for my lack of resolve. 
 
Then one day, as I sat down at my co mputer to write an art ic le on interest -rate swaps, something 
unexpected happened. Auma called. 
 
I had never met this half sister; we had written only intermittently. I knew that she had left Kenya to study in 
Germany, and in our letters we  had mentioned the possibility of my going there for a visit, or perhaps her coming to the 
States. But the plans had always been left vague-neither of us had any money, we would say; maybe ne xt year. Our 
correspondence maintained a cordia l d istance. 
 
Now, suddenly, I heard her voice for the first time. It was soft and dark, tinged with a co lonial accent. For a  fe w 
mo ments I couldn¡¯t understand the words, only the sound, a sound that seemed to have always been there, 
misplaced but not forgotten. She was coming to the States, she said, on a trip with several friends. Could she 
come to see me in Ne w Yo rk?  
 
¡°Of course,¡± I said. ¡° You can stay with me; I can¡¯t wa it.¡± And she laughed, and I laughed, and then the line grew quiet 
with static and the sound of our breath. ¡°Well,¡± she said, ¡°I can¡¯t stay on the phone too long, it¡¯s so expensive. Here ¡¯s 
the flight informat ion¡±; and we hung up quickly a fter that, as if our contact was a treat to be doled out in small 
measures. 
 
I spent the next few wee ks rushing around in preparation: new sheets for the sofa bed, e xt ra p lates and towels, a 
scrubbing for the tub. But two days before she was scheduled to arrive, Au ma called again, the voice thicke r now, 
barely a whisper. 
 
 
 
 
¡°I can¡¯t co me after all,¡±  she said. ¡°One of our brothers, David ¡­he¡¯s been killed. In a motorcycle acc ident. I 
don¡¯t know any mo re than that.¡± She began to cry. ¡°Oh, Ba rack. Why do these things happen to us?¡± 
 
I tried to comfort her as best I could. I asked her if I could do anything for her. I told her there would be 
other times for us to see each other. Eventually her voice quieted; she had to go book a flight home , she said. 
 
¡°Okay, then, Barac k. See you. ¡¯Bye.¡±  
After she hung up, I left  my office, telling my secretary I¡¯d be gone for the day. For hours I wandered the streets of 
Manhattan, the sound of Auma¡¯s voice playing over and over in my mind. A continent away, a wo man cries. On a dark 
and dusty road, a boy skids out of control, tu mbling against hard earth, wheels spinning to silence. Who were  these 
people, I asked myself, these strangers who carried my blood? What might save this woman fro m her sorrow?  What 
wild, unspoken dreams had this boy possessed? 
 
Who was I, who shed no tears at the loss of his own? 
 
 
 
I still wonder sometimes how that first contact with Auma a ltered my life. Not so much the contact itself (that meant 
everything, would mean everything) or the news that she gave me of David¡¯s death (that, too, is an absolute; I would 
never know him, and that says enough), but rather the timing of her ca ll, the particu lar sequence of events, the raised 
e xpectations and then the dashed hopes, coming at a t ime when the idea of beco ming an organizer was still just that, an 
idea in my  head, a vague tug at my heart. 
 
Maybe it made no diffe rence. Maybe by this time I was already co mmitted to organizing and Auma¡¯s voice simply 
served to remind me  that I still had wounds to heal, and could not heal myself. Or maybe, if Dav id hadn¡¯t died when he 
did, and Auma had co me to Ne w York as orig inally planned, and I had lea rned fro m her then what I would only learn 
later, about Kenya, and about our father¡­well, maybe it would have re lieved certain p ressures that had built up inside 
me , showing me a d ifferent idea of co mmunity, a llo wing  my  a mbit ions to travel a narrower, more  personal course, so 
that in the end I might have taken my friend Ike¡¯s advice and given myself over to stocks and bonds and the pull of 
respectability. 
 
I don¡¯t know. What¡¯s certain is that a few months after Auma ¡¯s  call I turned in my resignation at the consulting firm 
and began looking in earnest for an organizing job. Once again, most of my letters went unanswered, but after a 
month or so I was called in for an intervie w by the director o f a pro minent civil rights  organization in the city. He 
was a tall, handsome black man, dressed in a crisp white shirt, a  paisley tie, and red suspenders. His office was 
furnished with Ita lian chairs and African sculpture, a bar service built into the exposed brick. Through a tall  window, 
sunlight streamed down on a bust of Dr. King. 
 
¡°I like it,¡± the director said after looking over my r&# 233;sum&# 233;. ¡°Part icularly the corporate e xperience. That¡¯s 
the real business of a civil rights organization these days. Protest and pickets won¡¯t cut it anymore. To get the job 
done, we¡¯ve got to forge links between business, government, and the inner city.¡± He c lasped his broad hands together, 
then showed me a g lossy annual report opened to a page that listed the organization¡¯s board of directors. There was 
one black minister and ten white corporate e xecutives. ¡° You see?¡± the director said. ¡°Public -private partnerships. The 
key to the future. And that¡¯s where young people like  yourself co me in. Educated. Self-assured. Co mfortable  in 
boardrooms. Why, just last week I was discussing the problem with the secretary of HUD at a White House dinner. 
 
 
 
 
Terrific guy, Jack. He¡¯d be interested in meet ing a young man like you. Of course I¡¯m a reg istered De mocrat, but 
we have to learn to wo rk with whoever¡¯s in powe r¡­.¡±  
 
On the spot he offered me the job, which involved organizing conferences on drugs, unemployment, housing. 
Facilitating dialogue, he called it. I declined his generous offer, deciding I needed a job closer to the streets. I spent th ree 
months working for a Ralph Nader offshoot up in Harlem, trying to convince the minority students at City 
 
College about the importance of recycling. Then a wee k passing out flyers for an assembly man¡¯s race in 
Brooklyn-the candidate lost and I never did get paid. 
 
In six months I was broke, une mployed, eating soup from a can. In search of some inspiration, I we nt to hear Kwa me 
Tour&#233;, forme rly Stokely Ca rmichael of SNCC and Blac k Po wer fa me, speak at Co lu mbia. At the entrance to the 
auditoriu m, t wo wo men, one black, one Asian, were selling Marxist lite rature and arguing with each other about 
 
Trotsky¡¯s place in history. Inside, Tour&#233; was proposing a program to establish economic t ies between Africa 
and Harle m that would c ircu mvent white cap italist imperialis m. At the end of his re ma rks, a thin young wo man with 
glasses asked if such a progra m was practical g iven the state of African economies and the immed iate needs facing 
black A me ricans. Tour&#233; cut her off in midsentence. ¡°It¡¯s only the brainwashing that you¡¯ve received that 
ma kes it impract ical, sister,¡± he said. His eyes glowed inwa rd as he spoke, the eyes of a madman o r a saint. The 
wo man re ma ined standing for several minutes while  she was upbraided for her bourgeois attitudes. People began to 
file out. Outside the auditoriu m, the two Marxists were now shouting at the top of their lungs. 
 
¡°Stalin ist pig!¡± 
¡°Reformist bitch!¡±  
 
 
It was like a bad drea m. I wandered down Broadway, imag ining myself standing at the edge of the Lincoln Me morial 
and looking out over an empty pavilion, debris scattering in the wind. The move ment had died years ago, shattered into 
a thousand frag ments. Every path to change was well t rodden, every strategy exhausted. And with each defeat, even 
those with the best of intentions could end up further and further re moved fro m the struggles of those they purported to 
serve. 
 
Or just plain cra zy. I suddenly realized that I was talking to myself in the middle of the street. People on their way 
home fro m work were cutting a sma ll a rc around me, and I thought I recognized a couple of Colu mb ia classmates in the 
crowd, their suit jac kets thrown over their shoulders, carefully avoid ing my glance.  
 
I had all but given up on organizing when I received a call fro m Marty Kaufman. He e xp la ined that he¡¯d started 
an organizing drive in Chicago and was looking to hire a t rainee. He¡¯d be in New York th e fo llo wing week and 
suggested that we meet at a coffee shop on Le xington. 
 
His appearance didn¡¯t inspire much confidence. He was a white man of med iu m he ight wearing a ru mpled suit over a 
pudgy fra me. His face was heavy with two-day-old wh iskers; behind a pair of thick, wire-rimmed glasses, his eyes 
seemed set in a perpetual squint. As he rose from the booth to shake my hand, he spilled some  tea on his shirt. 
 
¡°So,¡± Marty said, dabbing the stain with a paper napkin. ¡°Why does somebody fro m Ha wa ii want to b e 
an organizer?¡± I sat down and told him a little b it about myself.  
¡°Hmmph.¡± He nodded, taking notes on a dog-eared legal pad. ¡° You must be angry about something.¡± 
 
 
 
 
 
¡°What do you mean by that?¡± 
He shrugged. ¡°I don¡¯t know what e xact ly. But something. Don¡¯t get me  wrong -anger¡¯s a require ment for the job. The 
only reason anybody decides to become an organize r. We ll -adjusted people find more re la xing work.¡±  
 
He ordered more  hot water and told me about himself. He was Jewish, in his late thirties, had been reared in Ne w 
Yo rk. He had started organizing in the sixties with the student protests, and ended up staying with it  for fifteen 
years. Farmers in Nebraska. Blac ks in Ph ilade lphia. Me xicans in Ch icago. Now he was trying to pull urban blacks 
and suburban whites together around a plan to save manufacturing jobs in metropolitan Chicago. He  needed 
somebody to work with him, he said. So mebody black.  
 
¡°Most of our work is with churches,¡± he said. ¡°If poor and working -class people want to build rea l power, they have 
to have some sort of institutional base. With the unions in the shape they¡¯re in, the churches are the only game in 
town. That¡¯s where the people are, and that¡¯s where the values are, even if they¡¯ve been buried under a lot of bullshit. 
Churches won¡¯t work with you, though, just out of the goodness of their hearts. They¡¯ll talk a good game -a sermon on 
 
Sunday, maybe, or a  special offering for the ho meless. But if push comes to shove, they won¡¯t really move unless 
you can show them how it¡¯ll help the m pay their heating bill.¡±  
 
He poured himself more hot water. ¡°What do you know about Chicago 
anyway?¡± I thought a mo ment. ¡° Hog butcher to the world,¡± I said 
finally. Ma rty shook his head. ¡°The butcheries closed a while ago.¡±  
¡°The Cubs never 
win.¡±  ¡°True.¡± 
¡°America¡¯s most segregated city,¡± I said. ¡°A blac k man, Ha rold Washington, was just elected mayor, and wh ite 
people don¡¯t like  it.¡±  
 
¡°So you¡¯ve been following Haro ld¡¯s career,¡±  Marty said. ¡°I¡¯m surprised you haven¡¯t gone to work 
for him.¡± ¡° I tried. His office d idn¡¯t write bac k.¡±  
Marty smiled and took off h is glasses, cleaning them with the end of his tie. ¡° Well, that¡¯s the thing to do, isn¡¯t it, if 
you¡¯re young and black and interested in social issues? Find a politica l ca mpaign to wo rk for. A powerful patron -
somebody who can help you with your own career. And Ha rold¡¯s powerfu l, no doubt about it. Lots of ch aris ma. He 
has almost monolithic support in the black co mmun ity. About half the Hispanics, a handful of white libera ls. You¡¯re 
right about one thing, though. The whole at mosphere in the city is polarized. A big media c ircus. Not much is getting 
done.¡± I leaned back in my seat. ¡°And whose fault is that?¡± 
 
Marty put his glasses back on and met my  stare. ¡°It ¡¯s not a question of fault,¡± he said. ¡°It¡¯s a  question of whether any 
politic ian, even somebody with Harold¡¯s talent, can do much to break the cycle. A polarized c ity isn¡¯t necessarily a bad 
thing for a politic ian. Black o r white.¡±  
 
He offe red to start me o ff at ten thousand dollars the first year, with a t wo -thousand-dollar travel allowance to buy 
a car; the salary would go up if things worked out. After he was gone, I took the long way ho me, a long the East 
River pro menade, and tried to figure out what to ma ke of the man. He was smart, I decided. He  seemed co mmitted 
to his work. St ill, there was something about him that made me wary. A little too sure of himself, maybe. And 
white-he¡¯d said himse lf that that was a proble m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The old fluted park la mps flic kered to life; a  long brown barge rolled through the gray waters toward the sea. I sat  
down on a bench, considering my options, and noticed a black wo man and her young son approach. The boy yanked 
the woman up to the railing, and they stood side by side, his arm wrapped around her leg, a single silhouette against the 
twilight. Eventually the boy¡¯s head craned upward with what looked like a question. The wo man shrugged her 
shoulders and the boy took a few steps toward me . 
 
¡°Excuse me, mister,¡± he shouted. ¡°You know why sometimes the rive r runs that way and then sometimes it 
goes this way?¡± 
 
The wo man smiled and shook her head, and I said it probably had to do with the tides. The answer seemed to satisfy 
the boy, and he went back to his mother. As I watched the two of the m disappear into dusk, I rea lized I had never 
noticed which way the river ran. 
 
A week later, I loaded up my car and drove to Chicago.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER EIGHT 
I HA D BEEN TO CHICA GO once before. It was during the summer a fter my father¡¯s visit to Ha waii, before my  
eleventh birthday, when Toot had decided it was time  I saw the main la nd of the United States. Perhaps the two 
things were connected, her decision and my father¡¯s visit-his presence (once again) disturbing the world she and 
Gra mps had made for the mselves, triggering in her a  desire to recla im antecedents, her own me mories, a nd pass 
them on to her grandchildren. 
 
We traveled for over a month, Toot and my mother and Maya and I-Gra mps had lost his taste for traveling by this 
time and chose to stay behind. We flew to Seattle, then went down the coast to California  and Disneyland, east to 
the Grand Canyon, across the Great Pla ins to Kansas City, then up to the Great La kes before heading back west 
through Ye llowstone Park. We took Greyhound buses, mostly, and stayed at Howard Johnson¡¯s, and watched the 
 
Watergate hearings every night before going to bed. 
 
We were in Chicago for three days, in a motel in the South Loop. It must have been sometime in July, but for some 
reason I re me mber the days as cold and gray. The motel had an indoor swimming pool, which impressed me; there 
were no indoor pools in Hawa ii. Standing beneath the el tracks, I closed my eyes as a train passed and shouted as loud 
as I could. At the Fie ld Museum, I saw two shrunken heads that were kept on display. They we re wrinkled but well 
preserved, each the size of my palm, their eyes and mouths sewn shut, just as I would have e xpected. They appeared to 
be of European ext raction: The man had a sma ll goatee, like  a conquistador; the fema le had flowing red hair. I stared 
at them fo r a long time (until my mother pulled me a way), fee ling -with the morb id glee of a young boy-as if I had 
stumbled upon some sort of cosmic  jo ke. Not so much the fact that the heads had been shrunk-that I could understand; 
it was the same idea as eating tiger meat with Lo lo, a form of mag ic, a  taking of control. Rather, the fact that these 
litt le European faces were here  in a  glass case, where strangers, perhaps even descendants, might observe the details of 
their gruesome fate. That no one seemed to think that odd. It was a different sort of magic, these harsh museum lights, 
the neat labels, the seeming indifference of the visitors who passed; another effort at control.  
 
 
 
 
Fourteen years later, the city appeared much prettie r. It was another July, and the sun sparkled through the deep 
green trees. The boats were out of their moorings, their distant sails like the wings of doves across La ke Mich igan. 
Marty had told me that he would be busy those first few days, and so I was left on my o wn. I had bought a map, and I 
followed Martin Luther King Drive fro m its northernmost to its southernmost point, then went back up Cottage Grove, 
down byways and alleys, past the apartment build ings and vacant lots, convenience stores and bungalow homes. And 
as I drove, I re me mbered. I re me mbered the wh istle of the Illinois Central, bearing the weight of the thousands who 
had come up fro m the South so many years before; the black men and wo men an d children, dirty fro m the soot of the 
railcars, c lutching their ma keshift luggage, all making their way to Canaan Land. I imagined Frank in a baggy suit and 
wide lapels, standing in front of the old Regal Theatre, wait ing to see Duke or Ella e me rge fro m a  gig. The ma ilman I 
saw was Richard Wright, delivering ma il before his first book sold; the little  girl with the glasses and pigtails was  
 
Regina, skipping rope. I made a cha in between my life and the faces I saw, borro wing other people¡¯s me mories. In 
this way I tried to take possession of the city, make it my  own. Yet another sort of mag ic.  
 
On the third day I passed Smitty¡¯s Barbershop, a fifteen -by-thirty-foot storefront on the edge of Hyde Park with four 
barber¡¯s chairs and a card table for LaTisha, the part-time  manicurist. The door was propped open when I walked in, 
the barbershop smells of hair c rea m and antiseptic mingling with the sound of men¡¯s laughter and the hum of slow fans. 
 
Smitty turned out to be an older black man, gray-haired, slender and stooped. His chair was open and so I took a seat, 
soon joining in the fa miliar barbershop banter of sports and women and yesterday¡¯s headlines, conversation at once 
intimate and anonymous, among men who¡¯ve agreed to leave their troubles outside. 
 
Somebody had just finished telling a story about his neighbor-the man had been caught in bed with his wife ¡¯s 
cousin and chased at the point of a kitchen knife, buck na ked, out into the street -when the talk turned to politics. 
 
¡° Vrdolyak and the rest of them crac kers don¡¯t know when to quit,¡± the man with the newspaper said, shaking his head 
in disgust. ¡°When Old Man Da ley was mayor, d idn¡¯t nobody say nothing about him putting all the m Irish up in City 
Hall. But the minute Haro ld tries to hire some b lack people, just to even things out, they call it reverse rac ism-¡± 
 
¡°Man, that¡¯s how it a lways is. Whenever a black man gets into power, they gonna try and change the rules on him.¡± 
¡°Worse part is, newspapers acting like  it was black folks that started this whole mess.¡± 
¡°What you expect fro m the wh ite man¡¯s paper?¡± 
¡° You right. Harold knows what he¡¯s doing, though. Just biding his time  till the ne xt elect ion.¡±  
 
 
 
That¡¯s how black people talked about Chicago¡¯s mayor, with a fa miliarity an d affect ion norma lly reserved for a 
relative. His picture was everywhere: on the wa lls of shoe repair shops and beauty parlors; still g lued to la mpposts 
fro m the last campaign; even in the windows of the Korean dry cleaners and Arab grocery stores, display ed 
prominently, like some  protective totem. Fro m the barbershop wall, that portrait looked down on me now: the 
handsome, grizzled face, the bushy eyebrows and mustache, the twinkle in the eyes. Smitty noticed me looking at 
the picture and asked if I¡¯d been in Chicago during the election. I told h im I hadn¡¯t. He nodded his head. 
 
¡°Had to be here before Ha rold to understand what he means to this city,¡± Smitty said. ¡°Be fore Harold, seemed like 
we¡¯d a lways be second-class citizens.¡± 
 
¡°Plantation polit ics,¡± the man with the newspaper said. 
 
 
 
 
¡°That¡¯s just what it was, too,¡± Smitty said. ¡°A plantation. Black people in the worst jobs. The worst housing. Police 
brutality ra mpant. But when the so-called blac k co mmittee men ca me a round election time, we ¡¯d all line up and vote 
the straight Democratic  tic ket. Se ll our soul for a Christmas turkey. White fo lks spitting in our faces, and we¡¯d 
reward ¡¯e m with the vote.¡± 
 
Clu mps of hair fell into my lap as I listened to the men recall Haro ld¡¯s rise. He had run for mayor once before, shortly 
after the elder Da ley died, but the candidacy had faltered -a source of shame, the men told me , the lac k of unity within 
the black co mmunity, the doubts that had to be overcome. But Haro ld had tried again, and this time the people were  
ready. They had stuck with h im when the press played up the income ta xes he¡¯d fa iled to pay (¡° Like  the white cats 
don¡¯t cheat on every damn thing every minute of their lives¡±). They had ra llied behind him when white De mocratic 
committee men, Vrdolyak and others, announced their support for the Republican candidate, saying that the city would 
go to hell if it had a blac k mayor. They had turned out in record numbers on election night, minist ers and gang-bangers, 
young and old. 
 
And their faith had been rewarded. Smitty said, ¡°The night Haro ld won, let me te ll you, people just ran the streets. It 
was like the day Joe Louis knocked out Sch meling. Sa me feeling. People weren ¡¯t just proud of Harold. They we re 
proud of themselves. I stayed inside, but my wife and I, we couldn¡¯t get to bed until three, we  we re so e xcited. When I 
woke up the ne xt morn ing, it see med like the most beautiful day of my life¡­.¡±  
 
Smitty¡¯s voice had fallen to a whisper, and everyone in the room began to smile. Fro m a  distance, reading the 
newspapers back in Ne w York, I had shared in their p ride, the same sort of pride that made me  root for any pro football 
team that fielded a b lack quarterback. But something was different about what I was now hearing; there was a fe rvor in  
 
Smitty¡¯s voice that seemed to go beyond politics. ¡°Had to be here to understand,¡± he had said. He¡¯d meant here in  
 
Chicago; but he could also have meant here in my shoes, an older black  man who still burns fro m a lifetime of insults, 
of foiled a mb itions, of a mbit ions abandoned before they¡¯ve been tried. I asked myself if I could truly understand that. I 
assumed, took for granted, that I could. See ing me, these men had made the same  assumption. Would they feel the 
same way if they knew mo re about me?  I wondered. I t ried to imagine what would happen if Gra mps walked into the 
barbershop at that moment, how the talk would stop, how the spell would be bro ken; the diffe rent assumptions at work.  
Smitty handed me the mirror to check his handiwork, then pulled off my  smock and brushed off the back of my shirt.  
 
¡°Thanks for the history lesson,¡± I said, standing up. 
 
¡°Hey, that part¡¯s free. Ha ircut¡¯s ten dollars. What¡¯s your name, 
anyway?¡± ¡°Barack.¡±  
¡°Barac k, huh. You a  
Muslim?¡± ¡° Grandfather was.¡± 
 
 
He took the money and shook my hand. ¡°Well, Ba rack, you should come back a little sooner next t ime. Your 
hair was looking awfu l raggedy when you walked in.¡±  
 
Late that afternoon, Marty picked me  up in front of my new address and we headed south on the Skyway. After 
several miles, we  took an e xit leading into the southeast side, past rows of small houses made of g ray clapboard or 
brick, until we arrived at a massive old factory that stretched out over several blocks. 
 
 
 
 
 
¡°The old Wisconsin Steel plant.¡±  
We sat there in silence, studying the building. It e xp ressed some of the robust, brutal spirit of Chicago¡¯s industrial 
past, metal bea ms and concrete rammed together, without much attention to comfort or detail. Only now it was 
empty and rust-stained, like  an abandoned wreck. On the other side of the chain -link fence, a spotted, mangy cat 
ran through the weeds . 
 
¡°All kinds of people used to work in the plant,¡± Ma rty said as he wheeled  the car a round and started back down the 
road. ¡°Blac ks. Whites. Hispanics. All working the same jobs. All liv ing the same kind of lives. But outside the plant, 
most  of  them  didn¡¯t  want  anything  to  do  with  each  other.  And  these  are  the  church  people  I¡¯m  talking  about. 
Brothers and sisters in Christ.¡± 
 
We came to a stoplight, and I noticed a group of young white men in their undershirts, drinking beer on a stoop. A 
Vrdolyak poster hung in one of the windows, and several of the men began to glare in my direction. I turned to Marty. 
 
¡°So what ma kes you think they can work together now?¡± 
 
¡°They don¡¯t have any choice. Not if they want their jobs back.¡± 
 
 
 
As we reentered the highway, Marty began to tell me mo re about the organization he¡¯d built. The idea had first co me 
to him two years earlie r, he said, when he¡¯d read reports of the plant closings and layoffs then sweeping across South 
Chicago and the southern suburbs. With the help of a sympathetic Catholic au xiliary b ishop, he¡¯d gone to meet with 
pastors and church me mbers in the area, and heard both blacks and whites talk about their shame of unemp loyment, 
their fea r of losing a house or of being cheated out of a pension-their co mmon sense of having been betrayed. 
Eventually over t wenty suburban churches had agreed to form an organizat ion, wh ich they named the Ca lu met 
Co mmunity Re lig ious Conference, or CCRC. Another eight churches had joined the city arm o f the organization, ca lled  
 
Developing Co mmunities Project, or DCP. Th ings hadn¡¯t moved quite as fast as Marty had hoped; the unions hadn¡¯t 
yet signed on, and the politica l war in the city council had proven to be a ma jor distraction. St ill, CCRC had recen tly 
won its first significant victory: a $500,000 co mputerized job place ment progra m that the Illinois legislature had agreed 
to fund. We were on our way to a rally to celebrate this new job bank, Ma rty e xpla ined, the opening shot in a long -term 
campa ign. 
 
¡°It¡¯s going to take a while to rebuild manufacturing out here,¡± he said. ¡°Ten years, min imu m. But once we get the 
unions involved, we¡¯ll have a base to negotiate fro m. In the meantime, we  just need to stop the hemorrhage and give 
people some short-term v ictories. So mething to show people how much power they have once they stop fighting 
each other and start going after the real ene my.¡±  
 
¡°And who¡¯s that?¡± 
Marty shrugged. ¡°The investment bankers. The polit icians. The fat cat lobbyists.¡± 
Marty nodded to himself, squinting at the road ahead. Looking at h im, I began to suspect that he wasn¡¯t as cynical as 
he liked to  make out, that the plant we¡¯d just left carried a  larger  meaning for h im. So me where  in his life, I thought, 
he, too, had been betrayed. 
 
It was twilight by the time we crossed the city line and pulled into the parking lot of a large suburban school, where 
crowds of people were already making their way into the auditorium. They appeared as Marty had described them: laid -
off steelworkers, secretaries, and truck drivers, men and women who smoked a lot and didn¡¯t watch their weight, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shopped at Sears or Kma rt, drove late-model ca rs fro m Detroit and ate at Red Lobster on special occasions. A barrel-
chested black man in a cle ric¡¯s colla r greeted us at the door and Marty introduced him as Deacon Wilbur M ilton, 
copresident of the organization. W ith his short, reddish beard and round cheeks, the man re minded me o f Santa Claus.  
 
¡°Welcome,¡±  Will said, pu mping my hand. ¡°We been wondering when we ¡¯d actually get to meet you. Thought 
maybe Marty just made you up.¡± 
 
Marty peeked inside the auditorium. ¡° How¡¯s turnout looking?¡± 
¡°Good so far. Everybody seems to be making their quota. Governor¡¯s people just called to say he¡¯s on his way.¡± Marty 
and Will began walking toward the stage, their heads buried in the evening¡¯s agenda. I started to follow them, but found 
my path blocked by three black women of indeterminate age. One of them, a pretty wo man with orange-tinted hair, 
introduced herself as Angela, then leaned over to me and whispered, ¡°You¡¯re Barack, aren¡¯t you?¡± 
 
 
I nodded. 
¡° You don¡¯t know how glad we a re to see you.¡± 
¡° You really don¡¯t,¡± the older wo man ne xt to Angela said. I o ffered the wo man my hand, and she smiled to show off 
a gold front tooth. ¡°I¡¯m sorry,¡± she said, taking my  hand, ¡°I¡¯m Shirley.¡± She gestured toward the last woman, da rk 
and heavyset. ¡°This is Mona. Don¡¯t he look c lean-cut, Mona?¡± 
 
¡°Sure does,¡± Mona said with a laugh. 
¡°Don¡¯t get me  wrong,¡± Angela said, her voice still lowe red a pitch. ¡° I¡¯ve got nothing against Marty. But the fact 
is, there¡¯s only so far you can-¡± 
 
¡°Hey, Angela!¡± We looked up to see Marty waving at us from the stage. ¡° You guys can talk to Barack all you 
want later. Right now I need all of you up here with me.¡±  
 
 
The wo men e xchanged knowing looks before Angela turned back to me.  
¡°I guess we better get going,¡± she said. ¡°But we  rea lly do have to talk. Soon.¡±  
¡°Sure do,¡± said Mona before the three of them wa lked a way, Angela and Shirley busy chatting away in the front, 
 
Mona leisurely bringing up the rear. 
 
The auditoriu m was almost filled by this time, two thousand people in all, maybe a third of them blac ks bused in 
fro m the c ity. At seven o¡¯clock, a choir sang two gospel songs, Will took a roll ca ll of a ll the churches represented, and 
a white Lutheran fro m the suburbs expla ined the history and mission of CCRC. A procession of speakers then 
mounted the stage: a black leg islator and a white legislator, a Baptist min ister and Cardina l Bernard in, and finally the 
governor, who offered his sole mn pledge of support for the new job bank and rec ited evidence of his tire less efforts on 
behalf of the working men and wo men of Illinois. 
 
To my  mind the whole thing came off a bit flat,  like a politica l convention or a TV wrestling  match. Still, the crowd 
seemed to be enjoying itself. So me people hoisted bright banners bearing the name of their church.  Others broke into 
boisterous cheers as a friend or re lative was recognized fro m the stage. See ing all these black and wh ite faces together 
in one place, I, too, found myself feeling cheered, recognizing in myself the sa me v ision driv ing Marty, h is confidence 
in the populist impulse and working-c lass solidarity; his fa ith that if you could just clear away the politic ians and media  
and bureaucrats and give everybody a seat at the table, then ordinary people could find co mmon ground. 
 
 
 
 
When the rally was over, Ma rty mentioned that he had to give some people a ride ho me, so instead of riding with him 
I decided to take one of the buses heading back to the city. As it turned out, there was an empty seat next to Will on 
the bus, and in the glow of the freeway lights, he began to tell me a  little about himself.  
 
He had grown up in Ch icago, he said, and served in Vietna m. After the wa r, he had found a job as an e xecutive tra inee 
at Continental Illinois Bank and had risen fast, enjoying  the trappings of the work-the car, the suits, the downtown 
office. Then the bank had reorganized and Will was laid o ff, leav ing him shaken and badly in debt. It was the turning 
point in his life, he said, God¡¯s way o f telling him to get his values straigh t. Rather than look fo r another job in 
banking, he turned to Christ. He joined St. Catherine¡¯s parish in West Pullman and took a job as the janitor there. The 
decision had put some strain on his ma rriage-his wife  was ¡°still adjusting,¡± he said-but according to Will, the ascetic 
lifestyle suited his new mission: to spread the Good News and puncture some of the hypocrisy he saw in the church. ¡°A 
lot of blac k folks in the church get mixed up in middle-c lass attitudes,¡± Will said. ¡°Think that as long as they fo llow the 
letter of Scripture, they don¡¯t need to follo w the spirit. Instead of reaching out to people who are hurting, they ma ke 
them fee l unwe lco me. They look at people funny unless they¡¯re wearing the right clothes to mass, talk p roper and all 
that. They figure they¡¯re co mfortable , so why put themselves out. Well, Christ ain¡¯t about comfort, is he? He preached 
a social gospel. Took his message to the weak. The downtrodden. And that¡¯s exact ly what I tell some  of these middle -
class Negroes whenever I stand up on Sunday. Tell ¡¯e m what they don¡¯t wanna hear.¡± 
 
¡°Do they listen?¡± 
 
¡°No.¡± Will chuckled. ¡° But that don¡¯t stop me. It¡¯s like th is colla r I wear. That rea lly gets some of ¡¯e m mad. ¡®Collars 
are for priests,¡¯ they tell me. But see, just ¡¯cause I¡¯m ma rried and can¡¯t be ordained don¡¯t mean I don¡¯t have a calling. 
Ain¡¯t  nothing  in  the  Bible  ta lking  about  collars.  So  I  go  ahead  and  wear  a  collar  to  let  people  know  where  I¡¯m 
coming fro m. 
 
¡°In fact, I wo re a collar when some  of us went to meet with Ca rd inal Bernardin about a month back. Everyone was 
real uptight about it. Then they got upset when I called the Ca rdinal ¡®Joe¡¯ instead of ¡®Your Holiness.¡¯ But you know, 
Bernard in was cool. He¡¯s a spiritual man. I could tell we understood each other. It¡¯s thes e rules again that keep us 
apart-rules of men, not ru les of God. See, Barac k, I¡¯m in the Catholic church, but I was raised a Baptist. Could¡¯ve 
joined a Methodist church, Pentecostal, whatever, just as easy. St. Catherine¡¯s is just where God happened to sen d me. 
And He cares more  about whether I¡¯m about the business of helping others than whether I¡¯m straight on my 
catechisms.¡± 
 
I nodded, deciding not to ask what a catechism was. In Indonesia, I had spent two years at a Muslim school, two 
years at a Catholic school. In the Muslim school, the teacher wrote to tell my mother that I made faces during Koranic  
studies. My mother wasn¡¯t overly concerned. ¡°Be  respectful,¡± she¡¯d said. In the Catholic school, when it ca me  time  to 
pray, I would pretend to close my eyes , then peek around the room. Nothing happened. No angels descended. Just a 
parched old nun and thirty brown children, muttering words. So metimes the nun would catch me, and her stern look 
would force my  lids back shut. But that didn¡¯t change how I felt ins ide. I fe lt that way now, listening to Will; my 
silence was like closing my eyes. 
 
The bus came to a stop in the church parking lot, and Will walked to the front of the bus. He thanked everybody for 
coming and urged them to stay involved. ¡°It¡¯s a long road we¡¯re traveling,¡± he said, ¡°but tonight showed me what we 
 
 
 
 
can do when we put our minds to it. That good feeling you got right now, we got to keep it going till we 
got this neighborhood back on its feet.¡± 
 
A few people s miled and offe red an a men. But as I stepped off the bus, I heard a wo man behind me  wh ispering t o 
her friend, ¡°I don¡¯t need to hear about the neighborhood, girl. Where these jobs they talking about?¡±  
 
The day after the rally, Marty decided it was time for me to do some real work, and he handed me a long list of 
people to interview. Find out their self-interest, he said. That¡¯s why people become involved in organizing -
because they think they¡¯ll get something out of it. Once I found an issue enough people cared about, I could take 
them into action. With enough actions, I could start to build power.  
 
Issues, action, power, self-interest. I liked these concepts. They bespoke a certain hardheadedness, a worldly lack of 
sentiment; politics, not religion. For the ne xt three weeks, I worked day and night, setting up and conducting my 
interviews. It was harder than I¡¯d e xpected. There was the internal resistance I fe lt whenever I picked up the phone to 
set up the interviews, as images of Gra mps¡¯s insurance sales calls crept into my mind: the impatience that waited at 
the other end of the line, the e mpty feeling of messages left unreturned. Most of my appointments were in the evening, 
home visits, and the people were t ired after a fu ll day¡¯s work. So metimes I would a rrive only to find that the person 
had forgotten our appointment, and I¡¯d have to re mind h im or her of who I was as I was eyed suspiciously fro m 
behind a half-opened door. 
 
Still, these were minor d ifficult ies. Once they were  overcome , I found that people didn¡¯t mind a chance to air their 
opinions about a do-nothing alderman or the neighbor who refused to mo w his la wn. The mo re intervie ws I did, the 
more  I began to hear certain recurring themes. I learned, for e xa mp le, that most of the people in the area had bee n 
raised farther north or on Chicago¡¯s West Side, in the cra mped blac k enclaves that restrictive covenants had created 
for most of the city¡¯s history. The people I talked to had some fond me mories of that self-contained world, but they 
also re me mbered the absence of heat and light and space to breathe-that, and the sight of their parents grinding out life  
in physical labor. 
 
A few had fo llo wed their parents into the steel mills or onto the assembly line. But many more had found jobs as 
ma il carrie rs, bus drivers, teachers, and social workers, ta king advantage of the more rigorous enforcement of 
antidiscrimination la ws in the public sector. Such jobs had benefits and provided enough security to think about 
taking on a mortgage. With the passage of fair housin g laws, they began to buy homes, one at a time, in Roseland and 
other white neighborhoods. Not because they were necessarily interested in mingling with whites, they insisted, but 
because the houses there were affordable, with sma ll yards for their children; because the schools were better and the 
stores cheaper, and maybe just because they could. 
 
Often, as I listened to these stories, I wou ld find myself re minded of the stories that Gra mps and Toot and my mother 
had told-stories of hardship and migrat ion, the drive for something better. But there was an inescapable difference 
between what I was now hearing and what I re me mbered, as if the images of my childhood had been run in reverse. In 
these new stories, For Sa le signs cropped up like dandelions under a summer sun. Stones flew through windows and the 
strained voices of anxious parents could be heard calling children indoors fro m innocent games. Ent ire b locks turned 
over in less than six months; entire neighborhoods in less than five years. 
 
 
 
 
 
In these stories, wherever blac k and white met, the result was sure to be anger and grief.  
The area had never fully recovered fro m this rac ial upheaval. The stores and banks had left with their white 
customers, causing ma in thoroughfares to decompose. City services had declined. St ill, when the blacks who¡¯d now 
lived in their homes for ten or fifteen years looked back on the way things had turned out, they did so with some 
measure of satisfaction. On the strength of two incomes, they had paid off house notes and car notes, maybe college 
educations for the sons or daughters whose graduation pictures filled every mantelpiece. They had kept their ho mes up 
and kept their children off the streets; they had formed b lock c lubs to make  sure that others did too. 
 
It was when they spoke of the future that a certain disquiet entered their voices. They would mention a cous in or 
sibling who ca me by every so often asking for money; or an adult child, une mployed, who still lived at home. Even the 
success of those children who¡¯d made it through college and into the white -collar world harbored within it an ele ment 
of loss-the better these children did, the more like ly they were to move away. In their place, younger, less stable 
fa milies moved in, the second wave of migrants fro m poorer ne ighborhoods, newcomers who couldn¡¯t always afford to 
keep up with their mo rtgage payments or invest in periodic ma intenance. Car thefts were  up; the leafy parks we re 
empty. People  began to spend more time  inside; they invested in elaborate wrought -iron doors; they wondered if they 
could afford to sell at a  loss and retire to a wa rme r c limate, perh aps move back to the South. 
 
So despite the deserved sense of accomplishment these men and wo men fe lt, despite the irre futable evidence of their 
own progress, our conversations were marked by another, more  o minous strain. The boarded -up homes, the decaying 
storefronts, the aging church rolls, kids fro m unknown fa milies who swaggered down the streets -loud congregations of 
teenage boys, teenage girls feeding potato chips to crying toddlers, the discarded wrappers tumbling down the block-a ll 
of it whispered painful t ruths, told them the progress they¡¯d found was ephemeral, rooted in thin soil;  that it might not 
even last their lifetimes. 
 
And it was this dual sense, of individual advancement and collective decline, that I thought accounted for some of 
the attitudes agitating Will when we¡¯d spoken the night of the rally. I heard it in the e xcessive pride some of the men 
took in the we ll-stocked bars they¡¯d built in their basements, with the lava la mps and the mirrored walls. In the 
protective plastic that the wo men kept over their spotless carpets and sofas. In all of it, one saw a determined effort to 
shore up the belief that things had in fact changed, if only some people would start acting right. ¡°I try to avoid driv ing 
through Roseland when I can,¡± a wo man fro m neighboring Washington Heights expla ined to me one evening. ¡°People 
down there are just rougher. You can see it in the way they keep up their ho mes. You didn¡¯t see things like  that when 
the white folks still lived there.¡±  
 
Distinctions between neighborhoods, then blocks, then finally neighbors within a b lock; atte mpts to cordon off, 
control the decay. One thing I noticed, though. The woman so concerned with the cruder habits of her neighbors had a 
picture of Ha rold in her kitchen, right ne xt to the sample r of the Twenty-third Psalm. So  did the young man who lived 
in the cru mbling apart ment a few blocks a way and was trying to ma ke ends meet by mixing records at dance parties. As 
it had for the men in Smitty¡¯s barbershop, the election had given both these people a new idea of themselves. Or maybe 
it was an old idea, born of a  simple r time. Haro ld was something they still he ld in co mmon : Like my idea of 
organizing, he held out an offer of collective rede mption. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I tossed my third-wee k report onto Marty¡¯s desk and took a seat as he read 
it through. ¡°Not bad,¡± he said when he was fin ished. 
¡°Not bad?¡± 
¡° Yeah, not bad.  You¡¯re starting to  listen.  But it ¡¯s still too abstract¡­like you¡¯re  taking  a survey or something. If 
you want to organize people, you need to steer away  fro m the  periphera l stuff and go towards people¡¯s centers. The 
stuff that makes them tic k. Otherwise, you¡¯ll never form the re lationships you need to get them involved.¡±  
 
The man was starting to get on my nerves. I asked him if he ever worried about becoming too calculating, if the 
idea of probing people¡¯s psyches and gaining their trust just to build an organization ever fe lt man ipulative. He 
sighed. ¡°I¡¯m not a poet, Ba rack. I¡¯m an organize r.¡±  
 
What did that mean? I left the office in a fou l mood. Later, I had to admit that Marty was right. I still had no idea 
how I might translate what I was hearing into action. In fact, it wasn¡¯t until I ca me  to the end of my  intervie ws that 
an opportunity seemed to present itself. 
 
It was during a meet ing with Ruby Styles, a stocky wo man who worked as an office manager on the north side of the 
city. We had been talking about her teenage son, Kyle, a  bright but diffident boy who was starting to have trouble at 
school, when she mentioned a rise in local gang activity. One of Kyle ¡¯s friends had been shot just last week, she said, 
right in front of his house. The boy was all right, but now Ruby was worried about her own son¡¯s safety. 
 
My ears perked up; this sounded like self-interest. Over the ne xt fe w days, I had Ruby introduce me to other parents 
who shared her fears and felt frustrated over the lackluster police response. When I suggested that we invite the district 
commander to a ne ighborhood meeting so the community could a ir its concerns, everyone agreed; and as we talked 
about publicity one of the wo men mentioned that there was a Baptist church on the block where the boy had been 
shot, and that the pastor there, a Reverend Reynolds, might be willing to ma ke an announcement to his congregation. 
 
It took me a wee k of phone calls, but when I finally reached Reverend Reynolds, his response seemed pro mising. 
He was the president of the local min isterial alliance, he said-¡°churches coming together to preach the social gospel.¡± 
He said that the group would be holding its regular meet ing the very next day and that he would be happy to put me 
on the agenda. 
 
I hung up the phone full of e xc ite ment, and arr ived at Reverend Reynolds¡¯s church early the ne xt morning. A pa ir 
of young women dressed in white gowns and gloves met me  in the foyer and showed me to a large conference 
room where ten or twelve o lder b lack men stood talking in a loose circle . A particu la rly distinguished-looking 
gentleman ca me up to greet me. ¡° You must be Brother Oba ma,¡± he said, ta king my  hand. ¡°Reverend Reynolds. 
You¡¯re just in time -we ¡¯re about to start.¡± 
 
We all sat around a long table, and Reverend Reynolds led us in prayer before offering me  the floor. Suppressing my 
nerves, I told the ministers about the increased gang activity and the meeting we had planned, and passed out flyers 
for the m to distribute in their congregations. ¡°With your leadership,¡± I said, wa rming up to my  subject, ¡°this can be  a 
first step towards cooperation on all kinds of issues. Fixing the schools. Bringing jobs back into the neighborhood¡­¡±  
 
Just as I passed out the last flyers, a tall, pecan-colored man entered the room. He wore a blue, double-breasted suit 
and a large gold cross against his scarlet tie. His hair was straightened and swept back in a pompadour. 
 
 
 
 
¡°Brother Smalls, you just missed an excellent presentation,¡± Reverend Reynolds said. ¡°This young man, 
Brother Oba ma, has a plan to organize a meet ing about the recent gang shooting.¡± 
 
Reverend Sma lls poured himself a cup of coffee and perused the flyer. ¡°What¡¯s the name of your organization?¡± he 
asked me. 
 
¡°Developing Co mmun ities Project.¡±  
¡°Developing Co mmun ities ¡­¡± His brow knotted. ¡°I think I re me mbe r some white man co ming around talking 
about some Developing something or other. Funny -looking guy. Je wis h name . You connected to the Catholics?¡± 
 
I told him that some of the Catholic churches in the area were involved. 
¡°That¡¯s right, I re me mber now.¡± Reverend Sma lls sipped his coffee and leaned back in his chair. ¡°I told that 
white man he might as well pac k up and get on out of here. We don¡¯t need nothing like this around here.¡±  
 
 
 
 
¡°I-¡± 
¡°Listen¡­what¡¯s your name  again? Oba mba? Listen, Oba mba, you may mean well. I¡¯m sure you do. But the last thing 
we need is to join up with a bunch of wh ite money and Catholic  churches and Jewish organizers to solve our problems. 
 
They¡¯re not interested in us. Shoot, the archdiocese in this city is run by stone -cold racists. Always has been. White 
folks co me in here thin king they know what¡¯s best for us, hiring a buncha high -talking college-educated brothers like 
yourself who don¡¯t know no better, and all they want to do is take over. It ¡¯s all a politica l thing, and that¡¯s not what 
this group here is about.¡± 
 
I stamme red that the church had always taken the lead in addressing  community issues, but Reverend Sma lls just 
shook his head. ¡° You don¡¯t understand,¡± he said. ¡°Things have changed with the new mayor. I¡¯ve known the district 
police co mmander since he was a beat cop. The aldermen in this area are a ll co mmitted to black e mp o werment. Why 
we need to be protesting and carrying on at our own people? Anybody sitting around this table got a direct line to  
 
City Ha ll. Fred, didn¡¯t you just talk to the alderman about getting that permit for your parking lot?¡±  
 
The rest of the room had grown quiet. Reverend Reynolds cleared his throat. ¡°The man¡¯s new around here, 
Charles. He¡¯s just trying to help.¡± 
 
Reverend  Sma lls  smiled  and  patted  me  on  the  shoulder.  ¡°Don¡¯t  misunderstand  me  now.  Like  I  said,  I  know  you 
mean  we ll.  We  need  some  young  blood to  help  out  with  the  cause.  All  I¡¯m  saying  is  that  right now  you¡¯re  on  the 
wrong side of the battle.¡± 
 
I sat there, roasting like a p ig on a spit, as the pastors went on to discuss a joint Thanksgiving service in the park 
across the street. When the meeting was over, Reverend Reynolds and a few of the others thanked me for 
coming. 
 
¡°Don¡¯t take Charles too s eriously,¡± one of them advised. ¡°He can be a little strong sometimes.¡± But I noticed that none 
of them le ft with my  flyers; and later in the wee k, when I tried to call some  of the min isters back, their secretaries kept 
telling me they were  gone for the day. 
 
We went forwa rd with our police meeting, which proved a s mall d isaster. Only thirteen people showed up, scattered 
across rows of e mpty chairs. The district co mmander canceled on us, sending a community re lations office r instead. 
Every few minutes an older couple walked in looking for the Bingo ga me. I spent most of the evening directing this  
 
 
 
 
wayward tra ffic upstairs, while Ruby sat glumly onstage, listening to the police man lecture about the need 
for parental d iscipline. 
 
About halfway  through the meeting, Marty arrived. 
After it was over, he ca me up and put a hand on my 
shoulder. ¡°Fee ls like shit, huh?¡± 
It did. He helped  me c lean up, then took me out for coffee and pointed out some of  my  mistakes. The proble m 
 
of  gangs  was  too  general  to  make   an  impression  on  people-issues  had  to  be  made  concrete,  specific ,  and 
winnable.  I  should  have  prepared  Ruby  more  ca refully-and  set  out  fewer  chairs.  Most  important,  I  needed  to 
spend more t ime getting to know the leaders in the commun ity; flyers couldn¡¯t pull people out on a rainy night.  
 
¡°That reminds me ,¡± he said as we stood up to go. ¡°Whatever happened to those pastors you were supposed 
to be meeting with?¡±  
 
I told him about Reverend Sma lls. He started to laugh. ¡° Guess it¡¯s a good thing I didn¡¯t tag along, 
huh?¡± I wasn¡¯t amused. ¡°Why didn¡¯t you warn me  about Sma lls?¡± 
 
¡°I did warn you,¡± Marty said, opening the door to his car. ¡°I told you Ch icago¡¯s polarized and that politicians use it 
to their own advantage. That¡¯s all Sma lls is -a politic ian who happens to wear a co lla r. Anyway, it¡¯s not the end of the 
world. You should just be glad you learned your lesson early.¡± 
 
Yes, but which lesson? Watching Marty drive away, I thought back to the day of the rally: the sound of Smitty¡¯s voice in 
the barbershop; the rows of black and white faces in the school auditorium, there because of the factory¡¯s desolation and 
Marty¡¯s own sense of betrayal; the cardinal, a small, pale, unassuming man in a black robe and glasses, smiling onstage as 
Will swallowed him up in a big bear hug; Will, so certain that the two men understood each other. 
 
Each image carried its own lesson, each was subject to differing interpretations. For there we re many churches, many 
faiths. There we re times, perhaps, when those faiths seemed to converge-the crowd in front of the Lincoln Me moria l, 
the Freedom Riders at the lunch counter. But such mo ments were partia l, frag mentary. W ith our eyes closed, we uttered 
the same words, but in our hearts we each prayed to our own masters; we each re mained locked in our own me mo ries; 
we a ll clung to our own foolish mag ic. 
 
A man like  Sma lls unders tood that, I thought. He understood that the men in the barbershop didn¡¯t want the victory of 
Harold¡¯s e lection-their v ictory-qualified. They wouldn¡¯t want to hear that their proble ms were  more co mp licated than a 
group of devious white aldermen, or that their rede mption was inco mplete. Both Marty and Sma lls knew that in 
politics, like religion, powe r lay in ce rtainty-and that one man¡¯s certainty always threatened another¡¯s. 
 
I rea lized then, standing in an empty McDonald¡¯s parking lot in the South Side of Chicago, that I was a heretic.  
 
Or worse-for even a heretic must believe in something, if nothing more than the truth of his own doubt. 
 
 
CHAPTER NINE 
 
 
 
T HE ALTGELD GARDENS PUBLIC housing project sat at Chicago¡¯s southernmost edge: two thousand apartments 
arranged in a series of two-story brick buildings with army -green doors and grimy mock shutters. Everybody in the 
 
 
 
 
area refe rred to Altgeld as ¡°the Gardens¡± for short, although it wasn¡¯t until later that I considered the irony of the 
name, its evocation of something fresh and well tended -a sanctified earth. 
 
True, there was a grove of trees just south of the project, and running s outh and west of that was the Calu met 
River, where you could sometimes see men flic k fishing lines la zily into darkening waters. But the fish that swam 
those waters were often strangely discolored, with cataract eyes and lumps behind their gills. People at e their 
catch only if they had to. 
 
To the east, on the other side of the expressway, was the Lake Calumet landfill, the largest in the Midwest. And to 
the north, directly across the street, was the Metropolitan Sanitary District¡¯s sewage treatment plant. The people of 
Altgeld couldn¡¯t see the plant or the open-air vats that went on for close to a mile; as part of a recent beautification 
effort, the district maintained a long wall of earth in front of the facility, dotted with hastily planted 
 
saplings that refused to grow month after month, like  hairs swept across a bald man¡¯s head. But offic ials could do 
nothing  to  hide  the  smell-a   heavy,  putrid  odor  that  varied  in  strength  depending  on  the  temperature  and  the 
wind¡¯s direct ion, and seeped through windows no matter how tightly they were shut. 
 
The stench, the toxins, the e mpty, uninhabited landscape. For c lose to a century, the fe w square miles surrounding 
Altgeld had taken in the offa l of scores of factories, the price people had paid fo r their high -wage jobs. Now that the 
jobs were gone, and those people that could had already left, it see med only natural to use the land as a dump. 
 
A dump-and a place to house poor blacks. Altgeld may  have been unique in its physical isolation, but it shared with 
the city¡¯s other projects a common history: the dreams of reforme rs to build decent housing for the poor; the politics 
that had concentrated such housing away fro m wh ite neighborhoods, and prevented working fa milies fro m living there; 
the use of the Chicago Housing Authority-the CHA-as a patronage trough; the subsequent mismanage ment and neglect. 
 
It wasn¡¯t as bad as Chicago¡¯s high-rise projects yet, the Robert Taylors and Cabrin i Greens, with their ink -blac k 
stairwells and urine-stained lobbies and random shootings. Altgeld¡¯s occupancy rate held steady at ninety percent, 
and if you went inside the apart ments, you would more  often than not find them we ll-kept, with sma ll touches -a 
patterned cloth thrown over torn upholstery, an old  calendar left hanging on the wall for its tropical beach scenes -that 
e xpressed the lingering idea of ho me. 
 
Still, everything about the Gardens seemed in a perpetual state of disrepair. Ce ilings crumbled. Pipes burst. Toilets 
backed up. Muddy tire tracks branded the small, brown lawns strewn with e mpty flo wer p lanters -broken, tilted, half 
buried. The CHA maintenance crews had stopped even pretending that repairs would happen any time soon. So that 
most children in Altgeld g rew up without ever having seen a garden. Children who could see only that things were 
used up, and that there was a certain pleasure in speeding up the decay. 
 
I took the turn into Altgeld at 131st and came to a stop in front of Our Lady of the Ga rdens Church, a flat brick 
building toward the rea r of the develop ment. I was there to meet some of our key leaders, to talk about the problems in 
our organizing effort, and how we  might get things back on track. But as I cut off the engine and started reaching for 
my brie fcase, something stopped me short. The view, perhaps; the choking gray sky. I c losed my eyes and leaned my 
head against the car seat, feeling like the first mate on a sinking ship. 
 
Over two months had passed since the botched police meeting, and things had gone badly. There had been no marches, 
no sit-ins, no freedom songs. Just a series of miscues and misunderstandings, tedium and stress. Part of the 
 
 
 
 
problem was our base, which-in the city, at least-had never been large: e ight Catholic  parishes flung across several 
neighborhoods, all with blac k congregations but all led by white p riests. They were isolated men, these priests, mostly 
of Polish or Irish descent, men who had entered the seminary in the sixt ies intending to serve the poor and heal racia l 
wounds but who lacked the zea l of their missionary forefathers; kinder men, perhaps better men, but also softer for 
their modernity. They had seen their sermons of brotherhood and goodwill tra mpled under the stampede of white 
flight, their e fforts at recru iting new me mbers met with suspicion by the dark faces -mostly Baptist, Methodist, 
Pentecostal-now surrounding their churches. Marty had convinced them that  organizing would brea k this isolation, 
that it would not only stop the neighborhoods¡¯ decline but also reenergize their o wn parishes and rekindle their spirits. 
That hope had been fragile, though, and by the time I met with them they had already resigned themselves to their 
disappointments. ¡°The truth is,¡± one of the priests told me , ¡° most of us out here are looking to get a transfer. The only 
reason I¡¯m still around is that nobody¡¯s willing to replace me.¡±  
 
Morale was even worse a mong the laity, b lack folks like Angela, Shirley, and Mona, the three wo men I¡¯d met at the 
rally. They were spirited, good-humored wo men, those three, women who-without husbands to help-somehow 
managed to raise sons and daughters, juggle an assortment of part -t ime jobs and small business schemes, and organize 
Girl Scout troops, fashion shows, and summe r ca mps for the parade of ch ildren that wandered through the church 
every day. Since none of the three actually lived in Altgeld -they all owned sma ll houses just west of the project-I had 
asked them once what motivated them to do what they did. Before  I could fin ish the question, they had all rolled their 
eyes as if on cue. 
 
¡°Watch out, girl,¡± Angela told Sh irley, causing Mona to chuckle merrily. ¡° Barac k¡¯s about to interview you. He ¡¯s 
got that look.¡± 
 
And Shirley said, ¡°We¡¯re  just a bunch of bored middle -aged wo men, Barac k, with nothing better to do with our time. 
But¡±-and here Shirley thre w a hand onto her bony hip and raised her cigarette to her lips like a mov ie star-¡°if Mr. Right 
comes along, then watch out! It¡¯s good-bye Altgeld, hello Monte Carlo!¡±  
 
I hadn¡¯t heard any jokes fro m them late ly, though. All I¡¯d heard we re co mpla ints. The wo men co mpla ined that Marty 
didn¡¯t care about Altgeld. They comp lained that Marty was arrogant and didn¡¯t listen to their suggestions. 
 
Most of all, they comp la ined about the new job bank that we had announced with such fanfare the night of the rally, 
but that had turned out to be a bust. As Marty had planned it, a state university out in the suburbs had been assigned 
to run the program-it was a matter of efficiency, he e xp la ined, since the university had the computers already in place . 
Unfortunately, two months after it was supposed to have started, no one had found work through the program. The 
computers didn¡¯t work right; the data entry was plagued with errors; people were sent to interview for jobs that didn¡¯t 
e xist. Marty was liv id, and at least once a week he would have to drive out to the university, cursing under his breath 
as he tried to pry answers out of offic ia ls who seemed more  concerned with ne xt year¡¯s funding cycle. But the wo men 
fro m A ltgeld we ren¡¯t interested in Marty¡¯s frustrations. All they knew was that $500,000 had gone somewhere, and it 
wasn¡¯t in their ne ighborhood. For the m, the job bank became  yet more evidence that Marty had used them to push a 
secret agenda, that somehow wh ites in the suburbs were getting the jobs they¡¯d been promised. 
 
¡°Marty¡¯s just looking out for his own,¡± they grumb led.  
 
 
 
 
I had tried my  best to mediate the conflict, defending Marty against charges of racis m, suggesting to him that he 
cultivate more tact. Marty told me  I was wasting my time . According to him, the only reason Angela and the other 
leaders in the city we re sore was because he¡¯d refused to hire them to run the program. ¡°That¡¯s what ruins a lot of so -
called co mmun ity organizat ions out here. They start taking government money. They hire big , do-nothing staffs. Pretty 
soon, they¡¯ve become big patronage operations, with clients to be serviced. Not leaders. Clients. To be serviced.¡± He 
spit the words out, as if they were unclean. ¡°Jesus, it ma kes you sick just thinking about it.¡±  
 
And then, seeing the still-fretfu l look on my face, he added, ¡°If you¡¯re going to do this work, Barack, you¡¯ve 
got to stop worrying about whether people like you. They won¡¯t.¡±  
 
Patronage, politics, hurt fee lings, rac ial grievances -they were all of a piece  to Marty, distractions from his la rger 
purpose, corruptions of a noble cause. He was still try ing to bring the union in then, convinced that they would 
replenish our ranks, deliver our ship to shore. One day in late Septe mber, he had asked Angela and me to  jo in him at 
a meeting with union officia ls fro m LTV Stee l, one of the fe w re ma ining steel operations in the city. It had taken 
Marty over a month to set up the meeting, and he was brimming with energy that day, talking at a rapid c lip about the 
company, the union, and new phases in the organizing ca mpa ign. 
 
Eventually the president of the local-a  young, handsome Irishman who¡¯d been recently elected on a promise of 
reform-entered the hall, along with two husky black men, the union treasurer and vice -president. After the 
introductions, we a ll sat down and Marty made his pitch. The corporation was preparing to get out of the steelmaking 
business, he said, and wage concessions would only prolong the agony. If the union wanted to preserve jobs, it had to 
take some new, bold steps. Sit down with the churches and develop a plan for a wo rke r buyout. Negotiate with the city 
for concessionary utility and ta x rates during the transition. Pressure the banks to provide loans that could be used to 
invest in the new technology needed to ma ke the plant competit ive again. 
 
Throughout the monologue, the union officia ls shifted uneasily in their chairs. Finally the president stood up 
and told Marty that his ideas merited further study but that right now the union had to focus on ma king an 
immed iate decision about management¡¯s offer. In the parking lot afterward, Marty looked stunned. 
 
¡°They¡¯re not interested,¡± he told me, shaking h is head. ¡°Like  a bunch of le mmings running towards a cliff.¡±  
 
I had felt bad for Marty. I had fe lt worse for Angela. She hadn¡¯t said a wo rd throughout the entire meeting, but as I 
pulled out of the union parking lot to drive her ho me, she had turned to me and said, ¡°I d idn¡¯t understand a word Marty 
was saying.¡± 
 
And I suppose it was then that I understood the difficulty of what Marty had tried to pull off, and the depth of his 
miscalculation. It wasn¡¯t so much that Angela had missed some of the details of Ma rty¡¯s presentation; as we 
continued to talk, it had become  apparent that she understood Marty¡¯s proposal at least as well as I d id. No, the rea l 
mean ing of her re mark was this: She had co me to doubt the relevance to her own situation of keeping the LTV plant 
open. Organizing with the unions might help the few b lacks who re mained in the plants keep their jobs; it wouldn¡¯t 
dent the rolls of the chronically une mployed any time soon. A job bank might help workers who already had skills 
and experience find something else; it wouldn¡¯t teach the black teenage dropout ho w to read or compute. 
 
In other words, it was different for black folks. It was different now, just as it had been different for Angela¡¯s 
grandparents, who¡¯d been barred from the unions, then spat on as scabs; for her parents, who had been kept out of the 
 
 
 
 
best patronage jobs that the Machine had to offer in the days before patronage became a dirty word. In his eagerness 
to do battle with the downtown power brokers, the investment bankers in their fancy suits, Marty wanted to wish such 
diffe rences away as part of an unfortunate past. But for so meone like  Angela, the past was the present; it determined 
her world with a force infin itely mo re rea l than any notions of class solidarity. It e xp la ined why more b lacks hadn¡¯t 
been able to move out into the suburbs while  the going was still good, why mo re blac ks hadn¡¯t climbed up the ladder 
into the American drea m. It e xp la ined why the unemploy ment in b lack neighborhoods was more widespread and 
longstanding, more desperate; and why Angela had no patience with those who wanted to treat black people and 
white people e xact ly the same. 
 
It e xpla ined Altgeld. 
 
 
I looked at my  watch: ten past two. Time to face  the music. I got out of my car and rang the church doorbell. 
Angela answered, and led me into a room where  the other leaders were wa iting: Shirley, Mona, Will, and Mary, a 
quiet, dark-ha ired white wo man who taught ele mentary school at St. Catherine¡¯s. I apologized for being late and 
poured myself some  coffee. 
 
¡°So,¡± I said, taking a seat on the windowsill. ¡°Why all the long 
faces?¡± ¡°We¡¯re quitting,¡± Angela said. 
 
 
 
 
¡°Who¡¯s quitting?¡± 
Angela shrugged. ¡°Well¡­I a m, I guess. I can¡¯t speak for everybody else.¡± 
I looked a round the room. The other leaders averted their eyes, like a  jury that¡¯s delivered an unfavorable verd ict. 
¡°I¡¯m sorry, Barack,¡± Angela continued. ¡°It has nothing to do with you. The truth is, we¡¯re  just tired. We¡¯ve a ll been 
at this for two years, and we¡¯ve got nothing to show for it.¡±  
 
¡°I understand you¡¯re frustrated, Angela. We¡¯re a ll a little frustrated. But you need to give it more time. We -¡± 
 
¡°We don¡¯t have more  time ,¡± Sh irley broke in. ¡°We can¡¯t keep on making pro mises to our people, and then 
have nothing happen. We need something now.¡± 
 
I fidgeted with my coffee cup, trying to think of something e lse to say. Words jumbled up in my head, and for a 
mo ment I was gripped with panic. Then the pan ic gave way to anger. Anger at Marty for talking me into coming to 
Chicago. Anger at the leaders for be ing short-sighted. Anger at myself fo r believing I could have ever bridged the gap 
between them. I suddenly reme mbered what Frank had told me that night back in Ha wa ii, after I had heard that Toot 
was scared of a black man. 
 
That¡¯s the way it is, he had said. You might as well get used to it. 
In this peevish mood, I looked out the window and saw a group of young boys gathered across the street. They 
were tossing stones at the boarded-up window of a vacant apartment, their hoods pulled over their heads like  
miniature monks. One of the boys reached up and started yanking at a loose piece of ply wood nailed across the 
apartment door, then stumbled and fell, causing the others to laugh. A part of me suddenly felt like join ing them, 
tearing apart the whole dying landscape, piece by piece. Instead, I turned back toward Angela.  
 
¡°Let me  ask you something,¡± I said, pointing out the window. ¡°What do you suppose is going to happen to those 
boys out there?¡± 
 
 
 
 
 
¡°Barac k¡­¡± 
¡°No, I¡¯m just asking you a question. You say you¡¯re tired, the sa me way most folks out here are tired. So I¡¯m just 
trying to figure out what¡¯s going to happen to those boys. Who¡¯s going to make sure they get a fair shot? The 
alderman? The social workers? The gangs?¡± 
 
I could hear my voice  rising, but I didn¡¯t let up. ¡° You know, I didn¡¯t co me  here ¡¯cause I needed a job. I 
came he re ¡¯cause Marty said there were some  people who were serious about doing something to change their 
 
neighborhoods. I don¡¯t care what¡¯s happened in the past. I know that I¡¯m here, and co mmitted to working with you. If 
there¡¯s a proble m, then we¡¯ll  fix  it. If you don¡¯t think anything¡¯s happened after working  with  me, then I¡¯ll be the 
first one to tell you to quit. But if you all are  planning to quit now, then I want you to answer my question.¡±  
 
I stopped there, trying to read each of their faces. They seemed surprised at my  outburst, though none of them was as 
surprised as me. I knew I was on precarious ground; I wasn¡¯t close enough to any of them to be sure my p lay wouldn¡¯t 
backfire. At that particula r mo ment, though, I had no o ther hand to play. The boys outside moved on down the street. 
 
Shirley went to get herself mo re coffee . After what seemed like ten minutes, Will finally spoke up. 
 
¡°I don¡¯t know about the rest of you, but I think we¡¯ve ta lked about this same old mess long enough. Marty 
knows we got proble ms. That¡¯s why he hired Barac k. Ain¡¯t that right, Ba rack?¡±  
 
I nodded cautiously. 
¡°Things still bad out here. Ain¡¯t nothing gone away. So what I wanna know,¡± he said, turning to me, ¡° is what we 
gonna do fro m here on out.¡± 
 
I told him the truth. ¡°I don¡¯t know, Will. You tell me .¡±  
Will s miled, and I sensed that the immediate  crisis had passed. Angela agreed to give it  another few months. I agreed 
to concentrate more  time  on Altgeld. We spent the next half hour talking strateg y and handing out assignments. On 
our way out, Mona came up and took me by the arm.  
 
¡° You handled that meeting pretty good, Barack. See ms like you know what 
you¡¯re doing.¡± ¡°I don¡¯t, Mona. I don¡¯t have a clue.¡±  
She laughed. ¡°Well, I promise I won¡¯t tell nobody.¡± ¡°I 
appreciate that, Mona. I sure do appreciate that.¡± 
 
 
 
 
That evening, I called Marty and told him so me of what had happened. He wasn¡¯t surprised: several of the 
suburban churches were already starting to drop out. He gave me a  fe w suggestions for approaching the job issue in 
Altgeld, then advised me to pick up the pace of my intervie ws.  
 
¡° You¡¯re going to need to find some new leaders, Barac k. I mean, Will¡¯s a terrific guy and all that, but do 
you really want to depend on him to keep the organization afloat?¡± 
 
I understood Marty¡¯s point. As much as I liked Will, as much as I appreciated his support, I had to admit that some of 
his ideas were¡­we ll, eccentric. He  liked to s moke  ree fer at the end of a day¡¯s wo rk (¡° If God d idn¡¯t want us to smoke  
the stuff, he wouldn¡¯t have put it on this here earth¡±). He would wa lk out of any meeting that he decided was boring. 
 
Whenever I took him a long to interview me mbers of h is church, he¡¯d start arguing with them about their incorrect  
 
 
 
 
reading of Sc ripture, their choice of la wn fe rtilizer, or the constitutionality of the income ta x (he fe lt that 
tax violated the Bill of Rights, and conscientiously refused to pay). 
 
¡°Maybe if you listened to other people a little mo re,¡± I had told him onc e, ¡°they¡¯d be mo re responsive.¡± 
Will had shaken his head. ¡°I do listen. That¡¯s the problem. Everything they say is wrong.¡± 
 
Now, after the meet ing in Altgeld, Will had a new idea. ¡°These mixed -up Negroes inside St. Catherine¡¯s ain¡¯t never 
gonna do nothing,¡± he said. ¡°If we wanna get something done, we gonna have to take it to the streets!¡± He pointed out 
that many of the people who lived in the immed iate vic inity of St. Catherine¡¯s we re jobless and struggling; those were 
the people we should be targeting, he said. And because they might not feel co mfortable  attending a meeting hosted by 
a foreign church, we should conduct a series of street corner meetings around West Pullman, a llowing them to gather 
on neutral turf. 
 
I was skeptical at first, but unwilling as I was to discourage any initiative, I he lped Will and Mary prepare a  flyer, 
for distribution along the block c losest to the church. A week later, the three of us stood out on the corner in the late 
autumn wind. The street re mained e mpty at first, the sh ades drawn down the rows of bric k bungalows. Then, 
slowly, people began to eme rge, one or two at a  time , wo men in ha ir nets, men in flannel shirts or windbreakers, 
shuffling through the brittle gold leaves, edging toward the growing circle . When the gathering numbered twenty or 
so, Will e xp lained that St. Catherine¡¯s was part of a  la rger organizing effort and that ¡°we want you to talk to your 
neighbors about all the things y¡¯all co mpla in about when you¡¯re sitting at the kitchen table.¡±  
 
¡°Well, all I can say is, it¡¯s about time,¡± one wo man said. 
 
 
For almost an hour, people talked about potholes and sewers, stop signs and abandoned lots. As the afternoon fell 
to dusk, Will announced that we¡¯d be moving the meetings to St. Catherine¡¯s basement starting the following month. 
 
Walking back to the church, I heard the crowd still behind us, a murmu r in the fading light. Will turned to me 
and smiled. 
 
¡°Told you.¡± 
We repeated these street corner meetings on three, four, five b locks -Will at the center with h is priest¡¯s collar and  
 
Chicago Cubs jacket, Mary with her sign-in sheets circling the edges of the crowd. By the time we moved the 
meetings indoors, we had a group of close to thirty people, prepared to work for little more than a cup of coffee. 
 
It was before such a meet ing that I found Mary alone in the church hall, ma king a pot of coffee. The evening¡¯s 
agenda was neatly printed on a sheet of butcher¡¯s paper taped to the wall; the chairs we re a ll set up. Mary waved at me 
while searching a cupboard for sugar and creamer, and told me W ill was running a little late.  
 
¡°Need any help?¡± I asked her. 
¡°Can you reach this?¡± 
I pulled down the sugar from the top shelf. ¡°Anything 
else?¡± ¡°No. I think we¡¯re a ll set.¡± 
 
 
I took a seat and watched Mary finish arranging the cups. She was a hard person to know, Mary was; she didn¡¯t like 
to talk much, about herself or her past. I knew that she was the only wh ite person fro m the city who worked with us, 
one of maybe five white people left  in West Pullman. I knew that she had two daughters, one ten and one twelve; the 
younger one had a disability that made walking difficu lt and required regular therapy.  
 
 
 
 
And I knew that the father was absent, although Mary never mentioned him. On ly in bits and pieces, over the course 
of many months, would I learn that she had grown up in a small Indiana town, part of a  big, working -class Irish 
fa mily. So mehow she had met a  black man there; they had dated secretly, were married; her fa mily refused to speak to 
her again, and the newlyweds moved to West Pullman, where  they bought a small house. Then the man left, and Mary 
found herself beached in a world she knew little  of, without anything but the house and two man ila -hued daughters, 
unable to return to the world she had known. 
 
Somet imes I would stop by Mary¡¯s house just to say hello, drawn perhaps by the loneliness I sensed there, and the 
easy parallels between my own mother and Mary; and between myself and Mary¡¯s daughters, such sweet and pretty 
girls whose lives were so much more d ifficult than mine had ever been, with grandparents who shunned them, b lack 
classmates who teased them, all the poison in the air. Not that the family had no support; after Mary¡¯s husband left, the 
neighbors had shown her and her children solic itude, helping the m fix a lea ky roof, invit ing them to barbecues and 
birthday parties, commending Mary on a ll her good works. Still, there were limits to how far the neighbors could 
accept the family, unspoken boundaries to the friendships that Mary could make  with the wo men -specially the married 
ones-that she met. Her only real friends were her daughters -and now Will, whose own fall, and idiosyncratic faith, gave 
them something private to share. 
 
With nothing left to do for the meeting, Mary sat down and watched me scribble  some last -minute notes to 
myself. ¡° Do you mind if I ask you something, Barack?¡±  
¡°No, go ahead.¡± 
¡°Why are you here? Doing this work, 
I mean.¡± ¡° For the gla mour.¡±  
¡°No, I¡¯m serious. You said yourself you don¡¯t need this job. And you¡¯re not very relig ious, are 
you?¡± ¡°Well¡­¡±  
 
 
 
 
¡°So why do you do it? That¡¯s why Will and I do this, you know. Because it¡¯s part of our fa ith. But with you, I don¡¯t -¡± 
At that mo ment, the door opened and Mr. Green  wa lked in. He  was an o lder man in a  hunting jac ket and a  cap whose 
earflaps hung stiffly against his chin. 
 
¡°How you doing, Mr. Green.¡± 
¡°Fine, just fine. Getting chilly, though¡­.¡± 
 
 
Mrs. Turner and Mr. A lbert quickly followed, then the rest of the group, all bundled up against the hint of an early 
winter. They unbuttoned their coats, prepared coffee for the mselves, and engaged in the small, unhurried talk that 
helped warm up the room. Finally Will walked in wearing cut-off jeans and a red T-shirt with ¡° Deacon Will¡± across the 
front, and after asking Mrs. Je ffrey to lead us in prayer, he started the meeting. While  everyone talked, I took notes to 
myself, speaking up only when things started to wander. In fact, I thought the meeting had already dragged on too long -
a few people had slipped out after an hour-when Will added a new ite m to the agenda. 
 
¡°Before  we ad journ,¡± he announced, ¡°I want us to try something out. This here¡¯s a church -based organization, and that 
means we  devote a part of each meet ing to re flect ion on ourselves, our re lationships to each other, and our relat ionship 
to God. So  I want everybody to take out just a minute to think about what brought them here  tonight, some  thoughts or 
feelings that you haven¡¯t talked about, and then I want you to share ¡¯em with the group.¡± 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Will let the silence build  for several minutes. ¡°Anybody want to share their thoughts?¡± he repeated. 
People looked down at the table uncomfortably.  
¡°Okay,¡± W ill said. ¡°I¡¯ll share something that¡¯s been on my mind for a while. Nothing big -just me mories. You know, 
my folks weren¡¯t rich or nothing. We lived out in Altgeld. But when I think bac k on my own ch ildhood, I re me mber 
some really good times. I re me mbe r going to Blac kburn Forest with my folks to pick wild berries. I re me mber 
ma king skating carts with my cut buddies out of empty fruit c rates and old rolle r skate wheels and racing around the 
parking lot. I re me mbe r going on field trips at school, and on the holidays meeting all the fa milies in the park, 
everybody out and nobody scared, and then in the summers sleeping out in the yard together if it got too hot inside. A 
lot of good me mo ries ¡­seemed like  I  was smiling all the time, laughing-¡± 
 
Will bro ke off suddenly and bowed his head. I thought he was preparing to sneeze, but when he raised his head 
back up, I saw tears ro lling down his cheeks. He  continued in a cracking voice, ¡°And you know, I don¡¯t see kids 
smiling around here no more. You look at ¡¯e m listen to ¡¯em¡­they seem worried a ll the time, mad about something. 
They got nothing they trust. Not their parents. Not God. Not themselves. And that¡¯s not right. That just ain¡¯t the 
way things supposed to be¡­kids not smiling.¡± 
 
He stopped again and pulled a handkerchief fro m his hip pocket to blow his nose. Then, as if the sight of this big man 
weeping had watered the dry surface of their hearts, the others in the room began speaking about their own me mories 
in sole mn, urgent tones. They talked about life in sma ll Southern towns: the corner stores where men had gathered to 
learn the news of the day or lend a hand to wo men with their groceries, the way adults looked afte r each other¡¯s 
children (¡° Couldn¡¯t get away with nothing, ¡¯cause your mo mma had eyes and ears up and down the whole block¡±), the 
sense of public decorum that such familia rity had helped sustain. In their voices was no little  bit of nostalgia, e le ments 
of selective me mory; but the whole of what they recalled rang vivid and true, the sound of shared loss. A feeling of 
witness, of frustration and hope, moved about the room fro m mouth to mouth, and when the last person had spoken, it 
hovered in the air, static and palpable. Then we a ll jo ined hands, Mr. Green¡¯s thick, ca llused hand in my left , Mrs. 
Turner¡¯s, slight and papery to the touch, in my right, and together we asked for the courage to turn things around. 
 
I helped Will and Mary put back the chairs, rinse out the coffee pot, lock up, and turn off the lights. Outside, the 
night was cold and clear. I turned up my collar and quic kly evaluated the meeting: W ill needed to watch the time; we  
had to research the issue of city services before the next meet ing and interview everyone who had come. At the end 
of my checklist, I put my a rm around Will¡¯s shoulders. 
 
¡°That reflection at the end was pretty powerful, Will.¡±  
He looked at Mary and they both smiled. ¡°We noticed you didn¡¯t share anything with the group,¡±  Mary 
said. ¡°The organize r¡¯s supposed to keep a low pro file.¡±  
¡°Who says?¡± 
¡°It¡¯s in my organize r¡¯s handbook. Co me on, Mary, I¡¯ll g ive you a ride ho me.¡±  
 
 
 
 
Will mounted his bike and waved good-bye, and Mary and I drove the four blocks to her house. I let her out in front of 
her door and watched her take a fe w steps before I stretched across the passenger seat and rolled down the window.  
 
¡°Hey, Mary.¡± 
 
She ca me back and bent down to look at me . 
 
 
 
 
¡° You know what you were asking before. About why I do this. It had something to do with the meeting tonight. 
 
I mean ¡­I don¡¯t think our reasons are all that diffe rent.¡± 
 
She nodded, and walked up the path to her daughters. 
 
 
A week later, I was back out in A ltgeld, try ing to stuff Angela, Mona, and Shirley into my subcompact car. 
Mona, who was sitting in the back, co mpla ined about the lack of room.  
 
¡°What kinda car is this anyway?¡± she asked. 
Shirley moved her seat up. ¡°It¡¯s built for the skinny little girls Barac k goes 
out with.¡± ¡°Who are we meeting with again?¡±  
I had scheduled three meetings, hoping to find a job strategy that would meet the needs of people in Altgeld. For now at 
least a new manufacturing boom appeared out of our reach: The big manufacturers had opted for well-scrubbed suburban 
corridors, and not even Gandhi could have gotten them to relocate near Altgeld anytime soon. On the other hand, there did 
remain a part of the economy that could be called local, I thought, a second -level consumer economy-of shops, restaurants, 
theaters, and services-that in other areas of the city continued to function as an incubator of civic life. Places where families 
might invest their savings and make a go of a business, and where entry -level jobs might be had; places where the economy 
remained on a human scale, transparent enough for people to understand. 
 
The closest thing to a shopping district in the area was in Roseland, and so we follo wed the bus route up Michigan 
Avenue, with its wig shops and liquor stores, discount clothing stores and pizzerias, until we a rrive d in front of a two-
story former wa rehouse. We entered the building through a heavy metal door and took a narrow set of stairs down 
into a basement filled with old fu rniture. In a s mall office sat a slight, wiry man with a goatee and a skullcap that 
accentuated a pair of pro minent ears. 
 
¡°Can I help you?¡± 
I e xp lained who we were and that we had spoken on the phone. 
 
 
 
 
¡°That¡¯s right, that¡¯s right.¡± He gestured to two large men standing on either side of his desk and they walked 
past us with a nod. ¡°Listen, we¡¯re  gonna have to ma ke this quick ¡¯cause something¡¯s come up. Rafiq al Shabazz.¡± 
 
¡°I know you,¡± Shirley said as we shook hands with Rafiq. ¡° You¡¯re M rs. Thompson¡¯s boy, Wally. How¡¯s 
your mo mma doing?¡± 
 
Rafiq fo rced a smile and offered us all a seat. He  e xp lained that he was the president of the Roseland Unity 
Coalition, an organizat ion that engaged in a range of politica l activit ies to promote the black cause and claimed 
considerable credit for he lping Mayor Washington get elected. When we asked him how our churches could 
encourage local economic  development, he handed us a leaflet accusing Arab stores of selling bad meat.  
 
¡°That¡¯s the real deal, right here,¡± Rafiq said. ¡°People from outside our community  making money off us and showing our 
brothers and sisters disrespect. Basically what you got here is Koreans and Arabs running the stores, the 
 
Jews still owning most of the buildings. No w, in the short term, we ¡¯re here  to make  sure that the interests of b lack 
people are looked a fter, you understand. When we hear one of them Koreans is mistreating a customer, we gonna be 
on the case. We gonna insist that they respect us and ma ke a contribution back to the co mmunity -fund our progra ms, 
what have you. 
 
 
 
 
¡°That¡¯s the short term. Th is¡±-Rafiq pointed to a map of Roseland that hung on the wall, with certain a reas ma rked off 
in red ink-¡°is the long term. It¡¯s all about ownership. A comp rehensive plan for the area. Black businesses, community 
centers-the whole nine yards. Some of the properties, we¡¯ve a lready started negotiating with the white owners to sell 
them to us at a fair price. So if y¡¯a ll are  interested in jobs, then you can help by spreading the message about this here 
plan. The proble m we got right now is not enough support from the folks in Roseland. Instead of taking a stand, 
they¡¯d rather follo w white fo lks out into the suburbs. But see, white fol ks ain¡¯t stupid. They just wait ing for us to 
move out of the city so they can come back, ¡¯cause they know that the value of the property we sitting on right now is 
worth a mint.¡± 
 
One of the burly men reentered Ra fiq¡¯s office, and Ra fiq stood up. ¡°I gotta get going,¡± he said abruptly. ¡°But 
hey, we¡¯ll talk again.¡±  He shook all our hands before his assistant led us to the door. 
 
¡°Sounds like you knew h im, Sh irley,¡± I said once we were out of the building.  
¡° Yeah, before  he got that fancy na me  of his, he  was p lain  old  Wally  Tho mpson. He can  change his name  but he 
can¡¯t hide them ears he¡¯s got. He gre w up in Altgeld -in fact, I thin k him and Will used to be in school together. Wally 
was a big-time gang-banger before he became a  Muslim.¡±  
 
¡°Once a thug, always a thug,¡± Angela said. 
Our ne xt stop was the local Cha mber of Co mmerce, located on the second floor of what looked like a  
pawnshop. Inside, we found a plu mp blac k man who was busy packing boxes.  
 
¡°We¡¯re looking for Mr. Foster,¡± I said to the man. 
¡°I¡¯m Foster,¡± he said, not looking up. 
¡°We were told that you were the president of the Cha mber-¡± 
¡°Well, you right about that. I was the president. Just resigned last week.¡±  
 
 
 
 
 
He offe red us three chairs and talked as he worked. He  e xp lained that he had owned the stationery store down the 
street for fifteen years now, had been the president of the Chamber for the last five. He had done his best to organize 
the local me rchants, but lack of support had finally left him discouraged. 
 
¡° You won¡¯t hear me  co mpla ining about the Koreans,¡± he said, stacking a few bo xes by the door. ¡°They¡¯re the only 
ones that pay their dues into the Chamber. They understand business, what it means to cooperate. They pool their 
money. Make  each other loans. We don¡¯t do that, see. The black merchants around here, we¡¯re  all like  crabs in a 
bucket.¡± He straightened up and wiped his brow with a handkerchief. ¡°I don¡¯t know. Maybe you can¡¯t blame us for 
being the way we are . All those years without opportunity, you have to figure it took something out of us. And it¡¯s 
tougher now than it was for the Ita lian or the Jew thirty years ago. These days, a small store like  mine has to compete 
against the big chains. It¡¯s a losing battle unless you do like these Koreans -work your fa mily sixteen hours a day, 
seven days a week. As a people, we¡¯re not willing to do that anymore. I guess we worked so long for nothing, we fee l 
like we shouldn¡¯t have to break our backs just to survive. That¡¯s what we tell our ch ildren anyway. I can¡¯t say I¡¯m  any 
diffe rent. I te ll my sons I don¡¯t want them taking over the business. I want the m to go work for some  big co mpany 
where they can be comfo rtable¡­.¡±  
 
Before  we  le ft, Angela asked about the possibility of part-time  wo rk for the youth in Altgeld. Mr. Foster looked 
up at her like she was cra zy. 
 
 
 
 
¡°Every me rchant around here turns down thirty applications a day,¡± he said. ¡°Adults. Senior c itizens. 
Expe rienced worke rs willing to take whatever they can get. I¡¯m sorry.¡± 
 
As we walked back to the car, we  passed a small c lothing store full of cheap dresses and brightly colored sweaters, 
two aging white mannequins now painted black in the window. The store was poorly lit, but toward the back I could 
ma ke out the figure o f a young Korean wo man sewing by hand as a child slept beside her. The scene took me back to 
my ch ildhood, back to the markets of Indonesia: the hawkers, the leather workers, the old wo men chewing betelnut and 
swatting flies off their fru it with whisk broo ms. 
 
I¡¯d always taken such markets for granted, part of the natural order of things. Now, though, as I thought about  Altgeld and 
Rose-land, Rafiq and Mr. Foster, I saw those Djakarta markets for what they were: fragile, precious things. The people who 
sold their goods there might have been poor, poorer even than folks out in Altgeld. They hauled fifty pounds of firewood  on 
their backs every day, they ate little, they died young. And yet for all that poverty, there remained in their lives a discernible 
order, a tapestry of trading routes and middlemen, bribes to pay and customs to observe, the habits of a generation playe d 
out every day beneath the bargaining and the noise and the swirling dust. 
 
It was the absence of such coherence that made a place like A ltgeld so desperate, I thought to myself; it was that loss 
of order that had made both Ra fiq and M r. Foster, in  their own ways, so bitter. For how could we  go about stitching a 
culture back together once it was torn? How long might it take in this land of dollars? 
 
Longer than it took a cu lture to unravel, I suspected. I tried to imagine the Indonesian workers who were no w ma king 
their way to the sorts of factories that had once sat along the banks of the Calu met River, jo ining the ranks of wage 
labor to assemble the radios and sneakers that sold on Michigan Avenue. I imag ined those same Indonesian workers 
ten, twenty years from now, when their factories would have closed down, a consequence of new technology or lower 
wages in some other part of the globe. And then the bitter discovery that their markets have vanished; that they no 
longer re me mber how to weave their own bas kets or carve their o wn furn iture or gro w their own food; that even if 
they reme mber such craft, the forests that gave them wood are now owned by timber interests, the baskets they once 
wove have been replaced by more durable  plastics. The very e xistence o f the factories, the timber interests, the plastics 
manufacturer, will have rendered their culture  obsolete; the values of hard work and individual init iative turn out to 
have depended on a system of belief that¡¯s been scrambled by migration and urbanization and imported TV re runs. 
Some  of the m would prosper in this new order. So me  would move to A merica. And the others, the millions left behind 
in Dja karta, or Lagos, or the West Bank, they would settle into their own A ltgeld Ga rdens, into a deeper despair.  
 
We drove in silence to our final meeting, with the ad min istrator of a loca l branch of the Mayor¡¯s Office of 
Emp loy ment and Training, o r M ET, wh ich helped refe r the unemp loyed to training progra ms throughout the city. 
We had trouble finding the place-it turned out to be a forty-five-minute drive fro m Altgeld, on a back street in  
 
Vrdolyak¡¯s ward-and by the time we a rrived the administrator was gone. Her assistant didn¡¯t know when she 
would be back but handed us a pile of glossy brochures. 
 
¡°This ain¡¯t no help at all,¡±  Shirley said as she started for the door. ¡°We might as well have stayed home.¡±  
Mona noticed I was lingering in the office. ¡°What¡¯s he looking at?¡± she asked Angela. 
 
 
I showed them the back of one of the brochures. It contained a list of all the M ET progra ms in the city. None of them 
were south of Ninety-fifth. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¡°This is it,¡± I 
said. ¡°What?¡± 
¡°We just found ourselves an issue.¡± 
As soon as we got back to the Gardens, we dra fted a letter to Ms. Cynthia Alvare z, the c ity -wide director o f M ET. 
Two wee ks later, she agreed to meet with us out in the Ga rdens. Determined not to repeat my mistakes, I drove both 
myself and the leadership to exhaustion: preparing a script for the meeting, pushing hard for the other churches to 
send their people, developing a clea r de mand-a job intake and tra ining center in the Fa r South Side-that we thought 
MET could de live r. 
 
Two wee ks of preparation and yet, the night of the meet ing, my stomach was tied up in knots. At six forty -five only 
three people had shown up: a young woman with a baby who was drooling onto her tiny ju mper, an older wo man 
who carefully fo lded a stack of cookies into a napkin that she t hen stuffed into her purse, and a drunken man who 
immed iately slouched into a light slumber in a back -ro w seat. As the minutes ticked away, I imag ined once again the 
empty chairs, the offic ial¡¯s change of mind at the last minute, the look of disappointment  on the leadership¡¯s faces -the 
deathly smell of failure. 
 
Then, at two minutes before seven, people began to trickle in. Will and Mary brought a group from West Pullman; then 
 
Shirley¡¯s children and grandchildren walked in, filling up an entire row of seats; then other Altgeld residents who owed 
 
Angela or Shirley or Mona a favor. There were close to a hundred people in the room by the time Ms. Alvarez showed up -a 
large imperious, Mexican-American woman with two young white men in suits trailing behind her. 
 
¡°I didn¡¯t even know this was out here,¡± I heard one of the aides whisper to the other as they walked through the door. I 
asked him if I could take  his coat, and he shook his head nervously. 
 
¡°No, no ¡­I¡¯ll, uh¡­I¡¯ll just hang on to mine, thanks.¡±  
The leadership acquitted themselves well that night. Angela la id out the issue for the crowd and exp lained to Ms. 
Alvarez what we  e xpected fro m her. When Ms. Alvare z avoided giving a definite response, Mona jumped in and 
pushed for a yes-or-no answer. And when Ms. Alvarez finally pro mised to have a MET intake center in the area within 
six months, the crowd broke into hearty applause. The only glitch ca me about halfway through the meeting, when the 
drunk in the back stood up and began shouting that he needed a job. I mmediately, Sh irley wa lked over to the man and 
whispered something in his ear that caused him to drop back into his seat. 
 
¡°What did you tell him?¡± I asked Shirley 
later. ¡° You¡¯re too young to know.¡± 
 
 
The meet ing was over in an hour-Ms. Alvare z and her a ides sped off in a  big blue ca r, and people went up to 
shake Mona¡¯s and Angela¡¯s hands. In the evaluation, the women were a ll s miles.  
 
¡° You did a terrific  job, Ba rack,¡± Angela said, giv ing me a b ig hug. 
¡°Hey, didn¡¯t I pro mise we we re gonna make something happen?¡± 
¡°He sure enough did,¡± Mona said with a wink. 
I told them that I¡¯d leave them alone for at least a couple of days, and went out to my car feeling slightly light -headed. I 
 
can do this job, I said to myself. Have this whole damn town organized by the time we¡¯re through. I lit a cigarette and, 
 
 
 
 
in my self-congratulatory mood, imagined taking the leadership downtown to sit down  with Harold and discuss the fate 
of the city. Then, under a streetlight a few feet a way, I saw the drunk fro m the meet ing spinning around in slow circles, 
looking down at his e longated shadow. I got out of my car and asked him if he needed some help getting home . 
 
¡°I don¡¯t need no help!¡± he shouted, trying to steady himself ¡°Not fro m nobody, you understand me! Punk-
ass motherfucker¡­try to tell me  shit¡­¡±  
 
His voice tra iled off. Before I could say anything more, he turned and began to wobble down the center of the 
road, disappearing into the darkness. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER TEN 
 
 
W INTER CAM E AND THE c ity turned monochrome-b lack trees against gray sky above white ea rth. Night now 
fell  in  midafternoon, especially  when the snowstorms ro lled  in, boundless prairie  storms that set the sky close to 
the ground, the city lights reflected against the clouds. 
 
The work was tougher in such weather. Mounds of fine white powder b lew through the cracks of my ca r, down my  
collar and into the openings in my coat. On rounds of intervie ws, I never spent enough time in one place to thaw 
properly, and parking spaces became scarce on the snow-narrowed streets-everyone, it seemed, had a cautionary tale 
about fights breaking out over parking spaces after a heavy snow, the resulting brawl or shooting. Attendance at 
evening meetings became mo re sporadic; people called at the last minute to say they had the flu or their car 
wouldn¡¯t start; those who did come looked da mp and resentful. At times, driving home  fro m such evenings, with the 
northern gusts off the lake shaking my car ac ross the lane dividers, I would mo mentarily forget  where I was, my 
thoughts a numbed reflect ion of the silence. 
 
Marty suggested that I take more t ime off, build a  life  for myself a way fro m the job. His concerns were professional, 
he e xpla ined: Without some personal support outside the work, an organizer lost perspective and could quickly burn 
out. There was something to what he said, for it was true that the people I met on the job we re generally much older 
than me, with a set of concerns and demands that created barriers to friendship. When I wasn¡¯t work ing, the 
weekends would usually find me a lone in an e mpty apart ment, making do with the company of books. 
 
I didn¡¯t heed Marty¡¯s advice, though, perhaps because, as the bonds between myself and the leadership grew stronger, 
 
I found them offering more than simple  friendship. After meetings, I might go with one of the men to a local tavern to 
watch the news or listen to oldies -the Temptations, the O¡¯Jays -thump fro m a d inged-up corner jukebo x. On Sunday, I¡¯d 
visit the various church services and let the women  tease me  over my confusion with co mmunion and prayer. At a 
Christmas party in the Ga rdens, I danced with Angela, Mona, and Shirley under a globe that sent sparkling beads 
across the room; I swapped sports stories over stale cheese puffs and meatballs with  husbands who had been reluctantly 
dragged to the affair; I counseled sons or daughters on their college applications, and played with grandchildren who 
sat on my knee. 
 
It was during such times, when familiarity or weariness dissolved the lines between organizer and leader, that I began to 
understand what Marty had meant when he insisted that I move toward the centers of people¡¯s lives. I remember, for 
 
 
 
 
instance, sitting in Mrs. Crenshaw¡¯s kitchen one afternoon, gulping down the burned cookies she liked to force on me 
every time I stopped by. It was getting late, the purpose of my visit had begun to blur in my head, and almost as an 
afterthought I decided to ask her why she still part icipated in the PTA so long after her own children had grown.  
 
Scooting her chair up closer to mine, she started to tell me  about growing up in Tennessee, how she¡¯d been forced to 
stop her own education because her family could afford to send only one child to college, a brother who would later 
die in World War II. Both she and her husband had spent years working in a factory, she said, just to see to it that their 
own son never had to stop his education-a son who had gone on to get a law degree fro m Ya le. 
 
A simp le enough story to understand, I thought: the generational sacrifice, the vindication of a fa mily¡¯s faith. Only, 
when I asked Mrs. Crenshaw what her son was doing these days, she went on to tell me  that he had been diag nosed 
with schizophrenia a  fe w years earlie r and that he now spent his days reading newspapers in his room, afra id to leave 
the house. As she spoke, her voice never wavered; it was the voice of someone who has forced a larger meaning out 
of tragedy. 
 
Or there was the time that I found myself sitting in the St. Helena¡¯s basement with Mrs. Stevens waiting for a meeting to 
start. I didn¡¯t know Mrs. Stevens well, knew only that she was interested in renovating the local hospital. 
 
By way of sma ll talk I asked her why she was so concerned with improving health care  in the area; her fa mily seemed 
healthy enough. And she told me  how, in her t wenties, she had almost lost her sight from cataracts. She had been 
working as a secretary at the time , and although her condition grew so bad her doctor declared her legally blind, she 
had kept her ailment fro m her boss for fear of being fired. Day afte r day, she had snuck off to the bathroom to read 
her boss¡¯s me mos with a magnifying glass, me morizing each line before  she went back to type, staying at the office 
long after the others had left to finish the reports that needed to be ready the following morning. In this way she had 
ma intained her secret for c lose to a year, until she finally saved en ough money for an operation. 
 
Or there was Mr. Ma rshall, a single man in his early thirt ies who worked as a bus driver for the Transit Authority. 
He was not typical of the leadership-he had no children, lived in an apart ment-and so I wondered why he was so 
interested in doing something about drug use among teenagers. When I offered to give him a ride one day to pick up a 
car he had left in the shop, I asked him the question. And he told me  about his father¡¯s dreams of wea lth in a  nowhere 
town in Arkansas; how the various business ventures had gone sour and how other men had cheated him; how his 
father had turned to gambling and drin k, lost his home and fa mily; how his father was finally pulled out of a ditch 
somewhere, suffocated in his own vo mit. 
 
That¡¯s what the leadership was teaching me, day by day: that the self-interest I was supposed to be looking for 
e xtended well beyond the immed iacy of issues, that beneath the small talk and sketchy biographies and received 
opinions people carried within the m some centra l e xp lanation of the mselves. Stories full of terror and wonder, studded 
with events that still haunted or inspired them. Sac red stories. 
 
And it was this realization, I think, that finally allowed me to share more of myself with the people I was working with, to 
break out of the larger isolation that I had carried with me to Chicago. I was tentative at first, afraid that my prior life would 
be too foreign for South Side sensibilities; that I might somehow disturb people¡¯s expectations of me. Instead, as people 
listened to my stories of Toot or Lolo or my mother and father, of flying kites in Djakarta or going to school dances at 
Punahou, they would nod their heads or shrug or laugh, wondering how someone with my background 
 
 
 
 
had ended up, as Mona put it, so ¡°country-fied,¡± or, most puzzling to the m, why anyone would willingly choose to 
spend a winter in Chicago when he could be sunning himself on Waikiki Beach. Then they¡¯d offer a story to match or 
confound mine, a knot to bind our e xperiences together-a lost father, an adolescent brush with crime , a wandering 
heart, a mo ment of simp le grace. As time passed, I found that these stories, taken together, had helped me  bind my  
world together, that they gave me the sense of place and purpose I¡¯d been looking for. Ma rty was right: There was 
always a co mmunity there if you dug deep enough. He was wrong, though, in characterizing the work. There  was 
poetry as well-a  lu minous world a lways present beneath the surface, a world that people might offer up as a gift to me, 
if I only re me mbered to ask. 
 
Not to say that everything I lea rned fro m the leaders cheered my  heart. If they often revealed a  strength of spirit that I 
hadn¡¯t imagined, they also forced me to acknowledge the unspoken forces that retarded our efforts, secrets that we kept 
fro m each other as well as fro m ourselves. 
 
That¡¯s how it was with Ruby, for e xa mple . After our aborted meet ing with the police co mmander, I had wo rrie d that 
she might back a way fro m organizing. Instead, she had thrown herself headlong into the project, working hard to build 
a network of neighbors that could be regularly de livered to our events, coming up with ideas for registering voters or 
working with school parents. She was what every organizer drea med about -someone with untapped talent, smart, 
steady, exc ited by the idea of a public life, eager to learn. And I liked her son, Kyle  Jr. He  had just turned fourteen, 
and in all of h is awkwa rdness -one mo ment frisky and bumping into me wh ile we  shot baskets together in the 
neighborhood park, the ne xt instant bored and sullen -I could see all the contours of my own youthful struggles. 
Somet imes Ruby would question me about him, e xasperated with a mediocre  repo rt card or a cut on his chin, baffled 
by a young man¡¯s unruly mind. 
 
¡°Last week he said he was going to be a rap artist,¡± she would report. ¡°Today he tells me he¡¯s going to the Air Force 
Academy to be a fighter pilot. When I ask him why, he just says ¡®So I can fly.¡¯ Like I was stupid. I swear, 
 
Barac k, so metimes I don¡¯t know whether to hug him or beat his skinny behind.¡± 
¡°Try both,¡± I would te ll her. 
 
One day just before Christmas, I asked Ruby to stop by my office so I could g ive her a  present for Kyle. I was on 
the phone when she walked in, and out of the corner of my eye I thought I saw something different about her, but I 
couldn¡¯t quite put my finger on what it was. Only after I had hung up and she turned toward me did I rea lize that  
her eyes, norma lly a  wa rm, dark brown that matched the color of her skin, had turned an opaque shade of blue, as if 
someone had glued plastic buttons over her irises. She asked me if something was wrong. 
 
¡°What did you do to your eyes?¡± 
¡°Oh, these.¡± Ruby shook her head and laughed. ¡°They¡¯re just contacts, Barack. The co mpany I work for makes 
cosmetic lenses, and I get them at a d iscount. You like them?¡±  
 
¡° Your eyes looked just fine the way they we re.¡±  
¡°It¡¯s just for fun,¡± she said, looking down. ¡°So mething different, you know.¡±  
 
 
 
I stood there, not knowing what to say. Fina lly I re me mbered Kyle¡¯s gift and handed it to her. ¡°For Kyle ,¡± I said. ¡°A 
book on airplanes¡­I thought he might like it.¡± 
 
 
 
 
Ruby nodded and put the book inside her purse. ¡°That¡¯s nice of you, Barack. I¡¯m sure he will.¡±  Then, abruptly, she 
stood up and straightened her skirt. ¡°Well, I better get going,¡± she said, and hurried out the door. 
 
For the rest of the day and into the next, I thought about Ruby¡¯s eyes. I had handled the mo ment badly, I told 
myself, made her fee l ashamed for a s mall vanity in a life that could afford few vanities. I rea lized that a part of me 
e xpected her and the other leaders to possess some sort of immunity fro m the onslaught of images that feed every  
 
American¡¯s insecurities -the slender  models in the fashion  magazines, the square-ja wed  men  in fast cars -images 
to which I  myself  was vulnerable and fro m  which  I had sought protection. When I  mentioned the incident to a 
black wo man friend of mine, she stated the issue more bluntly.  
 
¡°What are you surprised about?¡± my friend said impat iently. ¡°That blac k people still h ate themselves?¡± 
 
No, I told her, it wasn¡¯t e xactly surprise that I was fee ling. Since my first frightening discovery of bleaching crea ms 
in Life magazine, I¡¯d beco me fa miliar with the le xicon of color consciousness within the blac k co mmunity -good hair, 
bad hair; thick lips or thin; if you¡¯re light, you¡¯re a ll right, if you¡¯re b lack, get back. In college, the polit ics of blac k 
fashion, and the questions of self-esteem that fashion signified, had been a frequent, if delicate, topic of conversation 
for blac k students, especially a mong the wo men, who would s mile  bitterly at the sight of the militant brother who 
always seemed to be dating light-skinned girls-and tongue-lash any black man who was foolish enough to make  a 
re mark about black wo men¡¯s hairstyles. 
 
Mostly I had kept quiet when these subjects were broached, privately measuring my own degree of infect ion. But I 
noticed that such conversations rarely took place in large groups, and never in front of whites. Later, I would rea lize  
that the position of most black students in predominantly white colleges was already too tenuous, our identities too 
scrambled, to ad mit to ourselves that our black pride re ma ined inco mplete. And to admit our doubt and confusion to 
whites, to open up our psyches to general e xa mination by those who had caused so much of the damage in the first 
place, seemed ludicrous, itself an e xpression of self-hatred-for there seemed no reason to expect that whites would look 
at our private struggles as a mirror into their own souls, rather than yet more ev idence of blac k pathology. 
 
It was in observing that division, I think, between what we talked about privately and what we addressed publicly, that 
 
I¡¯d learned not to put too much stock in those who trumpeted black self -esteem as a cure for a ll our ills, whether 
substance abuse or teen pregnancy or black-on-black crime. By the time I reached Chicago, the phrase self-esteem 
seemed to be on everyone¡¯s lips: activists, talk show hosts, educators, and sociologists. It was a handy catchall to 
describe our hurt, a sanitized way of talking about the things we¡¯d been keeping to ourselves. But whenever I t ried to 
pin down this idea of self-esteem, the specific qualities we hoped to inculcate, the specific means by which we might 
feel good about ourselves, the conversation always seemed to follo w a path of infinite regress. Did you dislike yourself 
because of your color or because you couldn¡¯t read and couldn¡¯t get a job? Or perhaps it was because you were 
unloved as a child-only, we re you unloved because you were too dark? Or too light? Or because your mother shot 
heroin into her veins¡­and why did she do that anyway? Was the sense of emptiness you felt a consequence of kinky 
hair or the fact that your apartment had no heat and no decent furniture? Or was it because deep down you imag ined a 
godless universe? 
 
Maybe one couldn¡¯t avoid such questions on the road to personal salvation. What I doubted was that all the talk about 
self-esteem could serve as the centerpiece of an effective black politics. It demanded too much honest self-reckoning 
 
 
 
 
fro m people; without such honesty, it easily degenerated into vague exhortation. Perhaps with more self -esteem fewer 
blacks would be poor, I thought to myself, but I had no doubt that poverty did nothing for our self -esteem. Better to 
concentrate on the things we might all agree on. Give  that black man so me tangible skills and a job. Teach that black 
child read ing and arith metic in a safe, we ll-funded school. With the basics taken care of, each of us could search for 
our own sense of self-wo rth. 
 
Ruby shook up this predisposition of mine, the wall I had erected between psychology and politics, the state of our 
pocketbooks and the state of our souls. In fact, that particular ep isode was only the most dramatic e xa mp le of what I 
was hearing and seeing every day. It was exp ressed when a black leader casually e xpla ined to me that he never dealt 
with blac k contractors (¡°A black man¡¯ll just mess it up, and I¡¯ll end up paying white folks to do it all over again¡±); or 
in another leader¡¯s rationale  for why she couldn¡¯t mobilize  other people in her church (¡°Blac k fo lks are  just la zy, 
Barac k-don¡¯t wanna do nothing¡±). Often the word n igger rep laced black in such re marks, a word I¡¯d once liked to 
think was spoken in jest, with a knowing irony, the inside joke that marked our resilience as a people. Until the first 
time I heard a young mother use it on her child to tell him he wasn¡¯t worth shit, or watched teenage boys use it to draw 
blood in a quick round of verbal sparring. The transformation of the word ¡¯s origina l meaning was never comp lete; like 
the other defenses we erected against possible hurt, this one, too, involved striking  out at ourselves first. 
 
If the language, the humor, the stories of ordinary people were  the stuff out of which fa milies, co mmunities, 
economies would have to be built, then I couldn¡¯t separate that strength from the hurt and distortions that lingered 
inside us. And it was the implications of that fact, I rea lized, that had most disturbed me when I looked into Ruby¡¯s 
eyes. The stories that I had been hearing fro m the leadership, all the records of courage and sacrifice  and overcoming of 
great odds, hadn¡¯t simply arisen fro m struggles with pestilence or drought, or even mere poverty. They had arisen out 
of a very particula r e xpe rience with hate. That hate hadn¡¯t gone away; it formed a counternarrative buried deep within 
each person and at the center of which stood white people-some crue l, some  ignorant, sometimes a single face, 
sometimes just a faceless image of a system cla iming power over our lives. I had to ask myself whether the bonds of 
community could be restored without collectively e xo rcising that ghostly figure that haunted black drea ms. Could Ruby 
love herself without hating blue eyes? 
 
Rafiq a l-Shaba zz had settled such questions to his own satisfaction. I had begun to see him more  regularly, for the 
morn ing after DCP met with the Mayor¡¯s Office  of Emp loy ment and Training he had called me up and launched 
into a rapid-fire monologue about the job center we had asked for fro m the city.  
 
¡°We gotta talk, Ba rack,¡± he said. ¡°What y¡¯all are t rying to do with job train ing needs to fit into the ov erall 
comprehensive development plan I¡¯ve been working on. Can¡¯t think about this thing in isolation ¡­got to look at the big 
picture. You don¡¯t understand the forces at work out here. Is big, man. All kinds of folks ready to stab you in the back.¡± 
¡°Who is this?¡± 
 
¡°Rafiq. What¡¯s the matter, too early for you?¡± 
 
It was. I put him on hold and got a cup of coffee, then asked him to start all over again, more slowly this time. I eventually 
gathered that Rafiq had an interest in having the new MET intake center we¡¯d proposed to the city locate in a certain 
building near his office on Michigan Avenue. I didn¡¯t ask the particular nature of that interest: I doubted that I 
 
 
 
 
could get a straight answer out of him, and anyway, I figured that we might be able  to use an ally in  what was proving 
to  be  a  series  of  sticky  negotiations  with  Ms.  A lvare z.  If  the  storefront  he  had  in  mind  met  the  necessary 
specifications, I said, then I was willing to propose it as one possible alternative. 
 
So Rafiq and I formed an uneasy alliance, one that didn¡¯t go over too well  with the DCP  leaders. I understood their 
concerns: Whenever we  sat down with Ra fiq  to discuss our jo int strategy, he would  interrupt the discussion with long 
lectures about secret machinations afoot, and all the blac k people willing to  sell their people down  the river. It  was an 
effective negotiating ploy, for with h is voice progressively rising, the veins in  his neck straining , Angela and W ill and 
the others would suddenly drop into a curious silence, watching Ra fiq as if he were  an epileptic  in the midst of seizure .  
 
More than once, I¡¯d have to ju mp in and start shouting back at him, not so much in anger as simply to slow him  down, 
until finally a s mall s mile  would curl under h is mustache and we could get back to work.  
 
When the two of us were alone, though, Rafiq and I could sometimes have norma l conversations. Over t ime I arrived 
at a grudging ad miration fo r h is tenacity and  bravado, and, within his own  terms, a  certain  sincerity. He  confirmed 
that he had been a gang leader growing up in Altgeld; he had found religion, he said, under the stewardship of a local  
 
Muslim leader unaffiliated with Min ister Louis Fa rra khan¡¯s Nation of Isla m. ¡° If it hadn¡¯t been for Isla m, man, I¡¯d 
probably be dead,¡± he told me one day. ¡°Just had a negative attitude, you understand. Gro wing up in A ltgeld, I¡¯d 
soaked up all the poison the white man feeds us. See, the folks you¡¯re working with got the sa me proble m, even though 
they don¡¯t realize  it yet. They spend half they lives worrying about what white fo lks think. Start bla ming themselves 
for the shit they see every day, thinking they can¡¯t do no better till the wh ite man decides they all right. But d eep down 
they know that ain¡¯t right. They know what this country has done to their mo mma, their daddy, their sister. So the truth 
is they hate white folks, but they can¡¯t admit it to themselves. Keep it a ll bottled up, fighting themselves. Waste a lot of 
¡°I tell you one thing I ad mire about white fo lks,¡± he continued. ¡°They know who they are. Look at the Italians. 
energy that way. 
 
 
They didn¡¯t care about the American flag and all that when they got here. First thing they did is put together the 
 
Mafia to ma ke sure their interests were met. The Irish-they took over the city hall and found their boys jobs. The 
 
Jews, same thing ¡­you telling me  they care more about some black kid in the South Side than they do ¡¯bout they 
relatives in Israel? Shit. It¡¯s about blood, Barack, looking after your own. Period. Blac k people the only ones stupid 
enough to worry about their enemies.¡± 
 
That was the truth as Rafiq saw it, and he didn¡¯t waste energy picking that truth apart. His was a Hobbesian world 
where distrust was a given and loyalties e xtended from fa mily to mosque to the black race -whereupon notions of 
loyalty ceased to apply. This narrowing vision, of b lood and tribe, had provided him with a c larity of sorts, a means of 
focusing his attention. Blac k self-respect had delivered the mayor¡¯s seat, he could argue, lust as black self -respect 
turned around the lives of drug addicts under the tutelage of the Muslims. Progress was within our grasp so long as 
we didn¡¯t betray ourselves. 
 
But what exactly constituted betrayal? Ever since the first time I¡¯d picked up Malcolm X¡¯s autobiography, I had tried to 
untangle the twin strands of black nationalism, arguing that nationalism¡¯s affirming message -of solidarity and self-reliance, 
discipline and communal responsibility-need not depend on hatred of whites any more than it depended on 
 
 
 
 
white munificence. We could tell this country where it was wrong, I would te ll myself and any blac k friends who 
would listen, without ceasing to believe in its capacity for change. 
 
In talking to self-professed nationalists like Rafiq, though, I ca me to see how the blanket indict ment of everything 
white served a central function in their message of uplift; how, psychologically, at least, one depended on the other. 
For when the nationalist spoke of a rea waken ing of values as the only solution to black povert y, he was e xpressing an 
implic it, if not e xplicit, critic ism to black listeners: that we did not have to live as we did . And while there were those 
who could take such an unadorned message and use it to hew out a new life for themselves -those with the stolid 
dispositions that Booker T. Washington had once demanded fro m h is followers -in the ears of many blacks such talk 
smacked of the e xp lanations that whites had always offered for blac k poverty: that we continued to suffer fro m, if not 
genetic inferiority, then cultural weakness. It was a message that ignored causality or fau lt, a message outside history, 
without a script or plot that might insist on progression. For a people already stripped of their history, a people often 
ill equipped to retrieve that his tory in any form other than what fluttered across the television screen, the testimony of 
what we saw every day seemed only to confirm our worst suspicions about ourselves. 
 
Nationalism provided that history, an unambiguous morality tale that was easily co mmun icated and easily grasped. A 
steady attack on the white race, the constant recitation of blac k people¡¯s brutal e xperience in th is country, served as 
the ballast that could prevent the ideas of personal and communal responsibility fro m t ipping into an o cean of despair. 
 
Yes, the nationalist would say, whites are responsible for your sorry state, not any inherent flaws in  you. In fact, whites 
are so heartless and devious that we can no longer e xpect anything fro m the m. The self-loathing you feel, what keeps 
you drinking or thiev ing, is planted by them. Rid the m fro m your mind and find you r true power liberated. Rise up, ye 
mighty race! 
 
This process of displacement, this means of engaging in self-crit icis m while re mov ing ourselves from the object of 
critic is m, he lped e xpla in the much-ad mired success of the Nation of Isla m in turning around  the lives of drug addicts 
and criminals. But if it was especially we ll suited to those at the bottom rungs of Ame rican life, it  also spoke to all the 
continuing doubts of the lawyer who had run hard for the gold ring yet still e xperienced the awkward sile nce when 
walking into the clubhouse; those young college students who warily measured the distance between them and life  on  
 
Chicago¡¯s mean streets, with the danger that distance imp lied; a ll the black people who, it turned out, shared with me  a 
voice that whispered inside them-¡° You don¡¯t rea lly be long here.¡± 
 
In a sense, then, Rafiq was right when he insisted that, deep down, all blac ks were  potential nationalists. The 
anger was there, bottled up and often turned inward. And as I thought about Ruby and her blue eyes, the teenagers 
calling each other ¡°nigger¡± and worse, I wondered whether, for now at least, Rafiq wasn¡¯t also right in pre ferring 
that that anger be redirected; whether a black polit ics that suppressed rage toward whites generally, or one that 
failed to elevate race loyalty above all e lse, was a politics inadequate to the task. 
 
It was a painfu l thought to consider, as painful now as it had been years ago. It contradicted the mora lity my  mother 
had taught me, a  mora lity of subtle distinctions -between individuals of goodwill and those who wished me ill, between 
active malice and ignorance or indifference. I had a personal stake in that moral fra mework; I¡¯d discovered that I 
couldn¡¯t escape it if I tried. And yet perhaps it was a fra mewo rk that blacks in this country could no longer afford; 
perhaps it wea kened black resolve, encouraged confusion within the ranks. Desperate times called for desperate 
 
 
 
 
measures, and for many blac ks, times we re chronica lly desperate. If nationalis m could c reate a strong and effective 
insularity, deliver on its promise of self-respect, then the hurt it might cause well-meaning wh ites, or the inner turmo il 
it caused people like  me, would be of little consequence. 
 
If nationalis m could  deliver. As it turned out, questions of effectiveness, and not sentiment, caused  most of 
my  quarrels with Rafiq. Once, a fter a  particu larly thorny meet ing with M ET, I asked h im whether he could  turn 
out his followers if a  public showdown with the city became  necessary. 
 
¡°I don¡¯t got time  to run around passing out flyers trying to e xpla in everything to the public,¡± he said. ¡°Most of the 
folks out here don¡¯t care one way or another. The ones that do are gonna be double-crossing Negroes trying to mess 
things up. Important thing is to get our plan tight and get the city signed on. That¡¯s how stuff gets done -not with a 
big crowd and noise and all that. Once we got a done deal, then y¡¯all announce it a ny way you like.¡±  
 
I disagreed with Ra fiq¡¯s approach; for all h is professed love of black people, he seemed to distrust them an awfu l lot. 
But I a lso knew h is approach was dictated by a lack of capacity: Ne ither his organization nor his mosque, I had 
discovered, could claim a  me mbership of mo re than fifty persons. His influence arose not from any strong 
organizational support but from his willingness to show up at every meeting that re motely affected Roseland and 
shout his opponents into submission. 
 
What held true for Ra fiq was true throughout the city; without the concentrating effect of Harold ¡¯s campa ign, 
nationalism dissipated into an attitude rather than any concrete program, a  collection of grievances and not an 
organized force , images and sounds  that crowded the airwaves and conversation but without any corporeal e xistence. 
Among the handful of groups to hoist the nationalist banner, only the Nation of Isla m had any significant following:  
 
Minister Farrakhan¡¯s sharply cadenced sermons generally d re w a packed house, and still mo re listened to his radio 
broadcasts. But the Nation¡¯s active me mbership in Chicago was considerably smaller -several thousand, perhaps, 
roughly the size of one of Chicago¡¯s biggest black congregations -a base that was rarely, if ever, mobilized a round 
politica l races or in support of broad-based programs. In fact, the physical presence of the Nation in the 
neighborhoods was nominal, restricted ma inly to the clean -cut men in suits and bow ties who stood at the intersections 
of majo r thoroughfares selling the Nation¡¯s newspaper, The Final Call.  
 
I would occasionally p ick up the paper fro m these unfailingly polite men, in part out of sympathy to their heavy 
suits in the summer, their thin coats in winter; or sometimes because my at tention was caught by the sensational, 
tabloid-style headlines (CAUCASIAN W OMAN ADM ITS: WHITES ARE THE DEVIL). Inside the front cover, one 
found reprints of the minister¡¯s speeches, as well as stories that could have been picked straight off the AP news wi re 
were it not for ce rtain editorial e mbellishments (¡°Jewish Senator Metzenbaum announced today¡­¡±). The paper a lso 
carried a  health section, complete with Minister Fa rra khan¡¯s pork-free rec ipes; advertisements for Minister 
Farra khan¡¯s speeches on videocass ette (VISA or MasterCa rd accepted); and promotions for a line of toiletries -
toothpaste and the like -that the Nation had launched under the brand name POW ER, part of a strategy to encourage 
blacks to keep their money with in their o wn co mmunity.  
 
After a time, the ads for POWER products grew less prominent in The Final Call; it seems that many who enjoyed 
 
Minister Farrakhan¡¯s speeches continued to brush their teeth with Crest. That the POWER campaign sputtered said 
 
 
 
 
something about the difficulty that faced any black business -the barriers to entry, the lack of finance, the leg up that 
your competitors possessed after having kept you out of the game for over three hundred years. 
 
But I suspected that it also reflected the inevitable tension that arose when Minister Farrakhan¡¯s message was reduced 
to the mundane realit ies of buying toothpaste. I tried to imagine POW ER¡¯s product manager looking over his sales 
projections. He might briefly wonder whether it made sense to distribute the brand in national superma rket chains 
where blac ks preferred to shop. If he rejected that idea, he might consider whether any black-o wned supermarket 
trying to compete against the national chains could afford to give shelf space to a product guaranteed to alienate 
potential white customers. Would black consumers buy toothpaste through the mail? And what of the likelihood that 
the cheapest supplier of whatever it was that went into making toothpaste was a white man? 
 
Questions of competit ion, decisions forced by a ma rket economy and ma joritarian rule; issues of power. It was this 
unyielding reality-that whites were  not simp ly phantoms to be expunged fro m our drea ms but were  an active and varied 
fact of our everyday lives-that finally e xpla ined how nationalis m could thrive as an emot ion and flounder as a program. 
So long as nationalism re ma ined a cathartic curse on the white race, it could win the applause of the jobless teenager 
listening on the radio or the businessman watching late-night TV. But the descent fro m such unifying fervor to the 
practical choices blacks confronted every day was steep. Co mpro mises were everywhere. The black accountant asked: 
How a m I going to open an account at the black-owned bank if it charges me e xt ra for checking and won¡¯t even give 
me  a business loan because it says it can¡¯t afford the risk? The blac k nurse said: White fo lks I work with ain¡¯t so bad, 
and even if they were, I can¡¯t be quitting my job -who¡¯s gonna pay my rent to morrow, or feed my ch ildren today? Rafiq 
had no ready answers to such questions; he was less interested in changing the rules of power than in the color  
 
of those who had it and who therefore enjoyed its spoils. There was never much roo m at the top of the py ramid, though; 
in a contest framed in such terms, the wa it fo r blac k deliverance would be long indeed. Du ring that wa it, funny things 
happened. What in the hands of Malcolm had once seemed a call to arms, a  declarat ion that we would no longer 
tolerate the intolerable, ca me to be the very thing Malcolm had sought to root out: one more feeder of fantasy, one 
more  mask for hypocrisy, one mo re e xcuse for inaction. Black polit icians less gifted than Harold discovered what white 
politic ians had known for a very long time : that race-bait ing could make  up for a  host of limitations. Younger leaders, 
eager to ma ke a na me  for themselves, upped the ante, peddling conspiracy theories all over town -the Koreans were 
funding the Klan, Je wish doctors were in jecting black bab ies with the AIDS v irus. It was a shortcut to fame , if not 
always fortune; like se x o r vio lence on TV, black rage a lways found a ready ma rket. 
 
Nobody I spoke with in the neighborhood seemed to take such talk very  seriously. As it was, many had a lready given 
up the hope that politics could actually improve their lives, much less ma ke de mands on them; to them, a ba llot, if cast 
at all,  was simp ly a ticket to a good show. Blacks  had no real power to act on the occasional slips into anti-Se mitis m 
or Asian-bashing, people would tell me; and anyway, blac k fo lks needed a chance to let off a  little  steam every once in  
a while-man, what do you think those folks say about us behind our b acks? 
 
Just talk. Yet what concerned me wasn¡¯t just the damage loose talk caused efforts at coalition building, or the 
emotional pain it caused others. It was the distance between our talk and our action, the effect it was having on us as 
individuals and as a people. That gap corrupted both language and thought; it made us forgetful and encouraged 
fabrication; it eventually eroded our ability to hold either ourselves or each other accountable. And while none of this  
 
 
 
 
was unique to black polit icians or to blac k nationalists -Ronald Reagan was doing quite well with his brand of verbal 
legerde main, and white A me rica see med ever willing to spend vast sums of money on suburban parcels and p rivate 
security forces to deny the indissoluble lin k between blac k and wh ite-it was blacks who could least afford such ma ke-
believe. Black survival in this country had always been premised on a min imu m of delusions; it was such an absence 
of delusions that continued to operate in the daily lives of most black people I met. Instead of adopting such 
unwavering honesty in our public business, we seemed to be loosening our grip, letting our collect ive psyche go 
where it pleased, even as we sank into further des pair. 
 
The continuing struggle to align word and action, our heartfe lt desires with a workable  plan -didn¡¯t self-esteem finally 
depend on just this? It was that belief which had led me into organizing, and it was that belief which would lead me to 
conclude, perhaps for the fina l time, that notions of purity-of race or of culture-could no mo re serve as the basis for the 
typical blac k A merican¡¯s self-esteem than it could for mine. Ou r sense of wholeness would have to arise fro m 
something more  fine than the bloodlines we¡¯d inherited. It would have to find root in M rs. Crenshaw¡¯s story and Mr. 
Marshall¡¯s story, in Ruby¡¯s story and Rafiq¡¯s; in a ll the messy, contradictory details of our e xperience.  
 
I went a way for t wo wee ks to visit my fa mily. When I returned, I ca lled Ruby and told her I needed her to co me 
to a meet ing that Saturday night. 
 
A long pause. ¡°What about?¡± 
¡° You¡¯ll see. Be ready by six¡­we¡¯ll grab a  bite to eat first.¡± 
 
 
Our destination was a  fu ll hour a way fro m Ruby¡¯s apartment, in  one of the north -side neighborhoods where ja zz and 
blues had migrated in  search of a paying audience. We found a Vietna mese restaurant, and over a plate of noodles and 
shrimp we ta lked about her boss at work, the proble ms she was having with her back. The conversation seemed forced, 
though, without pause or reflect ion; as we spoke, we kept skirt ing each other¡¯s gaze. 
 
By the time  we ¡¯d paid the restaurant bill and walked ne xt door, the theater was already full. An  usher showed us 
to our seats, which turned out to be in front of a g roup of black teenage girls out on a fie ld trip. So me  of the girls 
diligently thumbed through their programs, taking their cue fro m the older wo man -a teacher, I assumed-who sat 
beside them. Most of the girls, though, were too e xc ited to sit still; they whispered and giggled about the play¡¯s 
lengthy title and asked questions of their chaperone, who showed an admirable patience throughout. 
 
The room was suddenly blanketed in darkness, and the girls fe ll quiet. Then the lights rose, a dim blue now, and 
seven black wo men appeared on the stage dressed in flo wing skirts and scarves, their bodies frozen in awkward 
contortions. One of them, a b ig wo man dressed in brown, began to cry out: 
 
 
¡­half-notes scattered 
without rhythm / no tune 
distraught laughter fallin¡¯ 
over a black girl¡¯s shoulder 
it¡¯s funny / it¡¯s hysterical 
the me lody-less-ness of her dance 
 
 
don¡¯t tell a soul 
she¡¯s dancing on beer cans and shingles¡­ 
 
 
 
 
 
As she spoke, the other women slowly ca me to life, a chorus of many shades and shapes, mahogany and 
crea m, round and slender, young and not so young, stretching their limbs across the stage. 
somebody / anybody 
sing a black girl¡¯s song 
bring her out 
to know herself 
to know you 
but sing her rhythms 
carin¡¯ / struggle / hard times 
sing her song of life¡­ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For the ne xt hour, the wo men took turns telling their stories, singing their songs. They sang about lost time  and 
discarded fantasies and what might have been. They sang of the men who loved them, betrayed them, raped them, 
embraced the m; they sang of the hurt inside these men, hurt that was understood and sometimes forgiven. They 
showed each other their stretch marks and the calluses on their feet; they revealed their beauty in the lilt of their voice, 
the flutter of a hand, beauty waning, ascendant, elusive. They wept over the aborted children, the murdered children, 
the children they once were. And through all of their songs, violent, angry, sweet, unflinching, the wo men danced, 
each of them, double-dutch and rhumba and bump and solitary wa ltz; sweat-brea king, heart-b reaking dances. They 
danced until they all seemed one spirit. At the end of the play, that spirit began to sing a single, simp le verse:  
I found god in myself 
and I loved her / I loved her fierce ly  
 
 
 
 
Lights came up; bows were taken; the girls behind us cheered wild ly. I helped Ruby with her coat and we wa lked out 
to the parking lot. The te mperature had dropped; the stars glinted like ice against the black sky. As we waited for the 
car to warm up, Ruby leaned over and kissed me on the cheek. 
 
¡°Thanks.¡± 
 
Her eyes, deep brown, were shimme ring. I g rabbed her gloved hand and gave it a quick squeeze before starting to 
drive. Nothing more was said; for the entire ride back to the South Side, until I left her a t her door and wished her 
good-night, we never broke that precious silence. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER ELEVEN  
 
 
 
 
 
 
I PULLED INTO THE AIRPORT parking lot at a quarter past three and ran to the termina l as fast as I could. 
Panting for breath, I spun around several times, my eyes scanning the crowds of Indians, Germans, Poles, Thais, 
and Czechs gathering their luggage. 
 
Da mn! I knew I should have left earlie r. Maybe she had gotten worried and tried to call. Had I g iven her my 
office nu mber? What if she¡¯d missed her flight? What if she had walked right past me and I hadn¡¯t even known it?  
 
I looked down at the photograph in my hand, the one she had sent me t wo months earlier, smudged now fro m too 
much handling. Then I looked up, and the picture came  to life : an African wo man e merg ing fro m behind the customs 
gate, moving with easy, graceful steps, her bright, searching eyes now fixed on my o wn, her dark, round, sculpted face 
blossoming like a wood rose as she smiled. 
 
 
¡°Barac k?¡± 
¡°Auma?¡± 
¡°Oh my¡­¡± 
 
 
 
 
I lifted my sister off the ground as we emb raced, and we laughed and laughed as we looked at each other. I p icked up 
her bag and we began to walk to the parking garage, and she slipped her arm through mine. And I knew at that mo ment, 
somehow, that I loved her, so naturally, so easily and fie rcely, that later, a fter she was gone, I would find myself 
mistrusting that love, trying to e xpla in it to myself. Even now I can¡¯t e xp la in it; I only know that the love was true, and 
still is, and I¡¯m gratefu l for it. 
 
¡°So, brother,¡± Auma  said as we drove into the city, ¡°you have to tell 
me  everything.¡± ¡°About what?¡± 
¡°Your  life,  of  course.¡± 
¡°From  the  beginning?¡± 
¡°Start anywhere.¡± 
I told her about Chicago and New York, my work as an organizer, my mother and grandparents and Maya-she had heard 
so much about them from our father, she said, she felt as if she already knew them. She described Heidelberg, where she 
was trying to finish a master¡¯s degree in linguistics, and the trials and tribulations of living in Germany. 
 
¡°I have no right to compla in, I suppose,¡± she said. ¡°I have a scholarship, a flat. I don¡¯t know what I would be doing if  
 
I was still in Kenya. Still, I don¡¯t care for Germany so much. You know, the Ge rmans like  to think of themselves 
as very libera l when it co mes to Africans, but if you scratch the surface you see they still have the attitudes of their 
childhood. In German fa iry ta les, black people are a lways the goblins. Such things one doesn¡¯t forget so easily. 
 
Somet imes I t ry to imag ine what it must have been like for the Old Man, leaving ho me for the first time. Whether he 
felt that same loneliness¡­¡± 
 
The Old Man. That¡¯s what Auma ca lled our father. It sounded right to me, somehow, at once fa miliar and distant, an 
ele mental force that isn¡¯t fully unders tood. In my apart ment, Auma  held up the picture of him that sat on my 
bookshelf, a  studio portrait that my mother had saved. 
 
¡°He looks so innocent, doesn¡¯t he? So young.¡± She held the picture next to my face. ¡°You have the same 
mouth.¡± I told her she should lie down and get some rest while I went to my office for a few hours of work. 
 
 
 
 
She shook her head. ¡°I¡¯m not tired. Let me  go with 
you.¡± ¡°You¡¯ll fee l better if you take a nap.¡±  
 
 
 
 
 
She said, ¡°Agh, Barac k! I see you¡¯re bossy like the Old Man as well. And you only met him once? It must be in the 
blood.¡± 
 
I laughed, but she didn¡¯t; instead, her eyes wandered over my face as if it we re a pu zzle to solve, another piece to 
a proble m that, beneath the exuberant chatter, nagged at her heart. 
 
I gave her a tour of the South Side that afternoon, the same drive I had taken in my first days in Chicago, only with 
some of my o wn me mories now. When we stopped by my office , Angela, Mona, and Shirley happened to be there. 
They asked Auma all about Kenya and how she braided her hair and how co me she talked so pretty, like  the queen of 
England, and the four of the m en joyed themselves thoroughly talking about me and a ll my strange habits. 
 
¡°They seem very fond of you,¡± Auma said afterward. ¡°They remind me o f our aunties back home.¡± She rolled down the 
window and stuck her face into the wind, watching Michigan Avenue pass by: the gutted remains of the old 
 
Roseland Theatre, a garage full o f rusted cars. ¡°Are you doing this for them, Barac k?¡± she asked, turnin g back to 
me . ¡°This organizing business, I mean?¡±  
 
I shrugged. ¡°For them. For me.¡±  
That same e xpression of puzzle ment, and fear, returned to Auma¡¯s face. ¡° I don¡¯t like politics much,¡± she said. 
¡°Why¡¯s that?¡± 
¡°I don¡¯t know. People a lways end up disappointed.¡± 
There was a letter wa iting for her in my mailbo x when we got ho me; it was fro m a Ge rman la w student she said she¡¯d 
been seeing. The letter was volu minous, at least seven pages long, and as I prepared dinner, she  sat at the kitchen table 
and laughed and sighed and clicked her tongue, her face suddenly soft and wistful. 
 
¡°I thought you didn¡¯t like  Ge rmans,¡± I said. 
She rubbed her eyes and laughed. ¡°Yah-Otto is different. He¡¯s so sweet! And sometimes I t reat him so  badly! I 
don¡¯t know, Barac k. So metimes I think it¡¯s just impossible for me to trust anybody completely. I think of what the 
Old Man made of his life, and the idea of marriage g ives me, how do you say¡­the shivers. Also, with Otto and 
his career, we would have to live in Germany, you see. I start imag ining what it would be like for me, liv ing my 
entire life as a fore igner, and I don¡¯t think I could ta ke it.¡±  
 
She folded her letter and put it back in the envelope. ¡°What about you, Barac k?¡± she asked. ¡°Do you have these 
problems, or is it just your sister who¡¯s so confused?¡± 
 
¡°I think I know what you¡¯re 
feeling.¡± ¡°Tell me.¡±  
 
I went to the refrigerator and pulled out two green peppers, setting them on the cutting board. ¡° Well¡­there was a 
wo man in Ne w Yo rk that I loved. She was white. She had dark hair, and specks of green in her eyes. He r voice 
sounded like a wind chime. We saw each other for a lmost a year. On the weekends, mostly. So metimes in her 
apartment, somet imes in mine. You know how you can fall into your own private world? Just two people, hidden and 
warm. Your own language. Your own customs. That¡¯s how it was.  
 
 
 
 
¡°Anyway, one weekend she invited me to her fa mily¡¯s country house. The parents were there, and they were very 
nice, very grac ious. It was autumn, beautiful, with woods all around us, and we paddled a canoe across this round, icy 
lake  full o f sma ll gold leaves that collected along the shore. The fa mily knew every inch of the land. They knew how 
the hills had formed, how the glac ial drifts had created the lake, the na mes of the earliest white settlers -their ancestors-
and before that, the names of the Indians who¡¯d once hunted the land. The house was very old, her grandfather¡¯s house. 
He had inherited it fro m h is grandfather. The library was filled with old books and pictures of the grandfather with 
fa mous people he had known-presidents, diplomats, industrialists. There was this tremendous  gravity to the room. 
Standing in that room, I realized that our two wo rlds, my friend¡¯s and mine, were as distant from each other as Kenya is 
fro m Germany. And I kne w that if we  stayed together I¡¯d eventually live in hers. After a ll, I¡¯d been doing it mos t of my 
life. Bet ween the two of us, I was the one who knew how to live as an outsider.¡± 
 
¡°So what happened.¡± 
I shrugged. ¡°I pushed her away. We started to fight. We started thinking about the future, and it pressed in on our 
warm little  world. One night I took her to see a new play by a blac k p laywright. It was a very angry play, but very 
funny. Typical blac k A merican hu mor. The audience was mostly black, and everybody was laughing and clapping and 
hollering like they were in church. After the play was over, my friend started talking about why black people were so 
angry all the time. I said it was a matter of re me mbering -nobody asks why Jews re me mber the Ho locaust, I think I said-
and she said that¡¯s different, and I said it wasn¡¯t, and she said that anger was just a dead end. We had a big fight, right 
in front of the theater. When we got back to the car she started crying. She couldn¡¯t be black, she said. She would if she 
could, but she couldn¡¯t. She could only be herself, and wasn¡¯t that enough.¡± 
 
¡°That¡¯s a sad story, Barac k.¡±  
¡°I suppose. Maybe even if she¡¯d been black it still wou ldn¡¯t have worked out. I mean, there a re several blac k ladies 
out there who¡¯ve broken my heart just as good.¡± I smiled and scraped the cut -up peppers into the pot, and then turned 
back to Auma. ¡°The thing is,¡± I said, no longer smiling, ¡° whenever I thin k back to what my friend said to me, that 
night outside the theater, it somehow makes me  ashamed.¡± 
 
¡°Do you ever hear fro m her?¡±  
¡°I got a postcard at Christmas. She¡¯s happy now; she¡¯s met someone. And I have 
my work.¡± ¡° Is that enough?¡± 
¡°Somet imes.¡± 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I took the ne xt day off, and we spent the day together, visiting the Art Institute (I wanted to go see the shrunken heads 
at the Field Museum, but Auma re fused), digging old photos out of my c loset, visiting the supermarket, where Au ma 
decided that Americans were  friendly and overwe ight. She was stubborn sometimes, sometimes impish, somet imes 
burdened with the weight of the world, and always asserting a self-re liance that I recognized as a learned response-my 
own response to uncertainty. 
 
We didn¡¯t speak much about our father, though; it was as if our conversation stopped whenever we threatened to 
skirt his me mo ry. It was only that night, after dinner and a long wa lk along the lake ¡¯s cru mbling break wa ll, that 
we both 
 
 
 
 
sensed we couldn¡¯t go any further until we opened up the subject. I made us some tea and Auma began to tell me 
about the Old Man, at least what she could re me mber.  
 
¡°I can¡¯t say I rea lly knew him, Barac k,¡± she began. ¡°Maybe nobody did¡­not really. His life was so scattered. 
 
People only kne w scraps and pieces, even his own children.  
 
¡°I was scared of him. You know, he was already away when I was born. In Ha waii with your mu m, and then at  
 
Harvard. When he ca me back to Kenya, our oldest brother, Roy, and I were  sma ll children. We had lived with our 
mu m in the country, in A lego, up until then. I was too young to reme mber much about him co ming. I was four, but Roy 
was six, so maybe he can tell you more  about what happened. I just re me mber that he ca me back with an A merican 
wo man na med Ruth, and that he took us from our mother to go live with them in Na irobi. I re me mbe r that this wo man, 
 
Ruth, was the first white person I¡¯d ever been near, and that suddenly she was supposed to be my new mother.¡± 
¡°Why didn¡¯t you stay with your own mother?¡± 
 
Auma shook her head. ¡°I don¡¯t know e xactly. In Kenya, men get to keep children in a divorce -if they want them, 
that is. I asked my mu m about this, but it¡¯s difficult  for her to talk about. She only says that the Old Man¡¯s new wife 
refused to live with another wife, and that she-my mu m-thought us children would be better off living with the Old 
Man because he was rich. 
 
¡°In those first years, the Old Man was doing really we ll, you see. He was working for an A merican oil co mpany -Shell, 
I think. It was only a fe w years after independence, and the Old Man was we ll connected with all the top government 
people. He had gone to s chool with many of the m. The vice-p resident, ministers, they would all co me to the house 
sometimes and drink with him and talk about politics. He had a b ig house and a big car, and everybody was impressed 
with him because he was so young but he already had  so much education from abroad. And he had an American wife, 
which was still rare -although later, when he was still married to Ruth, he would go out sometimes with my real mu m. 
As if he had to show people, you see. That he could also have this beautiful Af rican wo man whenever he chose. Our 
four other brothers were born at this time. Ma rk and David, they we re Ruth¡¯s children, born in our big house in 
Westlands. Abo and Bernard, they were my  mu m¡¯s children, and lived with her and her fa mily upcountry. Roy and  I 
didn¡¯t know Abo and Bernard then. They never ca me to the house to see us, and when the Old Man visited them, he 
would always go alone, without telling Ruth. 
 
¡°I didn¡¯t think about this much until later, the way our lives were d ivided in two, because I was so young. I think it 
was harder on Roy, because he was old enough to reme mber what it had been like in Alego, living in the village with 
our mu m and our people. For me, things were okay. Ruth, our new mother, was nice enough to us then. She treated us 
almost like her own children. Her parents were rich, I think, and they would send us beautiful presents from the States. 
 
I¡¯d get rea lly e xcited whenever a package ca me fro m the m. But I re me mber so metimes Roy would refuse to take their 
gifts, even when they sent us sweets. I re me mbe r once he refused some chocolates they had sent, but later in the 
night, when he thought I was asleep, I saw him taking some of the chocolates that I had left on our dresser. But I 
didn¡¯t say anything, because I think I knew that he was unhappy. 
 
¡°Then things began to change. When Ruth gave birth to Mark and David, her attention shifted to them. The Old Man, he 
left the American company to work in the government, for the Ministry of Tourism. He may have had political ambitions, 
and at first he was doing well in the government. But by 1966 or 1967, the divisions in Kenya had become 
 
 
 
 
more  serious. President Kenyatta was fro m the la rgest tribe, the Kikuyus. The Luos, the second largest tribe, began to 
compla in that Kikuyus were getting all the best jobs. The government was full of intrigue. The v ice -president, Od inga, 
was a Luo, and he said the government was becoming corrupt. That, instead of serving those who had fought for 
independence, Kenyan politic ians had taken the place of the white colonia ls, buying up businesses and land that should 
be redistributed to the people. Odinga tried to start his own party, but was placed under house arrest as a Commun ist. 
 
Another popular Luo minister, To m M¡¯boya, was killed by a Kikuyu gunman. Luos began to protest in the streets, 
and the government police c racked down. People were killed. A ll this created more suspicion between the tribes. 
 
¡°Most of the Old Man¡¯s friends just kept quiet and learned to live with the situation. But the Old Man began to speak 
up. He would tell people that tribalis m was going to ruin the country and that unqualified men were  taking the best 
jobs. His friends tried to wa rn him about saying such things in public, but he didn¡¯t care. He  always thought he knew 
what was best, you see. When he was passed up for a pro motion, he co mpla ined loudly. ¡®How can you be my senior,¡¯ 
he would say to one of the min isters, ¡®and yet I am teaching you how to do your job properly?¡¯ Word got back to  
 
Kenyatta that the Old Man was a trouble ma ker, and he was called in to see the president. According to the stories, 
Kenyatta said to the Old Man that, because he could not keep his mouth shut, he would not work again until he had no 
shoes on his feet. 
 
¡°I don¡¯t know how much of these details are true. But I know that with the preside nt as an enemy things became very 
bad for the Old Man. He was banished from the government -blacklisted. None of the min istries would give him work. 
When he went to foreign companies to look for a post, the companies were warned not to hire h im. He  began lo oking 
abroad and was hired to work for the African Develop ment Bank in Addis Ababa, but before he could join the m, the 
government revoked his passport, and he couldn¡¯t even leave Kenya. 
 
¡°Finally, he had to accept a small job with the Water Depart ment. Even this was possible only because one of his 
friends pitied him. The job kept food on the table, but it was a big fa ll fo r him. The Old Man began to drink heavily, 
and many of the people he knew stopped coming to visit because now it was dangerous to be seen with him. They 
told him that maybe if he apologized, changed his attitude, he would be all right. But he re fused and continued to 
say whatever was on his mind. 
 
¡°I understood most of this only when I was older. At the time, I just saw that life at ho me beca me  very difficult. The  
 
Old Man never spoke to Roy or myself e xcept to scold us. He would co me  home  very late, drunk, and I could hear him 
shouting at Ruth, telling her to cook him food. Ruth became very b itter at how the Old Man had change d. Sometimes, 
when he wasn¡¯t home, she would te ll Roy and myself that our father was cra zy and that she pitied us for having such a 
father. I didn¡¯t bla me  her for this -I p robably agreed. But I noticed that, even more than before, she treated us differently  
fro m her own two sons. She would say that we were not her children and there was only so much she could do to help 
us. Roy and I began to feel like we had no one. And when Ruth left the Old Man, that fee ling was not so far fro m the 
truth. 
 
¡°She left when I was twelve or thirteen, after the Old Man had had a serious car accident. He had been drinking, I think, 
and the driver of the other car, a white farmer, was killed. For a long time the Old Man was in the hospital, almost a year, 
and Roy and I lived basically on our own. When the Old Man finally got out of the hospital, that¡¯s when he went to visit 
you and your mum in Hawaii. He told us that the two of you would be coming back with him and that 
 
 
 
 
then we would have a proper fa mily. But you weren¡¯t with him when he returned, and Roy and I were  le ft to deal with  
 
him by ourselves. 
 
¡°Because of the accident, the Old Man had now lost his job at the Water Department, and we had no place to live. For a 
while, we bounced around from relative to relative, but eventually they would put us out because they had their own 
troubles. Then we found a run-down house in a rough section of town, and we stayed there for several years. That was a 
terrible time. The Old Man had so little money, he would have to borrow from relatives just for food. This made him more 
ashamed, I think, and his temper got worse. Despite all our troubles, he would never admit to Roy or myself that anything 
was wrong. I think that¡¯s what hurt the most-the way he still put on airs about how we were the children of Dr. Obama. We 
would have empty cupboards, and he would make donations to charities just to keep up appearances! I would argue with him 
sometimes, but he would just say that I was a foolish young girl and didn¡¯t understand. 
 
¡°It was worse between him and Roy. They would have terrific  fights. Finally Roy just left. He just stopped coming 
home and started living with diffe rent people. So I was le ft a lone with the Old Man.  So metimes I would stay up half the 
night, wait ing to hear him co me through the door, worrying that something terrible  had happened. Then he would 
stagger in drunk and co me into my room and wa ke me  because he wanted company or something to eat. He would tal k 
about how unhappy he was and how he had been betrayed. I would be so sleepy, I wouldn¡¯t understand anything he 
was saying. Secretly, I began to wish that he would just stay out one night and never come back.  
 
¡°The only thing that saved me was Kenya High School. It was a girls¡¯ school that had once been reserved for the 
 
British. Very strict, and still very racist-it was only when I was there, after most of the white students had left, that 
they allowed African teachers to lecture. But despite these things , I became act ive there. It was a boarding school, so 
during the school term I would stay there instead of with the Old Man. The school gave me some  sense of order, 
you see. So mething to hold on to. 
 
¡°One year, the Old Man couldn¡¯t even pay my school fees, and I was sent home. I was so ashamed, I c ried a ll night. 
I didn¡¯t know what I would do. But I was lucky. One of the head mistresses heard about my situation and gave me a 
scholarship that let me  stay on. It¡¯s sad to say, but as much as I cared for the Old Man, and wo rried about him, I was 
glad not to have to live with him. I just left him to himself and never looked bac k.  
 
¡°In my last two years in h igh school, the Old Man¡¯s situation imp roved. Kenyatta died, and somehow the Old Ma n 
was able to work again in government. He got a job with the Ministry of Finance and started to have money again, and 
influence. But I think he never got over the bitterness of what had happened to him, seeing his other age -mates who had 
been more politica lly astute rise ahead of him. And it was too late to pick up the pieces of his fa mily. Fo r a long time he 
lived a lone in a hotel room, even when he could afford again to buy a house. He wou ld have diffe rent wo men for short 
spells-Europeans, Africans -but nothing ever lasted. I almost never saw him, and when I did, he d idn¡¯t know how to 
behave with me. We were like  strangers, but you know, he still wanted to pretend that he was a model father and could 
tell me how to behave. I re me mber when I got my scholars hip to study in Germany, I was afra id to tell him. I thought 
he might say I was too young to go and interfere with my student visa, which had to be approved by the government. 
So I just left without saying good-bye. 
 
¡°It was only in Germany that I began to let go of some of the anger I felt towards him. With distance, I could see what 
he had gone through, how even he had never really understood himself. Only at the end, after making such a 
 
 
mess of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
his life, do I think he was maybe beginning to change. The last time I saw h im, he was on a business trip, representing 
 
Kenya at an international conference in Eu rope. I was apprehensive, because we hadn¡¯t spoken for so long. But when 
he arrived in Ge rmany he seemed rea lly re la xed, almost peaceful. We had a really good time. You know, even when 
he was being complete ly unreasonable he could be so charming! He took me with h im to London, and we stayed in a 
fancy hotel, and he introduced me to all h is friends at a British club. He was pulling out chairs for me and ma king a 
great fuss, telling all h is friends how proud he was of me. On the flight back fro m London, I noticed a little  glass 
tumbler his wh iskey was being served in, and I said I was going to filch it, and he said, ¡®There ¡¯s no need for such 
things.¡¯ He called the stewardess and asked her to bring me a whole set of the  glasses, as if he owned the plane. 
When the stewardess handed them to me, I felt like  a litt le girl again. Like his princess. 
 
¡°On the last day of his visit, he took me to lunch, and we talked about the future. He asked me if I needed money and 
insisted that I take something. He told me  that once I returned to Kenya, he would find me a  proper husband. It was 
touching, you know, what he was trying to do¡­as if he could ma ke up for all the lost time. By then, he had just 
fathered another son, George, with a young woman he was living with. So I told h im, ¡®Roy and myself, we¡¯re a lready 
adults. We have our own ways, our own me mo ries, and what has happened between all of us is hard to undo. But with  
 
George, the baby, he is a clean slate. You have a chance to really do right by him.¡¯ And he just nodded, as if¡­as if¡­¡±  For 
some time, Auma had been staring at our father¡¯s photograph, soft-focused in the dim light. Now she stood up and went to 
the window, her back turned to me. She was clutching herself, her hands inch ing over her hunched shoulders. 
 
She began to shake violently, and I ca me up behind her and put my arms a round her as she wept, the sorrow washing 
through her in slow, deep waves. ¡°Do you see, Barac k?¡± she said between sobs. ¡° I was just starting to know him. It 
was just getting to the point where¡­where he might have e xpla ined himself. So met imes I thin k he might have really 
turned the corner, found some inner peace. When he died, I felt so¡­so cheated. As cheated as you must have  felt.¡± 
 
Outside, a car screeched around a corner; a solitary man crossed under the yellow circle of a streetlight. As if by force of 
will, Auma¡¯s body suddenly straightened, her breath steadied, and she wiped her eyes with her shirtsleeve. ¡°Ah, look at wh at 
you¡¯ve made your sister do,¡± she said, and let out a fragile laugh. She turned to me. ¡°You know, the Old 
 
Man used to talk about you so much! He would show off your picture to everybody and tell us how we ll you were 
doing in school. I guess your mu m and him used to exchange letters. I thin k those letters really co mfo rted him. 
During the rea lly bad times, when everybody seemed to have turned against him, he would bring her letters into my 
room and start reading them out loud. He would wake  me up and make   me listen, and when he was finished, he would 
shake the letter in his hand and say how kind your mu m had been. ¡®You see!¡¯ he would say. ¡®At least there are people 
who truly care for me.¡¯ He ¡¯d say this to himself over and over again¡­.¡±  
 
While Au ma brushed her teeth, I prepared the convertible sofa for her. Soon she was curled up under a blanket, sound 
asleep. But I re ma ined awa ke, propped up in a chair with the desk light on, looking at the stillness of her face, listening 
to the rhythm of her breathing, try ing to ma ke some  sense out of all that she¡¯d said. I fe lt as if my world had been 
turned on its head; as if I had wo ken up to find a blue sun in the yello w sky, or heard anima ls speaking like  men. A ll 
my life, I had carried a single image of my  father, one that I had sometimes rebelled against but had never questioned, 
one that I had later tried to take as my o wn. The brilliant scholar, the generous friend, the upstanding leader-my father 
had been all those things. All those things and more, because except for that one brief v isit in Hawa ii, he had never 
 
 
 
 
been present to foil the image, because I hadn¡¯t seen what perhaps most men see at some point in their lives: their 
father¡¯s body shrinking, their father¡¯s best hopes dashed, their father¡¯s face lined with grief and regret. 
 
Yes, I¡¯d seen weakness in other men-Gra mps and his disappointments, Lolo and his co mpro mise. But these men had 
become object lessons for me, men I might love but never emulate, wh ite men and brown men whose fates didn¡¯t speak 
to my own. It was into my father¡¯s image, the blac k man, son of Africa, that I¡¯d packed a ll the attributes I sought in 
myself, the attributes of Martin and Malcolm, DuBo is and Mandela. And if later I saw that the black men I knew-Fran k 
or Ray or Will or Rafiq-fell short of such lofty standards; if I had learned to respect these men fo r the struggles they 
went through, recognizing them as my own-my father¡¯s voice had nevertheless rema ined untainted, inspiring, rebuking, 
granting or withholding approval. You do not work hard enough, Barry. You must help in your people¡¯s struggle. Wake 
up, black man! 
 
Now, as I sat in the glow of a single light bulb, rocking slightly on a hard -backed chair, that image had suddenly 
vanished. Replaced by ¡­what? A bitter d runk? An abusive husband? A defeated, lonely bureaucrat? To think that all 
my life I had been wrestling with nothing more than a ghost! For a mo ment I fe lt giddy; if Auma hadn¡¯t been in the 
room, I would have probably laughed out loud. The king is overthrown, I thought. The emera ld curtain is pulled aside. 
The rabble of my  head is free to run riot; I can do what I da mn well p lease. For what man, if not my o wn father, has 
the power to tell me otherwise? Whatever I do, it seems, I won¡¯t do much worse than he did. 
 
The night wore on; I tried to regain my  balance, sensing that there was little  satisfaction to be had from my  newfound 
liberat ion. What stood in the way of my succumbing to the same defeat that had brought down the Old Man? Who 
might protect me fro m doubt or warn me  against all the traps that seem la id in a  blac k man¡¯s soul? The fantasy of my 
father had at least kept me  fro m despair. Now he was dead, truly. He could no longer tell me how to live.  
 
All he could te ll me, perhaps, was what had happened to him. It occurred to me that for a ll the new informat ion, I still 
didn¡¯t know the man my  father had been. What had happened to all his vigor, his pro mise? What had shaped his 
amb itions? I imagined once again the first and only time  we ¡¯d met, the man I now knew must have been as 
apprehensive as I was, the man who had returned to Hawa ii to sift through his past and perhaps try and reclaim that 
best part of him, the part that had been misplaced. He  hadn¡¯t been able to tell me  his true fee lings then, any more than I 
had been able to express my ten-year-o ld desires. We had been frozen by the sight of the other, unable to escape the 
suspicion that under exa mination our true selves would be found wanting. Now, fifteen years later, I looked into 
 
Auma¡¯s sleeping face and saw the price we had paid fo r that silence.  
 
 
Ten days later, Auma and I sat in the hard plastic seats of an airport terminal, looking out at the planes through the 
high wall of glass. I asked her what she was thinking about, and she smiled softly. 
 
¡°I was thinking about Alego,¡± she said. ¡°Ho me Square-our g randfather¡¯s land, where  Granny still lives. It¡¯s the most 
beautiful place, Ba rack. When I¡¯m in Ge rmany, and it¡¯s cold outside, and I¡¯m fee ling  lonely, sometimes I c lose my 
eyes and imagine I¡¯m there. Sitting in the compound, surrounded by big trees that our grandfather planted. Granny is 
talking, telling me  something funny, and I can hear the cow swishing its tall behind us, and the chickens pec king at the 
edges of the fie ld, and the smell of the fire fro m the cooking hut. And under the mango tree, near the cornfie lds, is the 
place where the Old Man is buried ¡­.¡±  
 
 
Her flight was starting to board. We rema ined seated, and Auma c losed her eyes, squeezing my 
hand. ¡°We need to go home,¡± she said. ¡°We need to go home, Barac k, and see him there.¡±  
CHAPTER TW ELVE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAFIQ HAD DONE HIS best to spruce the place up. There was a new sign above the entrance, and the door had 
been propped open to let in the spring light. The floors were freshly scrubbed, the furniture rearranged. Rafiq wore  a 
black suit and a blac k leather tie; his leather kufu was polished to a high gloss. For several minutes, he fussed over a 
long folding table set up on one side of the room, instructing a couple of his men on how to arrange the cookies and 
punch, fidgeting with the picture of Haro ld that hung from the wall.  
 
¡°That look straight to you?¡± he asked me. 
¡°It¡¯s straight, Rafiq.¡±  
 
 
 
 
The mayor was co ming to cut the ribbon for the new M ET intake  center opening in Roseland. It was considered a 
great coup, and for weeks Rafiq had begged to have the activities start at his building. He wasn¡¯t the only one. The 
alderman had said he¡¯d be happy to host a briefing with the mayor at his office. The state senator, an old wa rd heeler 
who¡¯d made the mistake of backing one of the wh ite candidates in the last mayoral elect ion, had promised to help us 
get money for any project we wanted if we just got him on the progra m. Even Reverend Sma lls had called, 
suggesting that we¡¯d be helping ourselves by letting him introduce his ¡°good friend Ha rold.¡± Whenever I wa lked into 
the DCP office, my secretary would hand me the latest batch of messages. 
 
¡° You¡¯ve sure become popular, Barac k,¡± she would say before the phone started ringing again. 
I looked now at the c rowd that had gathered inside Ra fiq¡¯s warehouse, mostly politic ians and hangers -on, all of them 
taking  peeks  out  the  door  every   fe w  minutes  while   pla inclothes  police men  spoke  into  their  walkie -talkies  and 
surveyed the scene. Wading my way across the room, I found Will and Angela and pulled the m aside.  
 
¡° You guys ready?¡± 
They nodded. 
¡°Re me mber,¡± I said, ¡°try to get Haro ld to commit  to come  to our rally in the fa ll. Do it while h is scheduler 
is around. Tell him about all the work we¡¯re  doing out here, and why -¡± 
 
At that moment, a murmur ran through the crowd, then a sudden stillness. A large motorcade pulled up, a limousine door 
opened, and from behind a phalanx of policemen I saw the Man himself. He wore a plain blue suit and a rumpled trench 
coat; his gray hair looked a little frazzled, and he was shorter than I had expected. Still, his presence was undeniable, his 
smile that of a man at the height of his powers. Immediately, the crowd began chanting -¡°Ha-rold! Ha-rold!¡±-and the mayor 
made a small pirouette, his hand held up in acknowledgment. With Ms. Alvarez and the plainclothes cops leading the way, 
he began making his way through the throng. Past the senator and the alderman. Past Rafiq and me. Past Reverend Smalls¡¯s 
outstretched hand. Until he finally came to a stop directly in front of Angela. ¡°Ms. Rider.¡± He took her hand, and made a 
slight bow. ¡°It¡¯s a pleasure. I¡¯ve heard excellent things about your work.¡± 
 
 
 
 
Angela looked like she was  going to pass out. The mayor asked if she would introduce him to her associates, and she 
began to laugh and flutter about before gathering enough composure to take him down the row of leaders. They all stood 
at attention like a line of scouts, each one wearing the same helpless grin. When the review was over, the mayor offered 
Angela his arm, and together they walked toward the door, the crowd pressing behind them. 
 
¡°Honey, can you believe this?¡± Shirley wh ispered to Mona. 
The cere mony lasted about fifteen minutes. Police had closed off two b locks of M ichigan Avenue, and a small stage 
had been set up in front of the storefront where the MET center would soon open. Angela introduced all the church 
me mbe rs who¡¯d worked on the project, as we ll as the politic ians in attendance; Will gave a brie f speech about DCP. 
The mayor congratulated us on our civic involve ment, while the senator, Reverend Sma lls, and the alderman 
jockeyed for position behind him, smiling wide ly for the photog raphers they¡¯d hired. The ribbon was cut, and that 
was it. As the limousine sped away to the next event, the crowd dispersed almost instantly, leaving just a few of us 
standing in the litter-blown road. 
 
I wa lked over to Angela, who was busy talking to Shirley and Mona. ¡°When I heard him say ¡®Ms. Rider,¡¯¡± she 
was saying, ¡°I swear I just about died.¡± 
 
Shirley shook her head. ¡° Girl, don¡¯t I know it.¡±  
¡°We got the pictures to prove it,¡± Mona said, holding up her Instamatic ca mera. 
I tried to break in. ¡° Did we get a date for the rally?¡±  
¡°So then he tells me that I look too young to have a fourteen -year-old daughter. Can you imagine?¡± 
¡°Did he agree to co me to our rally?¡± I repeated. 
The three of them looked at me  impatiently. ¡°What rally?¡±  
I threw up my  hands and started stomping down the street. As I reached my car, I heard Will co ming up fro m behind. 
¡°Where you off to in such a hurry?¡± he said. 
¡°I don¡¯t know. So me where.¡± I tried to light a cigarette, but the wind kept blowing out the mat ch. I cursed, tossing the 
matches to the ground, and turned to Will. ¡° You wanna know so mething, Will?¡±  
 
¡°What.¡± 
¡°We¡¯re trifling. That¡¯s what we are. Trifling. He re we a re,  with a chance to show the mayor that we¡¯re real players 
in the city, a group he needs to take seriously. So what do we do? We act like a bunch of starstruck children, that¡¯s 
what. Standing around, cheesing and grinning, worrying about whether we got a picture taken with him-¡± 
 
¡°You mean you didn¡¯t get yourself a picture?¡± Will smiled cheerfully and held up a Polaroid shot, then put a hand on my 
shoulder. ¡°You mind if I tell you something, Barack? You need to lighten up a little bit. What you call trifling was the most 
fun Angela and them have had all year. Ten years from now, they¡¯ll still be bragging about it. It made ¡¯em feel important. 
And you made it happen. So what if they forgot to invite Harold to a rally? We can always call him back.¡± 
 
I climbed into my car and ro lled down the window. ¡°Forget it, Will. I¡¯m just frustrated.¡± 
¡° Yeah, I can see that. But you should be asking yourself why you so frustrated.¡± 
¡°Why do you think?¡± 
Will shrugged. ¡°I think you¡¯re just trying to do a good job. But I also think you ain¡¯t  never satisfied. 
You want everything to happen fast. Like you got something to prove out here.¡± 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¡°I¡¯m not trying to prove anything, Will.¡± I started the car and began to pull away, but not fast enough to 
avoid hearing Will¡¯s parting words. 
 
¡° You don¡¯t have to prove nothing to us, Barac k. We love you, man. Jesus loves you!¡± 
 
 
Almost a year had passed since my arriva l in Chicago, and our labor had finally begun to bear fruit. Will¡¯s and 
Mary¡¯s street corner group had grown to fifty strong; they organized neighborhood cleanups, sponsored career days for 
area youth, won agreements fro m the a lderman to imp rove sanitation services. Farther north, Mrs. Crenshaw and Mrs. 
Stevens had pressed the Park District into overhauling run-down parks and playlots; work there had already begun. 
Streets had been repaired, sewers rooted, crime-watch progra ms instituted. And now the new job intake  center, where 
once only an empty storefront had been. 
 
As the organization¡¯s stock had grown, so had my own. I began receiving invitations to sit on panels and conduct 
workshops; local politic ians knew my  na me, even if they still couldn¡¯t pronounce it. As far as our leadership was 
concerned, I could do little  wrong. ¡° You s hould have seen him when he first got here,¡± I¡¯d overhear Sh irley tell a  
new leader one day. ¡° He was just a boy. I swear, you look at h im now, you¡¯d think he was a different person.¡± She 
spoke like a proud parent: I¡¯d become  a sort of surrogate prodigal so n. 
 
The appreciation of those you worked with, concrete improve ments in the neighborhood, things you could hang 
a price tag on. It should have been enough. And yet what Will had said was true. I wasn¡¯t satisfied. 
 
Maybe it was connected to Auma¡¯s visit and the news she had brought of the Old Man. Where once I¡¯d fe lt the need 
to live up to his e xpectations, I now fe lt as if I had to ma ke up for all h is mistakes. On ly the nature of those mistakes 
still wasn¡¯t clear in my  mind; I still couldn¡¯t read the signposts that might wa rn me a way fro m the wrong turns he¡¯d 
taken. Because of that confusion, because my image of him re ma ined so contradictory -sometimes one thing, sometimes 
another, but never the two things at once-I would find myself, at rando m mo ments in the day, feeling as if I was living 
out a preordained script, as if I we re fo llo wing h im into error, a captive to his tragedy. 
 
Then there were my prob le ms with Marty. We had offic ia lly separated our respective efforts that spring; since then 
he¡¯d been spending most of his time  with the suburban churches, where it turned out that parishioners, black and white, 
were less concerned about jobs than they were about the same pattern of white flight and dropping property values that 
had swept through the South Side a decade before. 
 
These were difficu lt issues, rife with the rac ialis m and delicacy that Marty found so distasteful. So he had decided 
to move on. He  had hired another organize r to do most of the day -to-day work in the suburbs and was now busy 
starting a new organizat ion in Ga ry, a c ity whe re the economy had long ago collapsed -where things were so bad, 
Marty said, that no one would care about the color of an organizer. One day, he asked me to co me with him.  
 
¡°This is a bad training situation for you,¡± he e xp lained. ¡°The South Side¡¯s too big. Too many distractions. It¡¯s 
not your fault. I should have known better.¡± 
 
¡°I can¡¯t just leave, Marty. I just got here.¡± 
 
He  looked  at  me  with  in fin ite  patience.  ¡° Listen,  Ba rack,  your  loyalty  is  admirable .  But  right  now  you  need  to 
worry  about your own develop ment. Stay here  and you¡¯re bound to fa il. You¡¯ll g ive up organizing before  you gave 
it a rea l shot.¡± 
 
 
 
 
He had it a ll worked out in h is head: how much time  it would ta ke to hire  and train a replace ment for me, the need to 
leave a respectable budget in place. As I listened to him lay out his plans, it occurred to me  that he¡¯d made no 
particular attach ments to people or place during his three years in the area, that whatever human warmth or connection 
he might require  ca me fro m e lsewhere: fro m his gracious wife, fro m his handsome young son. In his work, it was only 
the idea that drove him, the idea that a closed plant symbolized but that was larger than the plant, larger than Angela 
or Will o r the lonely priests who had agreed to work with him. That idea might take spark anywhere; for Marty, it was 
simp ly a matter of finding the right co mbination of c ircu mstances, the right mix of co mpounds. 
 
 
¡°Marty.¡± 
¡°What?¡± 
 
 
¡°I¡¯m not going anywhere.¡± 
We had eventually come to an agreement: He would provide me the consultation I still desperately needed; the fee he 
received would help subsidize his work elsewhere. In our weekly meetings, though, he would remind me of the choice 
 
I¡¯d made, that there was no risk in my modest accomplishments, that the men in fancy suits downtown were still 
calling all the shots. ¡°Life  is short, Barac k,¡± he would say. ¡°If you¡¯re not trying to really change things out here, 
you might as we ll forget it .¡± 
 
Ah, yes. Real change. It had seemed like such an attainable goal back in college, an e xtension of my personal wi ll 
and my mother¡¯s fa ith, like boosting my grade point average or giv ing up liquor: a matter of taking and assigning 
responsibility. Only now, after a year of organizing, nothing seemed simp le. Who was responsible for a  place like  
Altgeld? I found myself asking. There were no c igar-cho mping crac kers like Bull Connor out there, no club -wield ing 
Pinke rton thugs. Just a small band of olde r blac k men and wo men, a group characterized less by malice or ca lculat ion 
than by fear and small greeds. People like M r. Anderson, the Altgeld project manager, a bald ing, older man one year 
short of retire ment. Or M rs. Reece, a plu mp wo man with a p incushion face who was president of the officia l tenant 
council and spent most of her time protecting the small pre rogatives that c ame with her office: a stipend and a seat at 
the yearly banquet; the ability to see that her daughter got a choice apartment, her nephew a job in the CHA 
bureaucracy. Or Reverend Johnson, Mrs. Reece¡¯s pastor and head of the only large church in A ltgeld, wh o, the first 
and only time  that we met, had stopped me the minute I mentioned the word organizing.  
 
¡°CHA a in¡¯t the proble m,¡± the good reverend had said. ¡°Proble m is these young girls out here, engaging in all 
manner of forn ication.¡±  
 
Some  tenants in Altgeld would tell me  that Mr. Anderson didn¡¯t repair the apartments of anybody who opposed Mrs. 
Reece and her slate of candidates during LA C e lections, that Mrs. Reece was in turn controlled by Reverend Johnson, 
that Reverend Johnson owned a security guard serv ice under contract with CHA. I couldn¡¯t say that any of this was 
true, nor in the end did it seem to matter much. The three of the m only reflected the attitudes of most of the people who 
worked in Altgeld : teachers, drug counselors, police men. So me were th ere only for the paycheck; others sincerely 
wanted to help. But whatever their motives, they would all at so me point confess a common weariness, a weariness 
that was bone-deep. They had lost whatever confidence they might have once had in their ability to reverse the 
deterioration they saw all around them. W ith that loss of confidence came  a loss in the capacity for outrage. The idea 
of responsibility-their o wn, that of others -slowly eroded, replaced with gallo ws humor and low e xpectations. 
 
 
 
 
In a sense, then, Will was right: I did feel that there was something to prove -to the people of Altgeld, to Marty, to 
my father, to myself. That what I did counted for something. That I wasn¡¯t a fool chasing pipe drea ms. Later, when 
I tried to e xpla in some of this to Will, he would laugh and shake his head, preferring to attribute my gru mpy attitude 
that day at the ribbon cutting to a case of youthful jea lousy. ¡°See, you like the young rooster, Barac k,¡± he told me, 
¡°and Harold¡¯s like the old rooster. Old rooster ca me in, and the hens gave him a ll the attention. Made the young 
rooster realize he¡¯s got a thing or two to lea rn.¡±  
 
Will seemed to enjoy the co mparison, and I had laughed along with h im. But secretly I knew he had misunderstood 
my a mb itions. More than anything, I wanted Haro ld to succeed; like my real father, the mayor and his achieve ments 
seemed to ma rk out what was possible; his gifts, his power, measured my o wn hopes. And in listening to him speak to 
us that day, full of grace and good humor, a ll I had been able to think about was the constraints on that power. At the 
ma rgins, Ha rold could ma ke c ity services more  equitable. Black professionals now got a bigger share of city business. 
We had a black school superintendent, a black police chief, a b lack CHA director. Haro ld¡¯s presence consoled, as 
Will¡¯s Jesus consoled, as Rafiq¡¯s nationalis m consoled. But beneath the radiance of Harold ¡¯s victory, in A ltgeld a nd 
elsewhere, nothing seemed to change. 
 
I wondered whether, a way fro m the spotlight, Harold thought about those constraints. Whether, like M r. Anderson or 
Mrs. Reece or any number of other black offic ials who now ad ministered over inner c ity life, he fe lt  as trapped as those 
he served, an inheritor of sad history, part of a closed system with fe w moving parts, a system that was losing heat 
every day, dropping into low-level stasis. 
 
I wondered whether he, too, fe lt a prisoner of fate. 
 
 
 
It was Dr. Ma rtha Collier who eventually lifted me out my funk. She was the principal of Carver Ele mentary, one 
of the two ele mentary schools out in Altgeld. The first time I called her for an appoint ment, she didn¡¯t ask too 
many questions. 
 
¡°I can use any help I can get,¡± she said. ¡°See you at eight-thirty.¡± 
The  school,  three  large  bric k  structures  that  formed  a  horseshoe  around  a  broad,  pitted  dirt  lot,  was  at  the 
southern border of Altgeld. Inside, a security guard showed me to the main office,  where a  sturdily built,  midd le-
aged black wo man in a b lue suit was talking to a taut and disheveled younger wo man.  
 
¡°You go home now and get some rest,¡± Dr. Collier said, throwing her arm over the woman¡¯s shoulder. ¡°I¡¯m gonna 
make some calls and see if we can¡¯t get this thing sorted out.¡± She led the woman to the door, then turned to me. 
 
¡° You must be Obama. Co me on in. You want some  coffee?¡±  
 
Before  I had a chance to reply, she had turned to her secretary. ¡°Get Mr. Oba ma here a cup of coffee. 
Did those painters arrive yet?¡± 
 
The secretary shook her head, and Dr. Collier frowned. ¡°Hold all calls,¡± she said as I followed her into her office, 
¡°except for that good-for-nothing building engineer. I want to tell him just what I think of his sorry ass.¡± 
 
Her office was sparsely furnished, the walls bare e xcept for a  fe w co mmunity service a wards and a poster of a young 
black boy that read ¡° God Don¡¯t Make  No Junk.¡± Dr. Collie r pulled up a chair and said, ¡°That girl just leaving my 
 
 
assistants.¡± 
 
 
 
 
 
office, she¡¯s the mother of one of our kids. A junkie. He r boyfriend was arrested last night and can¡¯t make ba il. So  tell 
me -what can your organization do for someone like her?¡±  
 
The secretary came in with my coffee. ¡° I was hoping you¡¯d have some suggestions,¡± I said. 
¡°Short of tearing this whole  place down and giving people a chance to start over, I¡¯m no t sure.¡± 
She had been a teacher for two decades, a principal for ten years. She was accustomed to skirmishes with superiors -
once all-white, now mostly black-over supplies and curriculu m and hiring polic ies. Since coming to Ca rver, she¡¯d set 
up a child-parent center that brought teenage parents into the classroom to lea rn with their ch ild ren. ¡°Most of the 
parents here want what¡¯s best for their child,¡± Dr. Collier e xp la ined. ¡°They just don¡¯t know how to provide it. So we 
counsel them on nutrition, hea lth care, how to handle stress. We teach the ones who need it how to read so they can 
read to their child at home . Where we can, we help the m get their high school equivalency, or hire  them as teaching 
Dr. Collie r took a sip of her coffee. ¡°What we can¡¯t do is change the environment these girls and their babies 
go back to every day. Sooner or later, the child leaves us, and the parents stop coming -¡± 
 
Her phone buzzed; the painter was here. 
¡°I  tell  you  what,  Oba ma,¡±  Dr.  Collie r  said,  rising  to  her  feet.  ¡°You  come  in  and  talk  to  our  parent  group  next 
week. Find out what¡¯s on their  mind. I¡¯m not encouraging you, now. But if the parents decide they want to raise 
some hell with you, I can¡¯t stop them, can I?¡± 
 
She laughed cheerfully and walked me into the hallway, where a wobbly line of five - and six-year-olds was 
preparing to enter a classroom. A few o f the m waved and smiled at us; a pair of boys toward the rear spun around 
and around, their arms tight against their sides; a tiny little girl struggled to yank a sweater over her head and got 
tangled up in the sleeves. As the teacher tried to direct them up the stairs, I thought how happy and trusting they all 
seemed, that despite the rocky arrivals many of the m had gone th rough-delivered premature ly, perhaps, or delivered 
into addiction, most of them a lready smudged with the ragged air of poverty -the joy they seemed to find in simple 
locomotion, the curiosity they displayed toward every new face, seemed the equal of ch ildre n anywhere . They made 
me  think bac k to those words of Regina¡¯s, spoken years ago, in a diffe rent time and place : It¡¯s not about you. 
 
¡°Beautifu l, a ren¡¯t they?¡± Dr. Co llie r said. 
¡°They really a re.¡±  
¡°The change comes later. In about five years, a lthough it seems like it¡¯s co ming sooner all the time.¡±  
¡°What change is that?¡± 
 
 
¡°When their eyes stop laughing. Their throats can still ma ke the sound, but if you look at their eyes, you 
can see they¡¯ve shut off something inside.¡± 
 
I began spending several hours a week with those children and their parents. The mothers were all in their late teens or early 
twenties; most had spent their lives in Altgeld, raised by teenage mothers themselves. They spoke without self-consciousness 
about pregnancy at fourteen or fifteen, the dropping out of school, the tenuous links to the fathers who slipped in and out of 
their lives. They told me about working the system, which involved mostly waiting: waiting to see 
 
 
 
 
the social worker, wa iting at the currency e xchange to cash their we lfa re checks, wait ing for the bus that would 
take them to the nearest superma rket, five miles away, just to buy diapers on sale. 
 
They had mastered the tools of survival in their tightly bound world and made no apologies for it. They weren¡¯t 
cynical, though; that surprised me . They still had a mbit ions. There were  girls like Linda and Bernadette Lo wry, t wo 
sisters Dr. Co llier had helped get high school equivalencies. Be rnadette was now taking classes at the community 
college; Linda, pregnant again, stayed at home to look after Bernadette¡¯s son, Tyrone, and her own daughter, Jewe l-
but she said she¡¯d be going to college, too, once her new baby was born. After that they would both find jobs, they 
said-in food management, maybe, or as secretaries. Then they would move out of Altgeld. In Linda¡¯s apartment one 
day, they showed me an a lbum they kept full of c lippings fro m Better Ho mes and Ga rdens. They pointed  to the bright 
white kitchens and hardwood floors, and told me they would have such a home one day. Tyrone would take swimming 
lessons, they said; Jewel would dance ballet. 
 
Somet imes, listening to such innocent dreams, I would find myself fighting off the  urge to gather up these girls and 
their babies in my a rms, to hold them all t ight and never let go. The girls would sense that impulse, I th ink, and 
Linda, with her dark, striking beauty, would smile at Bernadette and ask me why I wasn¡¯t already ma rried.  
 
¡°Haven¡¯t found the right wo man, I guess,¡± I would say. 
And Bernadette would slap Linda on the arm, saying, ¡°Stop it! You ma king Mr. Oba ma b lush.¡± And they would both 
start to laugh, and I would rea lize  that in my own way, I must have seemed as innocent t o them as they both seemed to 
me . 
 
My plan for the parents was simple . We didn¡¯t yet have the power to change state welfare policy, or create local jobs, 
or bring substantially more money into the schools. But what we could do was begin to improve basic se rvices in 
Altgeld-get the toilets fixed, the heaters working, the windows repaired. A few v ictories there, and I imag ined the 
parents forming the nucleus of a genuinely independent tenants¡¯ organization. With that strategy in mind, I passed out a 
set of compla int forms at the ne xt full parents¡¯ meeting, asking everyone to canvass the block where they lived. They 
agreed to the plan, but when the meeting was over, one of the parents, a wo man na med Sadie  Evans, approached me 
holding a sma ll newspaper clipping. 
 
¡°I saw this in the paper yesterday, Mr. Oba ma,¡±  Sadie  said. ¡°I don¡¯t know if it means anything, but I wanted to 
see what you thought.¡± 
 
It was a legal notice, in s mall print, run in the classified section. It said that the CHA was solic iting bids fro m 
qualified contractors to remove asbestos from A ltgeld¡¯s management office. I asked the parents if any of the m had 
been notified about potential asbestos exposure. They shook their heads. 
 
¡° You think it¡¯s in our apart ments?¡± Linda asked. 
¡°I don¡¯t know. But we can find out. Who wants to call Mr. Anderson over at the management office?¡±  
I glanced around the room, but no hands went up. ¡°Come on, so mebody. I can¡¯t ma ke the call. I don¡¯t live here.¡±  
Finally Sadie raised her hand. ¡°I¡¯ll do it,¡±  she said. 
Sadie wouldn¡¯t have been my first choice. She was a small, slight woman with a squeaky voice that made her 
seem painfully shy. She wore knee-length dresses and carried a leather-bound Bible wherever she went. Unlike the 
other 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parents, she was married, to a young man who wo rked as a store clerk by day but was training to be a minister; 
they didn¡¯t associate with people outside their church. 
 
All this made her something of a misfit in the group, and I wasn¡¯t sure she¡¯d be tough enough to deal with the 
CHA. But when I got back to the office that day, my secretary passed on the message that Sadie had already set up 
the appointment with Mr. Anders on and had called all the other parents to let them know. The fo llowing morning, I 
found Sadie standing out in front of the Altgeld manage ment office, looking like an o rphan, alone in the cla mmy 
mist. ¡°Don¡¯t look like anybody else is showing up, does it, M r. Oba ma?¡± she said, looking at her watch. 
 
¡°Call me Barac k,¡±  I said. ¡° Listen, do you still want to go through with this? If you¡¯re not co mfortable, 
we can reschedule the meeting until we  have some other parents.¡± 
 
¡°I don¡¯t know. Do you think I can get in trouble?¡± 
 
¡°I think you¡¯ve got the right to information that could affect your health. But that doesn¡¯t mean Mr. Anderson is 
gonna think so. I¡¯ll stand behind you, and so will the other parents, but you need to do what makes sense for you.¡± 
Sadie pulled her overcoat tightly a round herself and looked again  at her watch. ¡°We shouldn¡¯t keep Mr. Anderson 
Fro m the e xp ression on Mr. Anderson¡¯s face when we wa lked into his office, it was clea r that I hadn¡¯t been e xpected. 
wait ing,¡± she said, and plunged through the door. 
 
 
He offe red us a seat and asked us if we wanted some coffee.  
 
¡°No thank you,¡± Sadie said. ¡° I rea lly appreciate you seeing us on such short notice.¡± With her coat still on, she 
pulled out the legal notice and set it carefully on Mr. Anderso n¡¯s desk. ¡°So me o f the parents at the school saw this 
in the paper, and we were worried ¡­well, we  wondered if this asbestos maybe was in our apart ments.¡±  
 
Mr. Anderson glanced at the notice, then set it aside. ¡°This is nothing to worry about, Mrs. Evans,¡± h e said. 
¡°We¡¯re just doing renovation on this building, and after the contractors tore up one of the walls, they found 
asbestos on the pipes. It¡¯s just being removed as a precautionary measure.¡±  
 
¡°Well¡­shouldn¡¯t the same thing, the same precautionary measures, I mean, be taken in our apart ments? I mean, isn¡¯t 
there asbestos there, too?¡± 
 
The trap was la id, and Mr. Anderson¡¯s eyes met mine. A cover-up would generate as much publicity as the 
asbestos, I had told mys elf. Publicity would ma ke my job easier. And yet, as I watched Mr. Anderson shift around in 
his seat, trying to take measure of the situation, there was a part of me  that wanted to warn him off. I had the 
unsettling feeling that his soul was fa miliar to me, that of an o lder man who fee ls betrayed by life-a  look I had seen 
so often in my grandfather¡¯s eyes. I wanted to somehow let M r. Anderson know that I understood his dile mma, 
wanted to tell him that if he would just e xpla in that the problems in A ltgeld preceded him and ad mit that he, too, 
needed help, then some measure of salvation might alight in the roo m.  
 
Instead, I said nothing, and Mr. Anderson turned away. ¡°No, Mrs. Evans,¡± he said to Sadie. ¡°There ¡¯s no asbestos 
in the residential units. We¡¯ve tested them thoroughly.¡± 
 
¡°Well, that¡¯s a relief,¡± Sadie said. ¡°Thank you. Thank you very much.¡± She rose, shook Mr. Anderson¡¯s hand, and 
started for the door. I was just about to say something when she turned back toward the project manager. 
 
¡°Oh, I¡¯m sorry,¡± she said. ¡°I forgot to ask you something. The other parents¡­we ll, they¡¯d like to see a copy of these 
tests you took. The results, I mean. You know, just so we can ma ke everybody feel their kids are safe.¡±  
 
 
¡°I¡­the records are all at the downtown office,¡± Mr. Anderson stammered. ¡°Filed a way, you understand.¡± 
¡°Do you think you can get us a copy by next week?¡±  
¡° Yes, we ll¡­o f course. I¡¯ll see what I can do. Ne xt  
week.¡±  When we got outside, I told Sadie she had 
done well. ¡°Do you think he¡¯s telling the truth?¡± 
¡°I don¡¯t know. We¡¯ll find out soon enough.¡± 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A week passed. Sadie called Mr. Anderson¡¯s office: She was told that the results would take another week to 
produce. Two wee ks passed, and Sadie¡¯s calls went unreturned. We tried to reach Mrs. Reece, then the CHA d istrict 
manager, then sent a letter to the e xecutive director of the CHA with a copy to the mayor¡¯s office. No response. 
 
 
¡°What do we do now?¡± Be rnadette asked. 
¡°We go downtown. If they won¡¯t come  to us, we¡¯ll go to them.¡±  
The next day we planned our action. Another letter to the CHA e xecutive director was drafted, informing h im that we  
would appear at his office  in two days to demand an answer to the asbestos question. A short press release was issued. 
The children of Carver were  sent home with a flyer pinned to their jackets urging their parents to join us. Sadie, Linda, 
and Bernadette spent most of the evening calling their neighbors. 
 
But when the day of reckon ing arrived, I counted only eight heads in the yellow bus parked in front of the school. 
Bernadette and I stood in the parking lot trying to recru it other parents as they came to pick up their children. They said 
they had doctors¡¯ appointments or couldn¡¯t find baby-sitters. So me didn¡¯t bother with e xcuses, walking past us as if we 
were panhandlers. When Angela, Mona, and Shirley arrived to see how things were shaping up, I insisted they ride 
with us to lend moral support. Everyone looked depressed, everyone except Tyrone and Jewel, who were busy ma king 
faces at Mr. Lucas, the only father in the group. Dr. Collier ca me up beside me.  
 
¡°I guess this is it,¡± I said. 
¡°Better than I e xpected,¡± she said. ¡°Oba ma¡¯s 
Army.¡±  ¡° Right.¡±  
¡° Good luck,¡± she said, and clapped me on the back. 
The bus rolled past the old incinerator and the Ryerson Steel plant, through Jackson Park, and then onto Lake Shore 
Drive. As we approached downtown, I passed out a script for the action and asked everyone to read it over carefully. 
Waiting for the m to finish, I noticed that Mr. Lucas had a deep frown carved into his forehead. He  was a short, gentle 
man with a bit of a  stutter; he did odd jobs around Altgeld and helped out the mother of h is children whenever he could. 
I ca me up beside him and asked if something was wrong. 
 
¡°I don¡¯t read so good,¡± he said quietly. 
We both looked down at the page of crowded type. 
¡°That¡¯s okay.¡± I wa lked to the front of the bus. ¡°Listen up, everybody! We¡¯re going to go over the script 
together to ma ke sure we ¡¯ve got it straight. What do we want?¡± 
 
¡°A meet ing with the director!¡± 
¡°Where?¡± 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¡°In Altgeld!¡± 
¡°What if they say they¡¯ll g ive us an answer later?¡±  
¡°We want an answer now!¡± 
¡°What if they do something we don¡¯t 
e xpect?¡± ¡°We caucus!¡± 
¡°Crac kers!¡± Tyrone shouted. 
The CHA office was in a stout gray building in the center of the Loop. We filed off the bus, entered the lobby, 
and mashed onto the elevator. On the fourth floor, we  entered a brightly lit lobby where a  receptionist sat behind 
an imposing desk. 
 
¡°Can I help you?¡± she said, scarcely glancing up fro m her maga zine. 
¡°We¡¯d like to see the director, please,¡± Sad ie said. 
¡°Do you have an appointment?¡± 
¡°He¡­¡± Sad ie turned to me. 
¡°He knows we¡¯re  co ming,¡± I said. 
¡°Well, he¡¯s not in the office right now.¡±  
Sadie said, ¡° Could you please check with his deputy?¡± 
The receptionist looked up with an icy stare, but we stood our ground. ¡°Have a seat,¡± she said finally.  
 
 
 
 
 
The parents sat down, and everyone fell into silence. Shirley started to light a cigarette, but Angela elbowed her in the 
ribs. 
 
¡°We¡¯re supposed to be concerned about health, reme mbe r?¡±  
¡°It¡¯s too late for me , girl,¡± Sh irley muttered, but the pack went back into her purse. A group of men in suits and ties 
came out of the door behind the receptionist¡¯s desk and gave our contingent the once -over as they walked to the 
elevator. Linda whispered something to Bernadette; Bernadette whispered back.  
 
¡°What¡¯s everybody whispering for?¡± I asked loudly. 
The children g iggled. Bernadette said, ¡°I fee l like I¡¯m wait ing to see the principal or so mething.¡±  
¡° You hear that, everybody,¡± I said. ¡°They build these big offices to ma ke you fee l intimidated. Just reme mber 
that this is a public authority. Fo lks who work here a re responsible to you.¡± 
 
¡°Excuse me,¡±  the receptionist said to us, her voice rising to match mine. ¡° I¡¯ve been told that the director will 
not be able to see you today. You should report any problems you have to Mr. Anderson out in Altgeld.¡±  
 
¡°Look, we ¡¯ve already seen Mr. Anderson,¡± Bernadette said. ¡°If the director¡¯s not here, we¡¯d like  to see his deputy.¡± 
¡°I¡¯m sorry but that¡¯s not possible. If you don¡¯t leave right now, I¡¯ll have to call Security.¡± 
 
At that moment, the e levator doors opened and several TV film cre ws came  in, along with various reporters. ¡°Is 
this the protest about asbestos?¡± one of the reporters asked me. 
 
I pointed to Sadie. ¡°She ¡¯s the spokesperson.¡± 
 
 
 
 
The TV c rews began to set up, and the reporters took out their notebooks. Sadie e xcused herself and 
dragged me aside. 
 
¡°I don¡¯t wanna talk in front of no ca meras.¡±  
 
 
 
 
 
 
¡°Why¡¯s that?¡± 
¡°I don¡¯t know. I never been on TV before.¡± 
¡° You¡¯ll be fine.¡±  
In a fe w minutes the cameras were  rolling, and Sadie, her voice quavering slightly, held her first press conference. As 
she started to fie ld questions, a wo man in a red suit and heavy mascara rushed into the reception area. She s miled 
tightly at Sadie, introducing herself as the director¡¯s assistant, Ms. Broadna x. ¡°I¡¯m so sorry that the director isn¡¯t here,¡±  
 
Ms. Broadna x said. ¡°If you¡¯ll just come this way, I¡¯m sure we can clea r up this whole 
matter.¡±  ¡°Is there asbestos in all CHA units?¡± a reporter 
shouted. ¡°Will the director meet with the parents?¡± 
¡°We¡¯re interested in the best possible outcome for the residents,¡± Ms. Broadnax shouted over her shoulder. We 
followed her into a la rge roo m where several gloo my offic ia ls were a lready seated around a conference table. 
Ms. Broadna x re marked on how cute the children we re and offe red everyone coffee and doughnuts. 
 
¡°We don¡¯t need doughnuts,¡± Linda said. ¡°We need answers.¡± 
And that was it. Without a word fro m me , the parents found out that no tests had been done and obtained a promise 
that testing would start by the end of the day. They negotiated a meet ing with the directo r, co llected a handful of 
business cards, and thanked Ms. Broadnax for her time . The date of the meeting was announced to the press before 
we cra mmed back into the elevator to meet our bus. Out on the street, Linda insisted that I treat everybody, includin g 
the bus driver, to cara me l popcorn. As the bus pulled away, I tried to conduct an evaluation, pointing out the 
importance of preparation, how everyone had worked as a team.  
 
¡°Did you see that woman¡¯s face when she saw the cameras?¡± 
¡°What about her acting all nice  to the kids? Just trying to cozy up to us so we wouldn¡¯t ask 
no questions.¡± ¡°Wasn¡¯t Sadie terrific? You d id us proud, Sadie.¡±  
¡°I got to call my  cousin to ma ke sure she gets her VCR set up. We gonna be on TV.¡±  
 
 
 
 
 
 
I tried to stop everybody from talking at once, but Mona tugged on my shirt. ¡° Give it up, Barac k. Here .¡± She 
handed me a bag of popcorn. ¡°Eat.¡±  
 
I took a seat beside her. Mr. Lucas hoisted the children up onto his lap for the view of Buckingham Fountain. As 
I  chewed  on  the  gooey  popcorn,  looking  out  at  the  lake,  calm  and  turquoise  now,  I  tried  to  recall  a  more  
contented mo ment. 
 
I changed as a result of that bus trip, in a fundamental way. It was the sort of change that¡¯s important not because it alters 
your concrete circumstances in s ome way (wealth, security, fame) but because it hints at what might be possible and 
therefore spurs you on, beyond the immediate exhilaration, beyond any subsequent disappointments, to retrieve that thing 
that you once, ever so briefly, held in your hand. That bus ride kept me going, I think. Maybe it still does. 
 
The publicity was nice, of course. The evening after we got back fro m the CHA office, Sadie¡¯s face was all over 
the television. The press, smelling blood, discovered that another South Side projec t contained pipes lined with 
rotting asbestos. Aldermen began calling for immediate hearings. La wyers called about a class -action suit. 
 
 
 
 
But it was away fro m a ll that, as we prepared for our meet ing with the CHA d irector, that I began to see something 
wonderful happening. The parents began talking about ideas for future ca mpaigns. Ne w parents got involved. The 
block-by-bloc k canvass we¡¯d planned earlier was put into effect, with Linda and her swollen belly waddling door-to-
door to collect comp laint forms; Mr. Lucas, unable to read the forms himself, e xpla ining to neighbors how to fill 
them out properly. Even those who¡¯d opposed our efforts b egan to come around: M rs. Reece agreed to cosponsor 
the event, and Reverend Johnson allowed some of his me mbers to ma ke an announcement at Sunday service. It was 
as though Sadie¡¯s small, honest step had broken into a reservoir of hope, allo wing people in A ltgeld to rec laim a 
power they had had all along. 
 
The meet ing was to be held in Our Lady¡¯s gymnasiu m, the only building in Altgeld that could accommodate the 
three hundred people we hoped would turn up. The leaders arrived an hour early, and we went over  our de mands one 
last time-that a panel of residents work with CHA to assure containment of asbestos, and that CHA establish a firm 
timetable fo r ma king repairs. As we d iscussed a few last-minute details, Henry, the ma intenance man, waved me over 
to the public address system. 
 
¡°What¡¯s the matter?¡± 
¡°System¡¯s dead. A short or something.¡± 
¡°So we don¡¯t have a microphone?¡± 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¡°Not  outta  here.  Gonna  have  to  make  do  with  this  thing  here.¡±   He  pointed  to a  solitary  amp lifier,  the  size  of  a 
small suitcase, with a  loose mic rophone that hung by a single, frayed cord. Sadie and Linda ca me  up beside me and 
stared down at the primitive bo x. 
 
¡° You¡¯re joking,¡± Linda said. 
 
I tapped on the mike. ¡° It¡¯ll be okay. You guys will just have to speak up.¡± Then, looking down at the a mp again, 
I said, ¡°Try not to let the director hog the microphone, though. He¡¯ll end up talking for hours. Just hold it up to 
him afte r you¡¯ve asked the questions. You know, like  Oprah.¡± 
 
¡°If nobody comes,¡± Sadie said, looking at her watch, ¡° we won¡¯t need no mike .¡±  
People ca me. Fro m all ac ross the Ga rdens, people came-senior c itizens, teenagers, tots. By seven o¡¯clock five 
hundred people had arrived; by seven-fifteen, seven hundred. TV crews began setting up cameras, and the local 
politic ians on hand asked us for a chance to warm up the crowd. Marty, who had come to watch the event, could 
barely contain himself. 
 
¡° You¡¯ve really got something here, Barac k. These people are ready to move.¡±  
There was just one problem: The d irector still hadn¡¯t arrived. Ms. Broadna x said he was caught in traffic , so we 
decided to go ahead with the first part of the agenda. By the time the pre limina ries we re over, it was almost eight. I 
could hear people starting to grumble, fanning themselves in the hot, airless gym. Near the door, I saw Marty trying 
to lead the crowd in a  chant. I pulled him aside. 
 
¡°What are you doing?¡± 
¡° You¡¯re losing people. You have to do something to keep them fired 
up.¡± ¡°Sit down, will you please.¡± 
 
 
 
 
I was about to cut our losses and go ahead with Ms. Broadnax when a  murmu r rose fro m the back of the gy m and the 
director wa lked through the door surrounded by a number of aides. He was a dapper blac k man of med iu m build, in his 
early fo rties. Stra ightening his tie, he grimly made his way to the front of the room.  
 
¡°Welcome,¡±  Sadie  said into the mike. ¡°We¡¯ve got a whole bunch of people who want to talk to you.¡±  
The crowd applauded; we heard a fe w catcalls. The TV lights switched on. 
 
 
¡°We¡¯re here tonight,¡± Sadie said, ¡°to talk about a proble m that threatens the health of our child ren. But before 
we talk about asbestos, we need to deal with proble ms we live with every day. Linda?¡± 
 
Sadie handed the microphone to Linda, who turned to the director and pointed to the stack of comp laint forms. ¡°Mr. 
Director. All o f us in Altgeld don¡¯t e xpect mirac les. But we do e xpect basic services. That¡¯s all, just the basics. 
 
Now these people here have gone out of their way  to fill out, rea l neat -like, all the things they keep asking the CHA to 
fix but don¡¯t never get fixed. So  our question is, will you agree here tonight,  in front of all these residents, to work 
with us to ma ke these repairs?¡± 
 
The next mo ments are blurry in my me mory. As I re me mber it , Linda leaned over to get the director¡¯s response, but 
when he reached for the microphone, Linda pulled it back.  
 
¡°A yes-or-no answer, please,¡± Linda said. The director said something about responding in his own fashion and again 
reached for the mike. Again, Linda pulled it back, only this time there was the slightest hint of mockery in the gesture, 
the move ment of a child who¡¯s goading a sibling with an ice-c rea m cone. I tried to wave at Linda to forget what I¡¯d 
said before and give up the microphone, but I was standing too far in the rear for her to see me . Meanwhile, the 
director had gotten his hand on the cord, and for a mo ment a struggle ensued between the distinguished offic ial and the 
pregnant young woman in stretch pants and blouse. Behind them, Sadie  stood motionless, her face shining, her eyes 
wide. The crowd, not clear on what was happening, began shouting, some at the director, others at Linda.  
 
Then¡­pandemoniu m. The director re leased his grip and headed for the exit. Like some  single-celled creature, people 
near the door lurched after him, and he broke into a near trot. I ran myself, and by the time I had fought my way 
outside, the director had secured himself in h is limousine while a swe ll of people surrounded the car, some pressing 
their faces against the tinted glass, others laughing, still others cursing, most just standing about in confusion. Slowly 
the limo lurched forward, an inch at a t ime, until a  path onto the road opened up and the car sped away, lu mp ing over 
the cratered street, running over a curb, vanishing from sight.  
 
I wa lked back towa rd the gymnasium in a  daze , against the current of people now going home. Near the door, a 
small c irc le was gathered around a young man in a bro wn leather jacket who m I recognized as an aide to the 
alderman. ¡°The whole thing was put together by Vrdolya k, see,¡± he was telling the group. ¡°You saw that white 
man egging the folks on. They just trying to ma ke Harold look bad.¡± 
 
A few feet away, I spotted Mrs. Reece and several of her lieutenants. ¡°See what you done!¡± she snapped at me. 
¡°This is what happens when you try and get these young folks involved. Emba rrassed the whole Gardens, on TV and 
everything. White folks seeing us act like  a bunch of niggers! Just like  they e xpect.¡± 
 
Inside, only a fe w of the parents re mained. Linda stood alone in one corner, sobbing. I ca me up and put my 
arm around her shoulder. 
 
¡° You okay?¡± 
 
 
 
 
¡°I¡¯m so embarrassed,¡± she said, gulping down a sob. ¡°I don¡¯t know what happened, Barac k. W ith 
all the people¡­see ms like I just always mess things up.¡± 
 
¡° You didn¡¯t mess up,¡± I said. ¡°If anybody messed up, it was me.¡±  I ca lled the others together into a circ le and tried 
to offer encouragement. The turnout was great, I said, wh ich  meant people we re  willing to get involved. Most of 
the residents would still support our effort. We would lea rn fro m our mistakes. 
 
¡°And the director sure knows who we are now,¡± Sh irley said. 
 
 
This last line dre w some  wea k laughter. Sadie  said she had to get home; I told the group that I could take care 
of cleaning up. As I watched Bernadette pick up Tyrone in one arm and carry h is slumbering we ight across the 
gymnasium floor, I fe lt my stomach constrict. Dr. Collie r tapped me  on the shoulder. 
 
¡°So who¡¯s gonna cheer you up?¡± she 
asked. I shook my head. 
¡° You take some chances, things are gonna blow once in a 
while.¡± ¡° But the looks on their faces¡­¡± 
 
 
¡°Don¡¯t worry,¡± Dr. Co llie r said. ¡°They¡¯re  tough. Not as tough as they sound -none of us are, including you. 
But they¡¯ll get over it. So mething like this is just part of growing up. And sometimes growing up hurts.¡± 
 
The fallout fro m the meeting could have been worse. Because we had run so late, only one TV station replayed the 
tug-of-war between Linda and the director. The mo rning paper noted the frustration residents felt with CHA¡¯s slow 
response to the asbestos problem, as we ll as the director¡¯s tardiness that evening. In fact, we  could cla im the meeting as 
a victory of sorts, for the following wee k men dressed in moon -suits and masks were seen all over the Ga rdens, sealing 
any asbestos that posed an immediate threat. CHA a lso announced that it had asked the U.S. Depart ment of Housing 
and Urban Develop ment for several million dollars in e mergency cleanup funds. 
 
Such concessions helped to lift the spirits of some of the parents, and after a few weeks of licking our wo unds, we 
started meeting again to make sure that CHA fo llo wed up on its commit ments. Still, in Altgeld at least, I couldn¡¯t 
shake the feeling that the window of possibility that had been pried open so briefly had sla mmed shut once again. 
Linda, Bernadette, Mr. Lucas-they would all continue to work with DCP, but only reluctantly, out of loyalty to me 
rather than to each other. Other residents who had joined us during the weeks leading up to the meeting dropped 
away. Mrs. Reece re fused to speak to us anymore, and wh ile  fe w people paid attention to her attacks on our methods 
and motives, the squabbling only served to reinforce the suspicion among residents that no amount of activism would 
alter their condition, e xcept maybe to bring trouble that they didn¡¯t nee d. 
 
A month or so after the in itia l c leanup, we met with HUD to lobby for CHA ¡¯s budget request. In addition to the 
eme rgency cleanup funds, CHA had asked the feds for over a billion dollars to ma ke basic repairs on projects all 
over the city. A tall, dour wh ite man fro m HUD went over the line ite ms. 
 
¡°Let me  be blunt,¡± he told us. ¡°CHA has no chance of getting even half the appropriation it¡¯s requested. You can 
have the asbestos removed. Or you can have new plumb ing and roofing where  it¡¯s needed. But you can¡¯t have both.¡± 
 
¡°So you¡¯re telling us that after all this, we  gonna be worse off than we was,¡± Bernadette said. 
¡°Well, not e xactly. But these are the budget priorities co ming out of Washington these days. I¡¯ m sorry.¡± 
 
 
 
 
 
Bernadette hoisted Tyrone up on her lap. ¡°Tell that to him.¡±  
Sadie didn¡¯t join us for that meeting. She had called me to say that she had decided to stop working with DCP. ¡°My 
husband doesn¡¯t think it¡¯s a good idea, me spending all this time instead of looking after my own family. He 
 
says that the publicity went to my head ¡­that I beca me prideful.¡±  
 
I suggested that as long as her family lived in the Ga rdens, she¡¯d have to stay involved. 
¡°Ain¡¯t nothing gonna change, Mr. Obama ,¡± she said. ¡°We just gonna concentrate on saving our money so we 
can move outta here as fast as we can.¡± 
 
 
 
CHAPTER THIRTEEN 
 
 
 
 
I ¡¯M TELLING YOU, MAN, the world  is a place.¡±  
¡°Say, the world is  a p lace, huh.¡± 
¡°That¡¯s just what I¡¯m saying.¡± 
We were walking back to the car after dinner in Hyde Pa rk, and Johnnie was in an e xpansive mood. He often got 
like this, especially after a good mea l and wine. The first time I met him, when he was still working with a downtown 
civic group, he had started expla ining the re lationship between jazz and Eastern re lig ion, then swerved into an 
analysis of black wo men¡¯s behinds, before coming to a stop on the subject of Federal Reserve Bank policy. In such 
mo ments his eyes would grow wide; his voice would speed up ; his round, bearded face would glo w with a ch ild like 
wonder. That was part of the reason I¡¯d hired Johnnie, I suppose, that curiosity of his, his appreciation of the absurd. 
 
He was a philosopher of the blues. 
 
¡°I¡¯ll give  you an e xa mp le,¡±  Johnnie was saying to me  now. ¡°The other day, I¡¯m headed fo r a  meeting up  in  the State 
of Illinois Building. You know how it¡¯s open in the middle, right¡­b ig atriu m and a ll that. Well, the guy I¡¯m supposed 
to be meeting with is late, so I¡¯m just standing there looking down  at the lobby fro m the twe lfth floor, checking out the 
architecture, when all of a sudden this body flies past me. A suicide.¡±  
 
¡° You didn¡¯t tell me about that-¡± 
 
 
¡° Yeah, we ll, shook me up pretty good. High up as I was, I could hear the body land like it was  right there ne xt to me. 
Terrible sound. Soon as it happened, these office wo rke rs rushed up to the guardrail to see what was going on. We¡¯re 
all looking down, and sure enough the body¡¯s lying there, all twisted and limp. People started screaming, covering  
their eyes. But the strange thing was, after people got through screaming, they¡¯d go back to the railing to get a second 
look. Then they¡¯d scream and cover their eyes all over again. Now why would they do that? Like , what do they expect 
the second time around? But see, fo lks are funny like that. We can¡¯t help ourselves with that mo rbid shit ¡­.  
 
¡°Anyway, the cops come, they rope things off and take the body away. Then the building cre w starts cleaning up. 
 
Nothing special, you know-just a broom and a mop. Sweeping up a life. Whole thing¡¯s cleaned up in maybe five 
minutes. Makes sense, I guess¡­. I mean, it¡¯s not like you need special equip ment or suits or something. But it starts me  
thinking, How¡¯s that gonna feel to be one of those janitors, mopping up somebody¡¯s re mains? So mebody¡¯s got to do it, 
right? But how you gonna feel that night eating dinner?¡± 
 
 
 
 
 
¡°Who was it that jumped?¡± 
¡°That¡¯s the other thing, Barac k!¡± Johnnie took a d rag fro m his cigarette and let the smo ke ro ll fro m his mouth. ¡°It was 
a young white girl, man, sixteen maybe, seventeen. One of these punk rock types, with blue ha ir and a ring through her 
nose. Afterward, I¡¯m wondering what she was thinking about while she was rid ing up the elevator. I mean, folks musta 
been standing right next to her on the way up. Maybe they looked her over, decided she was a frea k, and went back to 
thinking about their own business. You know, their pro motion, o r the Bu lls ga me, or whatever. And the whole time  this 
girl¡¯s just standing there next to them with all that pain inside her. Got to be a lot of pain, doc, ¡¯cause right before she 
ju mps, you figure she looks down and knows that shit is g onna hurt.¡± 
 
Johnnie stamped out his cigarette. ¡°So that¡¯s what I¡¯m saying, Barac k. Whole panorama o f life out there. Cra zy shit 
going on. You got to ask yourself, is this kinda stuff happening elsewhere? Is there any precedent for all this shit? 
You ever ask yourself that?¡± 
 
¡°The world¡¯s a place,¡± I repeated. 
¡°See there! It¡¯s serious, man.¡± 
 
 
We¡¯d almost reached Johnnie¡¯s car when we heard a s mall pop, co mpact and brief, like a  balloon bursting. We 
looked in the direction of the sound, and watched a young man appear fro m a round the corner diagonal to us. I don¡¯t 
clearly reca ll his features or what he wore , a lthough he cou ldn¡¯t have been older than fifteen. I just reme mbe r that he 
ran at a desperate pace, his sneakered feet silent against the sidewalk, h is lanky limbs pumping wildly, his chest jutting 
out as if strain ing for an imag inary tape. 
 
Johnnie dropped flat onto a s ma ll plot of grass in front of one of the apart ments, and I quickly fo llo wed suit. A fe w 
seconds later, two mo re boys came around the same corner, also running at full speed. One of the m, short, fattish, with 
pants that bunched around his ankles, was waving a s ma ll pistol. Without stopping to aim, he let out three quick shots 
in the direction of the first boy. Then, realizing that his target was out of range, he slowed to a walk, stuffing the 
weapon under his shirt. His co mpanion, skinny and big -eared, ca me  alongside. 
 
¡°Stupid motherfuc ker,¡±  the skinny boy said. He spat with satisfaction, and the two of them laughed to each 
other before continuing down the street, children again, their figures casting squat shadows on the asphalt. 
 
Another fall, another winter. I had recovered fro m the disappointments of the asbestos campaign, developed other 
issues and found other leaders. Johnnie¡¯s presence had helped relieve my workload, and our budget was stable; what 
I¡¯d lost in youthful enthusiasm I made up for in e xperience. And in fact, it may have been that growing fa miliarity with 
the landscape, the counsel of time, that gave me the sense that something diffe rent was going on with the children of 
the South Side that spring of 1987; that an invisib le line had been crossed, a blind and ugly corner turned.  
 
There was nothing definite I could po int to, no hard statistics. The drive -by shootings, the ambulance sirens, the night 
sounds of neighborhoods abandoned to drugs and gang war and phantom au tomobiles, where police or press rarely 
ventured until after the body was found on the pavement, blood spreading in a glistening, uneven pool-none of this 
was new. In p laces like A ltgeld, prison records had been passed down from father to son for more than  a generation; 
during my very first days in Chicago I had seen the knots of young men, fifteen or sixteen, hanging out on the corners 
of Michigan or Ha lsted, their hoods up, their sneakers unlaced, stomping the ground in a desultory rhythm during the  
 
 
 
 
colder months, stripped down to T-shirts in the summe r, answering their beepers on the corner pay phones: a knot that 
unraveled, soon to reform, whenever the police ca rs passed by in their barracuda silence. 
 
No, it was more  a change of atmosphere, like the electricity of an approaching storm. I fe lt it  when, driving ho me 
one evening, I saw four tall boys walking down a t ree-lined block idly snapping a row of young saplings that an older 
couple had just finished planting in front of their  house. I felt it whenever I looked into the eyes of the young men in 
wheelchairs that had started appearing on the streets that spring, boys crippled before their prime, their eyes without 
a trace of self-pity, eyes so composed, already so hardened, that they served to frighten rather than to inspire. 
 
That¡¯s what was new: the arrival of a  new equilib riu m between hope and fear; the sense, shared by adults and youth 
alike, that some, if not most, of our boys were slipping beyond rescue. Even life long South Siders like Johnnie noticed 
the change. ¡°I ain ¡¯t never seen it like  this, Barack,¡± he would tell me  one day as we sat in his apartment sipping beer. 
¡°I mean, things were tough when I was coming up, but there were limits. We¡¯d get high, get into fights. But out in 
public, at ho me, if an adult saw you getting loud or wild, they would say something. And most of us would listen, you 
know what I¡¯m saying? 
 
¡°Now, with the drugs, the guns -all that¡¯s disappeared. Don¡¯t take a whole lot of kids carry ing a gun. Just one or two. 
 
Somebody says something to one of ¡¯e m, and-pow!-kid wastes him. Fo lks hear stories like that, they just stop trying to 
talk to these young cats out here. We start generalizing about ¡¯e m just like the white fo lks do. We see ¡¯e m hanging out, 
we head the other way. After a while, even the good kid s tarts realizing ain ¡¯t nobody out here gonna look out for him.  
 
So he figures he¡¯s gonna have to look after h imself. Bottom line, you got twelve -year-o lds ma king their own 
damn ru les.¡± 
 
Johnnie took a sip of his beer, the foa m co llect ing on his mustache. ¡°I don¡¯t know, Ba rack. So met imes I¡¯m 
afraid o f ¡¯e m. You got to be afraid of somebody who just doesn¡¯t care. Don¡¯t matter how young they are.¡±  
 
After I was back in my own apart ment, I thought about what Johnnie had said. Was I afraid? I didn¡¯t thin k so¡­at least 
not in the way Johnnie had meant it. Wandering through Altgeld or other tough neighborhoods, my fea rs were a lways 
internal: the old fea rs of not belonging. The idea of physical assault just never occurred to me. Sa me  thing with the 
distinction Johnnie made between good kids and bad kids -the distinction didn¡¯t compute in my head. It see med based 
on a premise that defied my e xpe rience, an assumption that children could somehow set the terms of their o wn 
development. I thought about Bernadette¡¯s five-year-old son, scampering about the broken roads of Altgeld, between a 
sewage plant and a dump. Where did he sit along the spectrum of goodness? If he ended up in a gang or in ja il, would 
that prove his essence somehow, a wayward gene¡­or just the consequences of a ma lnourished world?  
 
And what about Kyle: How did one e xp lain what he was going through? I leaned back in my  chair, thinking about 
 
Ruby¡¯s son. He had just turned sixteen; the two years since my arrival had given him several inches, adde d bulk, 
and the shadow above his upper lip, first efforts at a mustache. He was still po lite to me , still willing to talk about 
the Bulls-this¡¯d be the year Jordan took ¡¯e m to the fina ls, he said. But he was usually gone whenever I stopped by, 
or on his way out with his friends. Some n ights, Ruby would call me  at home  just to talk about him, how she never 
knew where he was anymore, how his grades had continued to drop in school, how he hid things fro m her, the door 
to his room a lways closed. 
 
 
 
 
Don¡¯t worry, I would te ll her; I was a lot worse at Ky le¡¯s age. I don¡¯t think she believed that particular truth, but 
hearing the words seemed to ma ke her fee l better. One day I vo lunteered to sound Kyle out, inviting him to jo in me 
for a p ick-up basketball ga me at the Un iversity of Ch icago gym. He  was quiet most of the ride up to Hyde Pa rk, 
fending off questions with a grunt or a shrug. I asked him if he was still thinking about th e air force , and he shook his 
head; he¡¯d stay in Chicago, he said, find a job and get his own place. I asked him what had changed his mind. He said 
that the air force would never let a  blac k man fly a  plane.  
 
 
I looked at h im c rossly. ¡°Who told you that mess?¡± 
Kyle shrugged. ¡°Don¡¯t need somebody to tell me  that. Just is, that¡¯s all.¡±  
 
 
 
 
¡°Man, that¡¯s the wrong attitude. You can do whatever you want if you¡¯re willing to work for it.¡±  
Kyle s mirked and turned his head toward the window, his breath misting the glass. ¡°Yeah, we ll¡­ho w 
many blac k p ilots do you know?¡± 
 
The gym wasn¡¯t crowded when we a rrived, and we had to wa it only one ga me before we got onto the court. It had 
been at least six months since I¡¯d even seen a basketball, and the cigarettes had taken their toll. On the first play of the 
game, the man guarding me stripped the ball c lean out of my hands and I called a foul, causing the players on the 
sidelines to hoot with derision. By the second game I was wa lking across the half-court line, fee ling slightly dizzy. 
 
To spare myself further e mbarrassment, I decided to sit out the third game and watch Kyle p lay. His ga me wasn¡¯t 
bad, but he was guarding a brother a few years older than me, an orderly at the hospital-short but aggressive, and very 
quick. After a fe w p lays, it beca me c lear that the man had Kyle ¡¯s number. He scored three baskets in a row, then 
started talking the usual talk. 
 
¡° You can¡¯t do no better than that, boy? How you gonna let an old man like  me make  you look so bad?¡± 
Kyle d idn¡¯t answer, but the play between them beca me rough. The next t ime down the floor, as the man made 
his move for the basket, Kyle bu mped him hard. The man threw the ball at Kyle ¡¯s chest, then turned to one of his 
partners. ¡°You see that? This punk can¡¯t guard me-¡± 
 
Suddenly, without any warning, Ky le swung. His fist landed square on the man¡¯s jaw, dropping him to the floor. I ran 
onto  the  court  as  the  other  players  pulled  Kyle   away.  His  eyes  were  wide,  h is  voice  tre mb ling  as  he  watched  the 
orderly struggle to his feet and spit out a wad of blood. 
 
¡°I ain¡¯t no punk,¡± Kyle  muttered. And then again, ¡°I ain¡¯t no punk.¡±  
We were  luc ky; somebody had called  the security guard downstairs, but the orderly was too embarrassed to admit  to 
the incident. On the drive bac k, I gave Ky le a long lecture about keeping his cool, about violence, about responsibility. 
My words sounded trite, and Kyle  sat without answering, his eyes fixed on the road. When I was fin ished he turned to 
me  and said, ¡°Just don¡¯t tell my  mo mma , a ll right?¡± 
 
I thought that was a good sign. I said I wou ldn¡¯t tell Ruby what had happened so long as he did, and he grudgingly 
agreed. 
 
Kyle was a good kid; he still cared about something. Would that be enough to save him?  
 
 
The week after Johnnie¡¯s and my adventure in Hyde Park, I decided it was time to take on the public schools. 
 
 
 
 
It seemed like a natural issue for us. Segregation wasn¡¯t much of an issue anymore; whites had all but abandoned the 
system. Ne ither was overcrowding, at least in black neighborhood high schools; only half the incoming students 
bothered to stick around for graduation. Otherwise, Chicago¡¯s schools rema ined in a state of perpe tual crisis-annual 
budget shortfalls in the hundreds of millions; shortages of textbooks and toilet paper; a teachers¡¯ union that went out 
on strike at least once every two years; a bloated bureaucracy and an indifferent state legislature. The mo re I lea rn ed 
about the system, the more  convinced I became  that school reform was the only possible solution for the plight of the 
young men I saw on the street; that without stable fa milies, with no prospects for blue -colla r work that could support 
a fa mily o f their own, education was their last best hope. And so in April, in between working on other issues, I 
developed an action plan for the organization and started peddling it to my leadership. 
 
The response was underwhelming. 
 
Some  of it was a proble m of self-interest, constituencies misaligned. Older church me mbers told me  they had already 
raised their children; younger parents, like Angela and Mary, sent their children to Catholic schools. The biggest source 
of resistance was rarely talked about, though-namely, the uncomfortable fact that every one of our churches was filled 
with teachers, princ ipals, and district superintendents. Few o f these educators sent their own children to public schools; 
they knew too much for that. But they would defend the status quo with the same skill and vigor as their white 
counterparts of two decades before. There wasn¡¯t enough money to do the job right, they told me (wh ich was certain ly 
true). Efforts at reform-decentralizat ion, say, or cutbacks in the bureaucracy-were part of a  wh ite effort to wrest back 
control (not so true). As for the students, well, they were impossible. La zy. Unruly. Slow. Not the children¡¯s fault, 
maybe, but certain ly not the schools¡¯. There may not be any bad kids, Barac k, but there sure are a lot of bad parents. 
 
In my mind, these conversations came to serve as a symbol of the unspoken settlement we had made since the 1960s, 
a settlement that allowed ha lf o f our children to advance even as the other half fell further behin d. More than that, the 
conversations made me  angry; and so despite lukewa rm support fro m our board, Johnnie and I decided to go ahead 
and visit some of the area schools, hoping to drum up a constituency beyond the young parents of Altgeld.  
 
We started with Ky le¡¯s high school, the one in the area with the best reputation. It was a single build ing, re lative ly 
new but with a ca reless, impersonal fee l: bare concrete pilla rs, long stark corridors, windows that couldn¡¯t be opened 
and had already clouded, like the windows in a greenhouse. The principal, an attentive, personable man na med Dr. 
Lonnie King, said he was eager to work with co mmunity groups like ours. Then he mentioned that one of his school 
counselors, a Mr. Asante Moran, was trying to start a mentorship program fo r young men at the school and suggested 
that we might want to meet him. 
 
We followed Dr. King¡¯s directions to a small office toward the rear of the building. It was decorated with African themes: a 
map of the continent, posters of ancient Africa¡¯s kings and queens, a collection of drums and gourds and a kente-cloth wall 
hanging. Behind the desk sat a tall and imposing man with a handlebar mustache and a prominent jaw. He was dressed in an 
African print, an elephant-hair bracelet around one thick wrist. He seemed a bit put off at first-he had a stack of SAT practice 
exams on his desk, and I sensed that Dr. King¡¯s call had been an unwelcome interruption. 
 
Nevertheless, he offered us seats, told us to call him Asante, and as our interest became more apparent, began to 
e xpla in some of his ideas. 
 
 
 
 
¡°The first thing you have to realize,¡± he said, looking at Johnnie and me  in turn, ¡° is that the public school system is 
not about educating black children. Never has been. Inner-city schools are about social control. Pe riod. They¡¯re 
operated as holding pens -miniature ja ils, really. It¡¯s only when black children start breaking out of their pens and 
bothering white people that society even pays any attention to the issue of whether these children are be ing educated. 
 
¡°Just think about what a real education for these children would involve. It wou ld start by giving a child an understanding 
of himself, his world, his culture, his community. That¡¯s the starting point of any educational pr ocess. 
 
That¡¯s what ma kes a child hungry to learn-the pro mise of being part of something, o f mastering his enviro n ment. But 
for the black child, everything¡¯s turned upside down. Fro m day one, what¡¯s he lea rning about? Someone else¡¯s 
history. Someone else¡¯s culture. Not only that, this culture he¡¯s supposed to learn is the same culture that¡¯s 
systematically re jected him, denied his humanity.¡±  
 
Asante leaned back in his chair, his hands folded across his belly. ¡°Is it any wonder that the black child  loses interest 
in lea rning? Of course not. It¡¯s worst for the boys. At least the girls have older wo men to ta lk to, the e xa mple  of 
motherhood. But the boys have nothing. Half of the m don¡¯t even know their own fathers. There¡¯s nobody to guide them 
through the process of becoming a man ¡­to e xpla in to them the meaning of manhood. And that¡¯s a recipe fo r disaster. 
 
Because in every society, young men are  going to have violent tendencies. Either those tendencies are directed and 
disciplined in creative pursuits or those tendencies destroy the young men, or t he society, or both. 
 
¡°So that¡¯s what we¡¯re dea ling with here. Where I can, I try to fill the void. I e xpose students to African history, 
geography, artistic traditions. I t ry to give them a diffe rent values orientation -something to counteract the materia lis m 
and individualis m and instant gratificat ion that¡¯s fed to them the other fifteen hours of their day. I teach them that  
 
Africans are a co mmunal people. That Africans respect their e lders. So me of my European colleagues feel threatened 
by this, but I tell the m it¡¯s not about denigrating other cultures. It¡¯s about giving these young people a base for 
themselves. Unless they¡¯re rooted in their own tradit ions, they won¡¯t ever be able to appreciate what other cultures have 
to offer-¡± 
 
There was a knock on the door, and a gangly young man peeked into the office. Asante apologized; he had another 
appointment but would be happy to meet with us again to discuss possible youth programs for the area. Walking 
Johnnie and me to the door, Asante asked me about my name, and I told him about my background. 
 
¡°I thought so!¡± Asante smiled. ¡° You know, that¡¯s where I went for my  first trip to the continent. Kenya. Fifteen years 
ago, but I re me mber that trip like it was yesterday. Changed my life forever. The people were so we lco ming. And the 
land-I¡¯d never seen anything so beautiful. It really fe lt like I had  co me ho me.¡± His face  glowed with the me mo ry. 
¡°When was the last time  you were bac k?¡± 
 
I hesitated. ¡°Actually, I¡¯ve never been there.¡±  
 
Asante looked mo mentarily confused. ¡°Well¡­¡± he said after a  pause, ¡°I¡¯m sure that when you do make  the trip, 
it¡¯ll change your life , too.¡± With that, he shook our hands, waved in the young man wa it ing in the hall, and shut the 
door behind him. 
 
Johnnie and I were qu iet for most of the ride back to our office . We hit a patch of tra ffic, and Johnnie turned 
and said, ¡°Can I as k you something, Barac k?¡±  
 
¡°Sure.¡± 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¡°Why haven¡¯t you ever gone to Kenya?¡± 
¡°I don¡¯t know. Maybe I¡¯m scared of what I¡¯ll find out.¡± 
¡°Huh.¡± Johnnie lit a c igarette and rolled down the window to let out the smoke. ¡° It¡¯s funny,¡± he said, ¡°how listening 
to Asante back there made me th ink about my old man. I mean, it¡¯s not like my o ld man is real educated or nothing. 
He doesn¡¯t know anything about Africa. After my mother d ied, he had to raise me and my brothers on his own. Drove 
a delivery truc k fo r Sp iegel¡¯s for twenty years. They laid h im o ff before  his pension vested, so he¡¯s still working -for 
another company, but doing the same thing every day . Lift ing other people¡¯s furniture. 
 
¡°Never seemed like  he really enjoyed life, you know what I mean? On weekends, he¡¯d just hang around the house, 
and some of my uncles would co me over and they¡¯d drink and listen to music. They¡¯d co mpla in about what their  
bosses had done to ¡¯em this wee k. The Man did th is. The Man did that. But if one of ¡¯e m actually started talking 
about doing something different, or had a new idea, the rest of ¡¯e m would just tear the guy up. ¡®How¡¯s some no -
¡¯count nigger like you gonna start himself a business?¡¯ one of ¡¯em¡¯d say. And somebody else¡¯d say, ¡®Take  that glass 
away fro m Jimmy -that wine done gone to his head.¡¯ They¡¯d all be laughing, but I could tell they weren¡¯t laughing 
inside. So metimes, if I was around, my uncles¡¯d start talking about me. ¡®Hey, boy, that sure is a knobby head you 
got.¡¯ ¡®Hey, boy, you starting to sound just like  a white man, with all the m b ig words.¡¯¡±  
 
Johnnie blew a stream of smoke into the hazy air. ¡°When I was in high school, I got to feeling ashamed of him. My old 
man, I mean. Working like a dog. Sitting there, getting drunk with his brothers. I swore I¡¯d never end up like that. 
 
But you know, when I thought about it later, I realized my o ld man never laughed when I talked about wanting to go 
to college. I mean, he never said anything one way or the other, but he always made sure me and my b rother got up for 
school, that we didn¡¯t have to work, that we had a little walking-around money. The day I graduated, I re me mber he 
showed up in a jac ket and tie, and he just shook my hand. That¡¯s all¡­just shook my hand, then went back to work¡­.¡±  
 
Johnnie stopped talking; the traffic c leared. I started thinking about those posters back in Asante¡¯s office-posters of 
Nefert iti, rega l and dark-hued in her golden throne; and Shaka Zulu, fie rce and proud in his leopard -skin tunic-and then 
further back to that day years ago, before my father ca me for h is visit to Ha wa ii, when I had gone to the library in 
search of my o wn magic kingdom, my own g lorious birthright. I wondered how much difference those posters would 
ma ke to the boy we had just left in Asante¡¯s office. Probably not as much as Asante himself, I thought. A man willing 
to listen. A hand placed on a young man¡¯s shoulders. 
 
¡°He was there,¡± I said to 
Johnnie. ¡°Who?¡± 
¡° Your father. He was there for you.¡±  
Johnnie scratched his arm. ¡° Yeah, Ba rack. I guess he 
was.¡± ¡° You ever tell h im that?¡± 
 
 
 
¡°Naw. We¡¯re not rea l good at talking.¡± Johnnie looked out the window, then turned to me. ¡°Maybe I should though, 
huh.¡± 
 
¡° Yeah, John,¡± I said, nodding. ¡°Maybe you should.¡± 
 
 
 
 
Over the ne xt two months, Asante and Dr. Collier he lped us develop a proposal for a youth counseling network, 
something to provide at-risk teenagers with mentoring and tutorial services and to involve parents in a long -term 
planning process for reform. It was an e xc iting pro ject, but my mind was elsewhere. When the proposal was finished, I 
told Johnnie that I¡¯d be gone for a few days but that he should go ahead with some of the meet ings we¡¯d scheduled, to 
start lining up broader support. 
 
¡°Where¡¯re you going?¡± he 
asked me. ¡°To see my brother.¡± 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¡°I didn¡¯t know you had a brother.¡± 
¡°I haven¡¯t had one that long.¡± 
The next mo rning, I fle w down to Washington, D.C., where  my brother Roy now lived. We had first spoken to each 
other during Auma¡¯s visit to Ch icago; she had told me th en that Roy had married an A merican Peace Corps worker 
and had moved to the States. One day we had called him up just to say hello. He had seemed happy to hear fro m us, his 
voice deep and unruffled, as if we had talked only yesterday. His job, h is wife, his new life in A merica-everything was 
 
¡°lovely,¡± he said. The word rolled out of him slowly, the syllables drawn out. ¡°Looove-leee.¡± A visit from me would be 
¡°fan-taaas-tic.¡± Staying with him and his wife would be ¡°nooo prooob-lem.¡± After we got off the phone, I had told 
 
Auma that he sounded well. She looked at me doubtfully.  
 
¡° Yah, you never know with Roy,¡± she had said. ¡°He doesn¡¯t always show his true feelings. He¡¯s like the Old 
Man in that way. In fact, although they didn¡¯t get along, he really re minds me of the Old Man in many ways. At 
least that¡¯s how he was in Na irob i. I haven¡¯t seen him since David¡¯s funera l, though, so maybe ma rriage has 
settled him down.¡± She didn¡¯t say much more than that; I should get to know him fo r myself, she said. And so Roy 
and I had arranged a visit; I would fly to D.C. for the long wee kend, we  would see the sights, it would be a 
wonderful t ime. On ly now, as I searched the emptying gate at National, Roy was nowhere to be found. I ca lled h is 
house and he answered, sounding apologetic. 
 
¡°Listen, brother-you think maybe you can stay in a hotel tonight?¡± 
¡°Why? Is something wrong?¡± 
¡°Nothing serious. It¡¯s just, well, me  and the wife, we had a little argu ment. So having you here tonight might not be 
so good, you understand?¡± 
 
¡°Sure. I-¡± 
¡° You call me when you find a hotel, o kay? We¡¯ll meet tonight and have dinner. I¡¯ll p ick you up at eight.¡±  
I checked into the cheapest room I could find and wa ited. At nine, I heard a knock. When I opened the door, I found 
a big man standing there with his hands in his pockets, an even -toothed grin breaking across his ebony face. 
 
¡°Hey, brother,¡± he said. ¡° How¡¯s life?¡± 
In the pictures I had of Roy, he was slender, d ressed in African  print, with an  Afro, a  goatee, a mustache. The man 
who e mbraced me now was much heavier, over t wo hundred pounds, I guessed, the flesh on his cheeks pressing out 
beneath a thick pa ir of g lass es. The goatee was gone; the African shirt had been replaced by a gray sports coat, white 
shirt, and tie. Au ma  had been right, though; his resemb lance to the Old  Man was unnerving. Looking at my  brother, 
I fe lt as if I we re ten years old again. 
 
 
 
 
 
¡° You¡¯ve gained some we ight,¡± I said as we wa lked to his car.  
Roy looked down at h is generous belly and gave it a pat. ¡° Eh, it¡¯s this fast food, man. It¡¯s everywhere. Mc Donald¡¯s. 
Burger King. You don¡¯t even have to get out of the car to have these things. Two all -beef patties, special sauce, lettuce, 
cheese. The Double Whopper with cheese.¡± He shook his head. ¡°They tell me  I can have it  right away. My way!  
 
Fantastic!¡± 
 
He threw back his head to laugh, a mag ical, in ward sound that made his whole  body shake, as if he couldn¡¯t get over 
the wonders this new life had to offe r. It was infectious, his laughter-although I wasn¡¯t laughing as we made our way to 
dinner. His Toyota was too small for h is bulk-he looked like a  kid in a carn ival bu mper ca r-and it d idn¡¯t seem as if 
he¡¯d yet mastered a stick shift or the rules of the road, including the speed limit. Twice we a lmost collided with 
oncoming cars; once, at a turn, we ca reened over a high curb. 
 
¡° You always drive this way?¡± I shouted over the music blasting out of his tape deck. 
Roy smiled, shifting into fifth. ¡°I¡¯m not so good, eh? Mary, my wife, she¡¯s always comp lain ing, too. 
Especially since the accident¡­¡±  
 
¡°What accident?¡± 
¡°Ah, it was nothing. You see I¡¯m still here. Alive and breathing!¡± And again he laughed and shook his head, as if the 
car worked independently of him, as if our safe arriva l would be yet one more  e xa mp le of God¡¯s a mple  blessings. The 
restaurant was Mexican, beside a ma rina, and we chose a table with a vie w out over the water. I ordered a  beer,  
 
Roy a ma rgarita, and for a while we made sma ll talk about my work and his accounting job at a large mo rtgage 
finance co mpany. He ate with gusto, drank a second margarita; he laughed and joked about his adventures in America. 
But as the mea l wore on, the effo rt he was ma king began to show. Eventually, I ca me a round to asking him why his 
wife hadn¡¯t jo ined us. His smile evaporated. 
 
¡°Ah, I think we¡¯re getting divorced,¡± he 
said. ¡°I¡¯m sorry.¡± 
¡°She says she¡¯s tired of me staying out late. She says I drink too  much. She says I¡¯m beco ming just like the Old 
Man.¡± ¡°What do you think?¡± 
¡°What do I think?¡± He  lo wered h is head, then looked at me sombe rly, the fla me  of the tea candles dancing like  tiny 
bonfires across the lenses of his glasses. ¡°The truth is,¡± he said,  leaning his we ight forward, ¡°I don¡¯t thin k I rea lly 
like myself. And I b la me the Old Man for this.¡±  
 
For the next hour, he recounted all the hard times that Auma had spoken of-of being yanked away from his mother and 
everything familiar; the Old Man¡¯s sudden descent into poverty; the arguments and breakdown and eventual flight. He told 
me about his life after leaving our father¡¯s house; how, bouncing from relative to relative, he had gained admission to the 
University of Nairobi, then secured a job with a local accounting firm after graduation; how he had taught himself the 
discipline of work, always arriving at his job early and completing his tasks no matter how late he was out the night before. 
Listening to him, I felt the same admiration that I¡¯d felt when listening to Auma talk about her life, the resilience they had 
both displayed, the same stubborn strength that had lifted them out of bad circumstances. Except in Auma I had also sensed a 
willingness to put the past behind her, a capacity to somehow forgive, if not 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
necessarily forget. Roy¡¯s me mories of the Old Man seemed more  immediate, more taunting; for him the past rema ined 
an open sore. 
 
¡°Nothing was ever good enough for him,¡± he told me as the busboy took our plates away. ¡°He was smart, and he 
couldn¡¯t ever let you forget. If you came  home  with the second best grades in the class, he would ask why you 
weren¡¯t first. ¡®You are  an Oba ma,¡¯ he  would say. ¡®You should be the best.¡¯ He would rea lly be lieve this. And then I 
would see him drunk, with no money, living like a  beggar. I would ask myself, How can someone so smart fall so 
badly? It made no sense to me. No sense. 
 
¡°Even after I was living on my own, even after his death, I would try to figure out this puzzle. It was as if I couldn¡¯t 
escape him. I re me mber we had to take h is body to Alego for the funeral, and as the eldest son, I was responsible for 
ma king the arrangements. The government wanted a Christian burial. The fa mily wanted a Muslim burial. People ca me 
to Home  Square fro m every where, and we  had to mourn h im according to Luo tradit ion, burning a log for three days, 
listening to people cry and moan. Half these people, I didn¡¯t even kno w who they were . They wanted food. They 
wanted beer. So me people whispered that the Old Man had been poisoned, that I must take revenge. So me people stole 
things from the house. Then our relatives began to fight about the Old Man¡¯s inheritance. The Old Man ¡¯s last girlfriend, 
the mother of our baby brother, George-she wanted everything. So me people, like our Aunt Sarah, sided with her.  
 
Others lined up with my mu m¡¯s side of the fa mily. I¡¯m te lling you, it was cra zy! Everything seemed to be going wrong.  
 
¡°After the funeral was over, I d idn¡¯t want to be with anyone. The only person I trusted was David, our younger brother. 
 
That  guy,  let  me  te ll  you,  he  was  okay.  He  looked  like  you  a  little  bit,  only  younger¡­fifteen,  sixteen.  His  mother, 
Ruth, had tried to ra ise him like an  A merican. But David, he  rebelled. He  loved everybody, you see. He ran a way fro m 
home and came to live with  me.  I told him he should go home, but he refused. He didn¡¯t want to be an American, he  
said. He was an African. He was an Oba ma. 
 
¡°When David died, that was it for me. I was sure our whole fa mily was cursed. I started drinking, fighting -I didn¡¯t 
care. I figured if the Old Man could die, if David could die , that I would have to die, too. So met imes I wonder what 
would have happened if I had stayed in Kenya. As it was, there was Nancy, this A merican girl I had been seeing. 
She¡¯d returned to the States, so one day I just called her and said I wanted to come. When she said yes, I bought a 
ticket and caught the next plane out. I d idn¡¯t pack, or tell my o ffice, or say goodbye to anyone, or anything. 
 
¡°I thought I could start over, you see. But now I know you can never start over. Not really. You think you have control, 
but you are like a fly in somebody else¡¯s web. Sometimes I think that¡¯s why I like accounting. All day, you are only 
dealing with numbers. You add them, multiply them, and if you are careful, you will always have a solution. 
 
There¡¯s a sequence there. An order. With numbers, you can have control¡­.¡±  
 
Roy took another sip from his drink, and suddenly his speech slowed, as if he¡¯d dropped deep into another place, as if our 
father  had  taken possession  of him.  ¡°I  am  the  oldest, you see.  In  Luo  tradition,  I am  now head  of the household.  I am 
responsible for you, and for Auma, and for all the younger boys. It¡¯s my responsibility to set things right. To pay the boys¡¯ 
school fees. To see that Auma is properly married. To build a proper house and bring the family together.¡± 
 
I reached across the table and touched his hand. ¡°You don¡¯t have to do it alone, brother,¡± I said. ¡°We can 
share the load.¡± 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
But it was as if he hadn¡¯t heard me. He  just stared out the window, and then, as if snapping out of a trance, he 
waved the waitress over. 
 
¡° You want another drink?¡±  
¡°Why don¡¯t we just get the check?¡± 
Roy looked at me  and smiled. ¡°I can te ll you worry too much, Barac k. That¡¯s my proble m, as we ll. I think we  need to 
learn to go with the flo w. Isn¡¯t that what you say in America? Just go with the flow.¡­¡±  Roy laughed again, loud 
enough for the people at the next table to turn around. Only the mag ic was gone out of it now; it soun ded hollow, as if 
it we re traveling across a vast, empty distance. 
 
I caught a flight out the next day-Roy needed to spend some time  with his wife , and I d idn¡¯t have the money for 
another night at the hotel. We had breakfast together, and in the mo rning light he seemed in better spirits. At the airport 
gate, we shook hands and hugged, and he promised to come v isit me once things had settled down. The entire flight 
back to Ch icago, though, and through the rest of the weekend, I couldn¡¯t rid myself of the sense that Roy was in danger 
somehow, that old demons were  driv ing him toward an abyss, and that if only I was a better brother, my intervention 
would prevent his fall. 
 
Roy was still on my mind when Johnnie walked into my office  late Monday afternoon. 
¡° You¡¯re back early,¡± Johnnie said. ¡°Ho w was your trip?¡± 
¡°It was good. Good to see my brother.¡± I nodded, tapping on the edge of my desk. ¡° So what happened while 
I was gone?¡± 
 
Johnnie dropped into a chair. ¡°Well,¡± he said, ¡° we met with the state senator. He co mmitted to introducing a bill to get 
funding for a pilot progra m. Maybe not the whole half million, but enough.¡± 
 
¡°That¡¯s terrific. How about the high school princ ipals?¡± 
¡°Just got back fro m a meeting with Dr. King, the princ ipal at Asante¡¯s school. The rest of ¡¯e m haven¡¯t returned my 
calls.¡± 
 
¡°That¡¯s all right. What did Dr. King have to say?¡± 
¡°Oh, he was all s miles,¡± Johnnie said. ¡°Sa id he rea lly liked the proposal. He  got real e xc ited when he heard 
we  might  get  funding.  Said  he¡¯d  encourage  the  other  principals  to  work  with  us  and  that  we¡¯d  have his  full 
support. ¡®Nothing¡¯s more  important than saving our youth,¡¯ he said.¡± 
 
¡°Sounds good.¡± 
¡°Right. Sounds good. So then, I¡¯m about to walk out of his office when suddenly he gives me this.¡± Johnnie reached into 
his briefcase, pulled out a piece of paper, and handed it to me. I read over a few lines before handing it back. 
 
¡°A r&#233;sum&#233;?¡±  
¡°Not just any r&#233;sum&# 233;, Ba rack. His wife ¡¯s r&#233;sum&# 233;. See ms she¡¯s kinda bored around the 
house, see, and Dr. King thinks she¡¯d ma ke an ¡®e xce llent¡¯ director for our progra m. No pressure, you understand. 
 
Just once the money is allocated, some consideration, you know what I 
mean.¡± ¡° He gave you his wife¡¯s r&#233;sum&#233;-¡± 
 
 
 
 
¡°Not just his wife¡¯s r&# 233;sum&# 233;.¡± Johnnie reached into his briefcase and pulled out another piece 
of paper, wav ing it in the air. ¡° Got h is daughter¡¯s, too! Tells me she¡¯d ma ke an ¡®e xce llent¡¯ counselor-¡± 
 
¡°Naw-¡± 
 
 
 
¡°I¡¯m telling you, Barack, he had the whole thing figured out. And you know what? The whole t ime we¡¯re talking, he¡¯s 
not batting an eye. Acting like what he¡¯s doing is the most natural thing in the world. It was un believable.¡± Johnnie 
shook his head, then suddenly shouted out like a  preacher. ¡° Yessuh! Doctah Lonnie King! No w there¡¯s a brother with 
some nerve! An enterprising brother! Progra m hasn¡¯t even started yet, he¡¯s already thinking ahead.¡±  
 
I started to laugh. 
¡°He don¡¯t just want one job! He gotta have two! Go in to talk about some kids, he gonna hand you his whole goddamn 
fa mily¡¯s r&#233;sum&#233; ¡­.¡±  
 
I shouted out, catching the spirit. ¡°Doctah Lonnie King!¡±  
¡° Yessuh! Doctah Lonnie King!¡± Johnnie started to g iggle, wh ich made me  laugh even harder, until soon we were 
doubled over in loud guffaws, catching our breath only long enough to repeat that name again -¡° Doctah Lonnie King!¡±-
as if it now contained the most obvious truth, the most basic ele ment in an e le men tal world. We laughed until our faces 
were hot and our sides hurt, until tears came to our eyes, until we felt e mpt ied out and couldn¡¯t laugh anymore, and 
decided to take the rest of the afternoon off and go find ourselves a beer. 
 
That night, well past midnight, a ca r pulls up in front of my apart ment build ing carrying a t roop of teenage boys and a 
set of stereo speakers so loud that the floor of my  apart ment begins to shake. I¡¯ve learned to ignore such disturbances -
where e lse do they have to go? I say to myself. But on this particular evening I have someone staying over; I know that 
my  neighbors next door have just brought home their newborn child; and so I pull on some  shorts and head downstairs 
for a chat with our nighttime v isitors. As I approach the car, the voices stop, the heads within all turn my  way.  
 
¡°Listen, people are trying to sleep around here. Why don¡¯t y¡¯all take it somep lace else.¡±  
 
The four boys inside say nothing, don¡¯t even move. The wind wipes away my drowsiness, and I feel suddenly 
e xposed, standing in a pair of shorts on the sidewalk in the middle o f the night. I can¡¯t see the faces inside the car; it¡¯s 
too dark to know how o ld they are, whether they¡¯re sober or drunk, good boys or bad. One of the m could be Ky le.  On 
e of them could be Roy. One of them could be Johnnie. 
 
One of the m could be me . Standing there, I try to re me mbe r the days when I would have been sitting in a car like 
that, full of inarticulate resentments and desperate to prove my place in the world. The feelings of righteous anger as I 
shout at Gra mps for some forgotten reason. The blood rush of a high school brawl. The swagger that carries me  into a 
classroom drunk or h igh, knowing that my teachers will sme ll beer or reefe r on my breath, just daring  them to say 
something. I start picturing myself through the eyes of these boys, a figure  of rando m authority, and know the 
calculations they might now be ma king, that if one of them can¡¯t take me out, the four of the m certa inly can.  
 
That knotted, howling assertion of self-as I try to pierce the darkness and read the shadowed faces inside the car, I¡¯m 
thinking that while these boys may be weaker or stronger than I was at their age, the only difference that matters is this: T he 
world in which I spent those difficult times was far more forgiving. These boys have no margin for error; if they carry guns, 
those guns will offer them no protection from that truth. And it is that truth, a truth that they surely sense 
 
 
 
 
but can¡¯t admit and, in fact, must refuse if they are to wake up tomorrow, that has forced them, or others like them, 
eventually to shut off access to any empathy they may once have felt. Their unruly maleness will not be contained, as mine 
finally was, by a sense of sadness at an older man¡¯s injured pride. Their anger won¡¯t be checked by the intimation of danger 
that would come upon me whenever I split another boy¡¯s lip or raced down a highway with gin clouding my head. As I stand 
there, I find myself thinking that somewhere down the line both guilt and empathy speak to our own buried sense that an 
order of some sort is required, not the social order that exists, necessarily, but something more fundamental and more 
demanding; a sense, further, that one has a stake in this order, a wish that, no matter how fluid this order sometimes appears, 
it will not drain out of the universe. I suspect that these boys will have to search long and hard for that order-indeed, any 
order that includes them as more than objects of fear or derision. And that suspicion terrifies me, for I now have a place in 
the world, a job, a schedule to follow. As much as I might tell myself otherwise, we are breaking apart, these boys and me, 
into different tribes, speaking a different tongue, living by a different code. 
 
The engine starts, and the car screeches away. I turn back toward my  apart ment knowing that I¡¯ve been both stupid 
and lucky, knowing that I a m afra id afte r a ll. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER FOURTEEN 
 
 
I T WAS A N OLD BUILDING, in one of the South Side¡¯s older neighborhoods, still sound but badly in need of 
tuck-pointing and perhaps a new roof. The sanctuary was dark, with several pews that had cracked and splintered; 
the reddish carpet gave off a musty, damp odor; and at various points the floorboards beneath bucked and dipped like 
welts in a meadow. Reverend Ph ilips¡¯s office had this same ch ipped, worn quality, lit only by an antique desk la mp 
that cast the room in a  dull, a mber glow. And Reverend Ph ilip s himself-he was old. W ith the window shades drawn, 
surrounded by stacks of dusty old books, he seemed now to be receding into the wall, as still as a portrait , only his 
snow-white hair clea rly v isible, his voice sonorous and disembodied, like the voice of a  drea m. 
 
We had been talking for c lose to an hour, mostly about the church. Not his church so much as the church, the 
historically b lack church, the church as an institution, the church as an idea. He was an erudite man and began our 
conversation with a history of slave relig ion, telling me  about the Africans who, newly landed on hostile shores, had sat 
circ led around a fire mixing newfound myths with ancient rhythms, their songs becoming a vessel for those most 
radical of ideas-survival, and freedo m, and hope. The reverend went on to recall the Southern church of his own youth, 
a small, wh itewashed wooden place, he said, built with sweat and pennies saved from share -cropping, where on bright, 
hot Sunday morn ings all the quiet terror and open wounds of the week dra ined away in tears and shouts of gratitude; 
the clapping, waving, fanning hands reddening the embers of those same stubborn ideas -survival, and freedom, and 
hope. He discussed Martin Luther King¡¯s visit to Chicago and the jealousy he had witnessed  among some of King¡¯s 
fellow min isters, their fea r of be ing usurped; and the emergence of the Muslims, whose anger Reverend Philips 
understood: It was his own anger, he said, an anger that he didn¡¯t e xpect he would ever entire ly escape but that through 
prayer he had learned to control-and that he had tried not to pass down to his children.  
 
 
 
 
Now he was e xpla ining the history of churches in Chicago. There were  thousands of them, and it  seemed as if he 
knew the m a ll: the tiny storefronts and the large stone edifices; the high -yella congregations that sat stiff as cadets as 
they sang from their stern hymnals, and the charis matics who shook as their bodies expelled God¡¯s unintellig ible 
tongue. Most of the larger churches in Chicago had been a blend of these two forms, Reverend Philips e xpla ined, an 
e xa mple  of segregation¡¯s hidden blessings, the way it forced the la wyer and the doctor to live and worship right ne xt to 
the ma id and the laborer. Like a great pu mping heart, the church had circu lated goods, information, va lues, and ideas 
back and forth and back again, between rich and poor, lea rned and unlearned, sinner and saved. 
 
He wasn¡¯t sure, he said, how much longer his church would continu e to serve that function. Most of his better -off 
me mbe rs had moved away to tidie r neighborhoods, suburban life. They still drove back every Sunday, out of loyalty 
or habit. But the nature of their involvement had changed. They hesitated to volunteer for a nything-a tutoring 
program, a ho me visitation-that might keep them in the c ity after dark. They wanted more  security around the church, 
a fenced-in parking lot to protect their cars. Reverend Ph ilips e xpected that once he passed on, many of those me mbers 
would stop coming back. They would start new churches, tidy like their new streets. He feared that the lin k to the past 
would be finally broken, that the child ren would no longer retain the me mory o f that first circ le, a round a fire¡­.  
 
His voice began to trail off; I felt he was getting tired. I asked him for introductions to other pastors who might be 
interested in organizing, and he mentioned a few na mes -there was a dynamic  young pastor, he said, a Reverend 
Jere miah Wright, Jr., pastor of Trin ity United Church of Christ, who might be worth talking to; his message seemed to 
appeal to young people like me. Reverend Philips gave me his number, and as I got up to leave, I said, ¡° If we could 
bring just fifty churches together, we might be able to reverse some of the trends you¡¯ve been talking about.¡± 
 
Reverend Philips nodded and said, ¡° You may be right, Mr. Oba ma. You have some interesting ideas. But you see, 
the churches around here are used to doing things their own way. So met imes, the cong regations even more than the 
pastors.¡± He opened the door for me, then paused. ¡°By the way, what church do you belong to?¡± 
 
¡°I¡­I attend different services.¡± 
¡°But you¡¯re not a me mber 
anywhere?¡± ¡°Still searching, I guess.¡± 
 
 
¡°Well, I can understand that. It  might help your mission if you had a church home, though. It doesn¡¯t matter 
where, really. What you¡¯re asking fro m pastors requires us to set aside some of our mo re priestly concerns in 
favor of prophecy. That requires a good deal of fa ith on our part. It  ma kes us want to know just where you¡¯re 
getting yours from. Fa ith, that is.¡±  
 
Outside, I put on my sunglasses and walked past a group of older men who had set out their lawn chairs on the sidewalk for 
a game of bid whist. It was a gorgeous day, s eventy-five in late September. Instead of driving straight to my next 
appointment, I decided to linger, letting my legs hang out the open car door, watching the old men play their game. They 
didn¡¯t talk much, these men. They reminded me of the men Gramps used to play bridge with-the same thick, stiff hands; the 
same thin, natty socks and improbably slender shoes; the same beads of sweat along the folds of their necks, just beneath 
their flat caps. I tried to remember the names of those men back in Hawaii, what they had done for a living, wondering what 
residue of themselves they¡¯d left in me. They had been mysteries to me then, those old 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
black men; that mystery was part of what had brought me to Ch icago. And now, now that I was leaving 
Chicago, I wondered if I understood them any better than before. 
 
I hadn¡¯t told anyone except Johnnie about my decision. I figured there would be time for an announcement later; I 
wouldn¡¯t even hear back fro m the la w schools until January. Our new youth program would be up and running by then; 
 
I would have ra ised next year¡¯s budget, hopefully brought in a fe w more  churches. I had told Johnnie only because I 
needed to know whether he¡¯d be willing to stay on and take my place as lead organize r-and maybe, too, because he 
was my friend and I needed to exp lain myself. Except Johnnie hadn¡¯t seen the need for e xplanations. The minute I 
told him the schools to which I¡¯d applied-Harvard, Ya le, Stanford-he had grinned and slapped me on the back. 
 
¡°I kne w it!¡± he shouted. 
¡°Knew what?¡± 
¡°That it was just a matter of t ime, Barack. Before  you were 
outta here.¡± ¡°Why¡¯d you think that?¡± 
Johnnie shook his head and laughed. ¡°Da mn , Ba rack¡­¡¯cause you got options, that¡¯s why. ¡¯Cause you can leave. 
I  mean, I know you¡¯re a  conscientious brother and all that, but  when somebody¡¯s got a choice between Ha rvard 
and Roseland, it¡¯s only so long somebody¡¯s gonna keep choosing Roseland.¡± Again he shook his head. ¡°Harv ard! 
 
Godda mn. I just hope you reme mber your friends when you up in that fancy office downtown.¡±  
 
For some reason, Johnnie¡¯s laughter had made me defensive. I insisted that I would be co ming back to the 
neighborhood. I told him that I didn¡¯t plan on being da zzled by the wea lth and power that Harvard represented, and that 
he shouldn¡¯t be either. Johnnie put his hands up in mock surrender. 
 
¡°Hey, you don¡¯t need to be telling me a ll this. I a in¡¯t the one going nowhere.¡± 
I grew quiet, e mbarrass ed by my outburst. ¡°Yeah, we ll¡­I¡¯m just saying that I¡¯ll be back, that¡¯s all. I don¡¯t want 
you or the leaders to get the wrong idea.¡± 
 
Johnnie smiled gently. ¡°Ain¡¯t nobody gonna get the wrong idea, Barac k. Man, we ¡¯re just proud to see you succeed.¡± 
 
The sun was now slipping behind a cloud; a couple of the old cardplayers pulled on the windbreakers they had hung 
on the backs of their chairs. I lit a c igarette and tried to decipher that conversation with Johnnie. Had he doubted my 
intentions? Or was it just me that mistrusted myself? It seemed like I had gone over my dec ision at least a hundred 
times. I needed a break, that was for sure. I wanted to go to Kenya: Auma was already back in Na irobi, teaching at the 
university for a year; it would be an ideal t ime  for an e xtended visit. 
 
And I had things to learn in law school, things that would help me bring about real change. I would lea rn about 
interest rates, corporate mergers, the legislat ive process; about the way businesses and banks were put together; how 
real estate ventures succeeded or failed. I would lea rn power¡¯s currency in all its intricacy and detail, knowledge that 
would have compro mised me before co ming to Ch icago but that I could now bring back to where  it was needed, back 
to Roseland, back to Altgeld; bring it back like Pro methean fire. 
 
That¡¯s the story I had been telling myself, the same  story I imagined my father te lling himself twenty -e ight years 
before, as he had boarded the plane to America, the land of drea ms. He , too, had probably believed he was acting out 
some grand design, that he wasn¡¯t simp ly fleeing fro m possible inconsequence. And, in fact, he had returned to 
Kenya, hadn¡¯t he? But only as a divided man, his plans, his drea ms, soon turned to dust¡­.  
 
 
 
 
Would the same thing happen to me? Maybe Johnnie was right; maybe once you stripped away the rationalizations, it 
always ca me down to a simple  matter of escape. An escape from poverty or boredom or c rime or the shackles of your 
skin. Maybe, by going to law school, I¡¯d be repeating a pattern that had been set in motion centuries before, the 
mo ment white men, themselves spurred on by their own fears of inconsequence, had landed on Africa¡¯s shores, 
bringing with them their guns and blind hunger, to drag away the conquered in chains. That first encounter had 
redrawn the map of b lack life, recentered its universe, created the very idea of escape-an idea that lived on in Fran k and 
those other old blac k men who had found refuge in Ha waii; in green -eyed Joyce back at Occ idental, just wanting to be 
an individual; in Auma , torn between Ge rmany and Kenya; in Roy, finding out that he couldn¡¯t start over. And here, in 
the South Side, a mong me mbers of Reverend Philips¡¯s church, some of who m had probably marched alongside Dr.  
 
King, believing then that they marched for a higher purpose, for rights and for principles and for all God¡¯s children, but who 
at some point had realized that power was unyielding and principles unstable, and that even after laws were passed and 
lynchings ceased, the closest thing to freedom would still involve escape, emotional if not physical, away from ourselves, 
away from what we knew, flight into the outer reaches of the white man¡¯s empire-or closer into its bosom. 
 
The analogies weren¡¯t e xact ly right. The re lationship between black and wh ite, the meaning of escape, would never be  
quite the same for me as it had been for Frank, or for the Old Man, or even for Roy. And as segregated as Chicago was, 
as strained as race relations were , the success of the civil rights move ment had at least created some overlap between 
communit ies, more roo m to maneuver for people like  me. I could work in the black co mmunity as an organize r or a  
lawyer and still live in a high rise downtown. Or the other way around: I could work in a b lue -chip law firm but live in 
the South Side and buy a big house, drive a nice car, ma ke my  donations to the NAACP and Haro ld¡¯s ca mpaign, speak 
at local h igh schools. A role model, they¡¯d call me , an e xa mple o f blac k ma le success. 
 
Was there anything wrong with that? Johnnie obviously didn¡¯t think so. He had smiled, I rea lized now, not because 
he judged me but precisely because he didn¡¯t; because he, like  my leaders, didn¡¯t see anything wrong with such 
success. That was one of the lessons I¡¯d learned these past two and a half years, wasn¡¯t it? -that most black fo lks 
weren¡¯t like the father o f my drea ms, the man in my  mother¡¯s stories, full of h igh -blown ideals and quick to pass 
judgment. They we re mo re like my  stepfather, Lolo, practica l people who knew life was too hard to judge each other¡¯s 
choices, too messy to live according to abstract ideals. No one e xpected self-sacrifice fro m me-not Rafiq, who of late 
had been pestering me about helping him raise money fro m wh ite foundations for his latest scheme; not Reverend  
 
Smalls, who had decided to run for the state senator¡¯s seat and was anxious for our support. As far as they were 
concerned, my color had always been a sufficient criterion for community membership, enough of a cross to bear. 
 
Was that all that had brought me to Chicago, I wondered -the desire for such simple  acceptance? That had been part of 
it, certa inly, one mean ing to community. But there had been another meaning, too, a mo re de manding impu lse. Sure, 
you could be black and still not give a da mn about what happened in Altgeld or Roseland. You d idn¡¯t have to care 
about boys like Ky le, young mothers like Bernadette or Sadie. But to be right with yourself, to do right by others, to 
lend meaning to a co mmunity¡¯s suffering and take part in its healing -that required something more. It required the kind 
of commit ment that Dr. Co llier made every day out in Altgeld. It required the kind of sacrifices a man like Asante had 
been willing to make  with his students. 
 
 
 
 
It required faith. I g lanced up now at the small, second -story window of the church, imagin ing the old pastor 
inside, drafting his sermon for the week. Where did your fa ith co me fro m? he had asked. It suddenly occurred to 
me  that I didn¡¯t have an answer. Pe rhaps, still, I had fa ith in myself. But fa ith in one¡¯s self was never enough. 
 
I stamped out my c igarette and started the car. I looked into my rearv iew mirror and, driving off, watched the old, 
silent cardplayers recede fro m my sight. 
 
With Johnnie handling the organization¡¯s day-to-day activities, I met with more blac k min isters in the area, hoping to 
convince them to join the organization. It was a slow process, for unlike their Catholic counterparts, most black pastors 
were fie rcely independent, secure in their congregations and with little  obvious need for outside assistance. Whenever I 
first reached them on the phone, they would often be suspicious or evasive, uncertain as to why this Muslim -or worse 
yet, this Irishman, O¡¯Ba ma-wanted a few minutes of their time . And a handful I met with conformed to the prototypes 
found in Richard Wright novels or Malcolm X speeches: sanctimonious graybeards preaching pie -in-the-sky, or slic k 
Holy Rollers with flashy cars and a constant eye on the collection plate.  
 
For the most part, though, once I¡¯d had a chance to meet these men face-to-face , I would co me  away impressed. As a 
group, they turned out to be thoughtful, hardworking men, with a confidence, a certainty of purpose, that made them 
by far the best organizers  in the neighborhood. They were generous with their time , interested in the issues, 
surprisingly willing to open themselves to my scrutiny. One min ister talked about a forme r ga mbling addiction. 
Another told me about his years as a successful e xecutive and  a secret drunk. They all mentioned periods of re lig ious 
doubt; the corruption of the world and their own hearts; the striking bottom and shattering of pride; and then finally 
the resurrection of self, a self a lloyed to something larger. That was the sourc e of their confidence, they insisted: their 
personal fa ll, their subsequent redemption. It was what gave them the authority to preach the Good Ne ws. 
 
Had I heard the Good News? some of the m would ask me. 
Do you know where it is that your faith is co ming fro m? 
 
When I asked for other pastors to talk to, several gave me the name  of Reverend Wright, the same min ister 
Reverend Philips had mentioned that day at his church. Younger ministers seemed to regard Reverend Wright as a 
mentor of sorts, his church a model for what they themselves hoped to accomplish. Older pastors were more cautious 
with their pra ise, imp ressed with the rapid gro wth of Trinity¡¯s congregation but somewhat scornful of its popularity 
among young black professionals. (¡°A buppie church,¡± one pastor would tell me .)  
 
Toward the end of October I finally got a chance to pay Reverend Wright a visit and see the church for myself. It sat 
flush on Ninety-fifth Street in a mostly residential neighborhood a few blocks down fro m the Louden Ho me projects. I 
had expected something imposing, but it turned out to be a low, modest structure of red brick and angular windows, 
landscaped with evergreens and sculpted shrubs and a small sign spiked into the grass -FREE SOUTH A FRICA in 
simp le bloc k letters. Inside, the church was cool and murmu red with activity. A group of s mall ch ild ren wa ited to be 
picked up fro m day care. A c rew of teenage girls passed by, dressed for what looked like  an African dance class. Four 
elderly wo men e me rged fro m the sanctuary, and one of them shouted ¡°God is good!¡± causing the others to respond 
giddily ¡°All the time!¡± 
 
 
 
 
Eventually a p retty wo man with a brisk, cheerfu l manner ca me up and introduced herself as Tracy, one of Reverend  
 
Wright¡¯s assistants. She said that the reverend was running a few minutes late and asked if I wanted some coffee. As I 
followed her back into a kitchen toward the rear of the church, we  began to chat, about the church mostly, but also a 
litt le about her. It had been a difficu lt year, she said: Her husband had recently died, and in just a few weeks she¡¯d be 
moving out to the suburbs. She had wrestled long and hard with the decision, for she had lived most of her life in the 
city. But she had decided the move would be bes t for her teenage son. She began to exp lain how there we re a lot more 
black fa milies in the suburbs these days; how her son would be free to walk down the street without getting harassed; 
how the school he¡¯d be attending had music courses, a full band, free instruments and uniforms. 
 
¡°He¡¯s always wanted to be in a band,¡± she said softly. 
 
As  we  were  talking,  I  noticed  a  man  in  his  late  fort ies  walking  toward  us.  He  had  silver  hair,  a  silver 
mustache  and  goatee;  he  was  dressed  in  a   gray   three-piece   suit.  He  moved  slo wly,  methodically,  as  if 
conserving energy, sorting through his mail as he wa lked, humming a simp le tune to himself.  
 
¡°Barac k,¡± he said as if we we re old  friends, ¡°let¡¯s see if Tracy here will let me have a minute of your time.¡±  
 
¡°Don¡¯t pay him no mind, Barac k,¡± Tracy said, standing up and straightening out her skirt. ¡°I should have warned 
you that Rev likes to act silly somet imes.¡± 
 
Reverend Wright smiled and led me into a sma ll, c luttered office. ¡°So rry fo r being late,¡± he said, closing the 
door behind him. ¡°We¡¯re t rying to build a ne w sanctuary, and I had to meet with the bankers. I¡¯m telling you, 
doc, they always want something else fro m you. Latest thing is another life insurance policy on me . In case I drop 
dead tomorrow. They figure the whole church¡¯ll collapse without me .¡±  
 
¡°Is it true?¡± 
 
Reverend Wright shook his head. ¡°I¡¯m not the church, Barac k. If I d ie to morro w, I hope the congregation will g ive 
me  a decent burial. I like to think a  fe w tears will be shed. But as soon as I¡¯ m six feet under, they¡¯ll be right back on the 
case, figuring out how to make  this church live up to its mission.¡± 
 
He had grown up in Philadelphia, the son of a Baptist minister. He had resisted his father¡¯s vocation at first, join ing 
the Marines out of college, dabbling with liquor, Isla m, and black nationalis m in the sixties. But the call of h is faith 
had apparently rema ined, a steady tug on his heart, and eventually he¡¯d entered Howard, then the University of 
Chicago, where he spent six years studying for a Ph.D. in the history of religion. He learned Heb rew and Gree k, read 
the literature of Tillich and Niebuhr and the black liberation theologians. The anger and humor of the streets, the book 
learning and occasional twenty-five-cent wo rd, all this he had brought with him to Trinity almost two decades ago. 
And although it was only later that I would learn much of th is biography, it became  clea r in that very first meeting that, 
despite the reverend¡¯s frequent disclaime rs, it was this capacious talent of his -this ability to hold together, if not 
reconcile, the conflict ing strains of black e xpe rience-upon which Trinity¡¯s success had ultimate ly been built.  
 
¡°We got a lot of different personalities here,¡± he told me . ¡° Got the Africanist over here. The trad itiona list over here. 
 
Once in a while, I have to stick my hand in the pot-smooth things over before stuff gets ugly. But that¡¯s rare. 
Usually, if somebody¡¯s got an idea for a ne w ministry, I just tell ¡¯e m to run with it and get outta their way.¡±  
 
 
 
 
His approach had obviously worked: the church had grown from two hundred to four thousand members during his 
tenure; there were organizations for every taste, from yoga classes to Caribbean clubs. He was especially pleased with the 
church¡¯s progress in getting more men involved, although he admitted that they still had a way to go. 
 
¡°Nothing¡¯s harder than reaching young brothers like  yourself,¡± he said. ¡°They worry about looking soft. They worry 
about what their buddies are gonna say about ¡¯em. They tell th e mselves church is a woman ¡¯s thing-that it¡¯s a sign of 
weakness for a man to ad mit that he¡¯s got spiritual needs.¡± 
 
The reverend looked up at me then, a look that made me nervous. I decided to shift the conversation to more 
fa miliar ground, telling him about DCP and the issues we were working on, e xpla ining the need for involvement 
fro m larger churches like his. He sat patiently and listened to my pitch, and when I was finished he gave a small nod. 
 
¡°I¡¯ll try to help you if I can,¡± he said. ¡°But you should know that having us involved in your effort isn¡¯t 
necessarily a feather in your cap.¡± 
 
¡°Why¡¯s that?¡± 
 
Reverend Wright shrugged. ¡°Some  of  my   fellow cle rgy don¡¯t appreciate what  we¡¯re about. They fee l  like   we¡¯re  
too  radical.  Others,  we  a in¡¯t  radica l  enough.  Too  emotional.  Not  e motional  enough.  Our  e mphasis  on  African 
history, on scholarship-¡± 
 
 
¡°Some  people say,¡± I interrupted, ¡°that the church is too upwardly mobile.¡±  
The reverend¡¯s smile faded. ¡°That¡¯s a lot of bull,¡± he said sharply. ¡°Peo ple who talk that mess reflect their own 
confusion. They¡¯ve bought into the whole business of class that keeps us fro m working together. Half of ¡¯e m think 
that the former gang-banger or the former Muslim got no business in a Christian church. Other half th ink any 
black man with an education or a job, or any church that respects scholarship, is somehow suspect. 
 
¡°We don¡¯t buy into these false divisions here. It¡¯s not about income, Ba rack. Cops don¡¯t check my bank account when 
they pull me over and ma ke me  spread-eagle against the car. These miseducated brothers, like that sociologist at the 
 
University of Chicago, ta lking about ¡®the declining significance of race.¡¯ Now, what country is he living in?¡±  
 
But wasn¡¯t there a  rea lity to the c lass divisions, I wondered? I mentioned the conversation I¡¯d had with his assistant, 
the tendency of those with means to move out of the line of fire . He took off his glasses and rubbed what I now saw 
to be a pair of t ired eyes. 
 
¡°I¡¯ve given Tracy my  opinion about moving out of the city,¡± he said quietly. ¡°That boy of hers is gonna get out 
there and won¡¯t have a clue about where, or who, he is.¡±  
 
¡°It¡¯s tough to take chances with your child ¡¯s safety.¡± 
¡°Life ¡¯s not safe for a black man in this country, Barac k. Never has been. Probably never will be.¡± 
 
 
A secretary buzzed, re minding Reverend Wright of his ne xt appoint ment. We shook hands, and he agreed to have 
Tracy prepare a list of me mbe rs for me to meet. Afterward, in the parking lot , I sat in my car and thumbed through a 
silver brochure that I¡¯d pic ked up in the reception area. It contained a set of guiding princip les -a ¡° Blac k Value 
System¡±-that the congregation had adopted in 1979. At the top of the list was a co mmit ment to God, ¡°wh o will give us 
the strength to give up prayerful passivism and become Black Christian activ ists, soldiers for Black freedo m and the  
 
 
 
 
dignity of all hu mankind.¡± Then a co mmit ment to the black co mmun ity and black fa mily, education, the work ethic, 
discipline, and self-respect. 
 
A sensible, heartfelt list-not so different, I suspected, fro m the values old Reverend Ph ilips might have learned in h is 
whitewashed country church two generations before. There was one particular passage in Trinity¡¯s brochure that 
stood out, though, a command ment more self-conscious in its tone, requiring greater elaborat ion. ¡°A Disavowal of the 
Pursuit of Middlec lassness,¡± the heading read. ¡°While it is permissible to chase ¡®middle inco meness¡¯ with all our 
might,¡± the te xt stated, those blessed with the talent or good fortune to achieve success in the American ma instream 
must avoid the ¡°psychological entrapment of Black ¡®middlec lassness¡¯ tha t hypnotizes the successful brother or sister 
into believing they are better than the rest and teaches them to think in terms of ¡®we ¡¯ and ¡®they¡¯ instead of ¡®US¡¯!¡±  
 
My thoughts would often return to that declaration in the wee ks that follo wed as I met with various me mbers of 
 
Trin ity. I decided that Reverend Wright was at least partly justified in d ismissing the church¡¯s critics, for the bulk o f 
its me mbe rship was solidly working class, the same teachers and secretaries and government workers one found in 
other big black churches throughout the city. Residents from the nearby housing project had been actively recruited, 
and programs designed to meet the needs of the poor-legal aid, tutorials, drug progra ms -took up a substantial a mount 
of the church¡¯s resources. 
 
Still, there was no denying that the church had a disproportionate number of blac k professionals in its ranks: 
engineers, doctors, accountants, and corporate managers. So me of them had been raised in Trinity; others had 
transferred in fro m other denominations. Many confessed to a long absence from any re ligious practice-a 
conscious choice for some, part of a  polit ical or intellectual awa kening, but more often because church had seemed 
irrelevant to them as they¡¯d pursued their careers in large ly wh ite institutions. 
 
At some point, though, they all told me  of having  reached a spiritual dead end; a feeling, at once inchoate and 
oppressive, that they¡¯d been cut off fro m themselves. Intermittently, then mo re regula rly, they had returned to the 
church, finding in Trinity some o f the same things every religion hopes to offer its converts: a spiritual harbor and 
the chance to see one¡¯s gifts appreciated and acknowledged in a way that a paycheck never can; an assurance, as 
bones stiffened and hair began to gray, that they belonged to something that would outlast their own lives-and that, 
when their time fina lly ca me , a co mmun ity would be there to re me mbe r.  
 
But not all of what these people sought was strictly relig ious, I thought; it wasn¡¯t just Jesus they were co ming ho me 
to. It occurred to me that Trinity, with its African the mes, its e mphasis on black history, continued the role that 
Reverend Philips had described earlier as a red istributor of values and circulator of ideas. On ly now the redistribution 
didn¡¯t run in just a single direction fro m the schoolteacher or the phys ician who saw it as a Christian duty to help the 
sharecropper or the young man fresh fro m the South adapt to big -city life . The flow of cu lture now ran in reverse as 
well; the former gang-banger, the teenage mother, had their own forms of va lidation -c laims of greater deprivation, 
and hence authenticity, their p resence in the church providing the lawyer or doctor with an education fro m the 
streets. By widening its doors to allow a ll who would enter, a  church like Trinity assured its me mbers that their fates 
re mained inseparably bound, that an intellig ible ¡°us¡± still re ma ined.  
 
 
 
 
It was a powerful progra m, this cultura l co mmunity, one more  pliant than simple  nationalis m, more sustaining t han 
my o wn brand of organizing. Still, I couldn¡¯t help wondering whether it would be enough to keep more people fro m 
leaving the city or young men out of jail. Would the Christian fellowship between a blac k school administrator, say, 
and a black school parent change the way the schools were run? Would the interest in ma intain ing such unity allow 
Reverend Wright to take a forceful stand on the latest proposals to reform public housing? And if men like 
Reverend Wright fa iled to take  a stand, if churches like Trinity refused to engage with real powe r and risk genuine 
conflict, then what chance would there be of hold ing the larger co mmunity intact? 
 
Somet imes I would put such questions to the people I met with. They would respond with the same be mused look  
 
Reverend Philips and Reverend Wright had given me. For them, the princip les in Trin ity¡¯s brochure were  artic les of 
faith no less than belief in the Resurrection. You have some good ideas, they would tell me. Maybe if you jo ined the 
church you could help us  start a community progra m. Why don¡¯t you come by on Sunday? 
 
And I would shrug and play the question off, unable to confess that I could no longer distinguish between faith 
and mere  folly, between faith and simple  endurance; that while  I be lieved in the s incerity I heard in their voices, I 
re mained a reluctant skeptic, doubtful of my own mot ives, wary of e xpedient conversion, having too many quarrels 
with God to accept a salvation too easily won. 
 
 
The day before Thanksgiving, Harold Washington died. 
It occurred without warning. Only a few months earlier, Harold had won reelection, handily beating Vrdolyak and 
Byrne, brea king the deadlock that had prevailed in the city fo r the previous four years. He had run a cautious campaign 
this time  out, professionally managed, without any of the fervor of 1983; a ca mpa ign of consolidation, of balanced 
budgets and public works. He reached out to some of the old -t ime Machine politic ians, the Irish and the Poles, ready to 
ma ke peace. The business community sent him their checks, resigned to his presence. So secure was his power that 
rumb lings of discontent had finally surfaced within his own base, a mong black nationalists upset with his willingness to 
cut whites and Hispanics into the action, among activists disappointed with his fa ilure  to tackle  poverty head-on, and 
among people who prefe rred the drea m to the rea lity, impotence to compro mise. 
 
Harold d idn¡¯t pay such critics much attention. He saw no reason to take any big risks, no reason to hurry. He 
said he¡¯d be mayor for the ne xt twenty years. 
 
And then death: sudden, simp le, fina l, a lmost rid iculous in its ordinariness, the heart of an overweight 
man g iving way. 
 
It ra ined that weekend, cold and steady. In the neighborhood, the streets were silent. Indoors and outside, people 
cried. The b lack radio stations replayed Harold¡¯s speeches, hour after hour, trying to summon the dead. At City Hall, 
the lines wound around several blocks as mourners visited the body, lying in state. Every where blac k people 
appeared dazed, stricken, uncertain of direct ion, frightened of the future. 
 
By  the  time  of  the  funeral,  Washington  loyalists  had  worked through  the  initial shock.  They began  to  meet,  regroup, 
trying to decide on a strategy for maintaining control, trying to select  Harold¡¯s rightful heir. But it was too late for that. 
There was no political organization in place, no clearly defined principles to follow. The entire of black politics had 
 
 
 
 
centered on one man who radiated like a sun. Now that he was gone, no one could agree on what that 
presence had meant. 
 
The loyalists squabbled. Factions emerged. Ru mors flew. By Monday, the day the city council was to select a new 
mayor to serve until the special e lection, the coalition that had first put Harold in office  was all but e xt inguished. I 
went down to City Ha ll that evening to watch this second death. People, mostly black, had been gathering outside the 
city council¡¯s chambe rs since late afternoon-old people, curiosity seekers, men and wo men with banners and signs. 
They shouted at the black aldermen who had cut deals with the white b loc. They waved dollar b ills at the soft -spoken 
black a lderman-a  holdover fro m Machine days -behind whom the white a ldermen had thrown their support. They called 
this man a sellout and an Uncle To m. They chanted and stomped and swore never to leave. 
 
But power was patient and knew what it wanted; power could out -wa it slogans and prayers and candlelight vigils. 
Around midnight, just before the council got around to taking a vote, the door to the chambers opened briefly and I saw 
two of the aldermen o ff in a huddle. One, b lack, had been Harold¡¯s man; the other, wh ite, Vrdolyak¡¯s. They were  
whispering now, s miling brie fly, then looking out at the still-chanting crowd and quickly suppressing their smiles, 
large, fleshy men in double-breasted suits with the same look of hunger in their eyes -men who knew the score. 
 
I le ft after that. I pushed through the crowds that overflowed  into the street and began walking across Daley Pla za 
toward my car. The wind wh ipped up cold and sharp as a blade, and I watched a handmade sign tumble  past me. HIS 
SPIRIT LIVES ON, the sign read in heavy block letters. And beneath the words that picture I had seen so many times 
while wait ing for a cha ir in Smitty¡¯s Barbershop: the handsome, grizzled face; the indulgent smile; the twin kling eyes; 
now blowing across the empty space, as easily as an autumn leaf.  
 
The months passed at a breathless pace, with constant reminders of all the things left undone. We worked with a 
citywide coa lit ion in support of school reform. We held a series of jo int meetings with Me xicans in the Southeast Side 
to craft a co mmon environ mental strategy for the region. I drove Johnn ie nuts trying to cram him with the things it had 
taken me three years to learn. 
 
¡°So who did you meet with this week?¡±  I would ask.  
 
¡°Well, there¡¯s this woman, Mrs. Banks, over at True Vine  Ho liness Church. See ms like she¡¯s got potential¡­hold 
on, yeah, here it is. Teacher, interested in education. I think she¡¯ll definite ly work with us.¡± 
 
¡°What does her husband do?¡± 
¡° You know, I forgot to ask her-¡± 
¡°What does she think of the teachers¡¯ union?¡± 
¡°Damn, Barack, I only had half an hour¡­.¡± 
 
 
 
In February, I rece ived my acceptance fro m Harvard. The letter ca me  with a thic k packet of info rmation. It re minded 
me  of the packet I¡¯d rece ived fro m Punahou that summer fourteen years earlie r. I re me mbered how Gra mps had stayed  
up the whole night reading fro m the catalog about music lessons and advanced placement courses, glee clubs and 
baccalaureates; how he had waved that catalog and told me it would be my mea l t icket, that the contacts I made at a 
school like  Punahou would last me  a lifetime , that I would move in charmed c irc les and have all the opportunities that 
he¡¯d never had. I re me mbe red how, at the end of the evening, he had smiled and tousled my hair, h is breath smelling of  
 
 
 
 
whiskey, h is eyes shining as if he were about to cry. And I had smiled back at him, pretending to understand but 
actually  wishing  I  was  still  in  Indonesia  running  barefoot along  a  paddy  field,  with  my  feet  sinking  into  the 
cool, wet mud, part of a cha in of other brown boys chasing after a tattered kite.  
 
I fe lt something like that now. 
 
I had scheduled a luncheon that week at our office for the twenty or so ministers whose churches had agreed to 
join the organization. Most of the ministers we¡¯d invited showed up, as did most of our key leadership. Together we 
discussed strategies for the coming year, the lessons learned fro m Harold ¡¯s death. We set dates for a train ing retreat, 
agreed on a schedule of dues, talked about the continued need to recruit more churches. When we were finished, I 
announced that I would be leaving in May and that Johnnie would be taking over as director.  
 
No one was surprised. They all ca me  up to me afterward and offe red their congratulations. Reverend Ph ilips 
assured me I had made a wise choice. Angela and Mona said they always knew I¡¯d a mount to something someday. 
Shirley asked me if I¡¯d be willing to advise a nephew of hers who had fallen down a manhole and wanted to sue. 
 
Only Mary see med upset. After most of the min isters had left, she helped Will, Johnnie, and me c lean up. When I 
asked her if she needed a ride, she started shaking her head. 
 
¡°What is it with you men?¡± she said, looking at Will and myself. He r voice tre mb led slightly as she pulled on her 
coat. ¡°Why is it you¡¯re always in a  hurry? Why is it that what you have isn¡¯t ever good enough?¡± 
 
I  started  to say something,  then  thought  about  Mary¡¯s  two  daughters  at  home,  the  father  that  they  would  never 
know. Instead, I  walked her to the door and gave her a  hug. When she was gone, I  returned to the  meeting roo m, 
where Will was working on a plate of le ftover chicken wings. 
 
¡°Want some?¡± he asked in between bites. 
 
I shook my head, ta king a seat across the table fro m him. He watched me for a while, chewing silently, sucking 
hot sauce off his fingers. 
 
¡°Place kinda grows on you, don¡¯t it?¡± he said 
finally. I nodded. ¡° Yeah, Will. It does.¡± 
He took a sip fro m h is soda and let out a small burp. ¡°Th ree years ain¡¯t that long to be gone,¡± he said. 
¡°How do you know I¡¯m gonna be back?¡± 
 
 
¡°I don¡¯t know how I know,¡± he said, pushing away his plate. ¡°I just know, that¡¯s all.¡±  Without another word 
he went to wash his hands, before mounting his bike and rid ing off down the street. 
 
I wo ke up at six A.M. that Sunday. It was still dark outside. I shaved, brushed the lint fro m my  only suit, and arrived 
at the church by seven-thirty. Most of the pews were already filled. A wh ite-gloved usher led me past elderly matrons 
in wide plu maged hats, tall unsmiling men in suits and ties and mud -cloth kufis, children in their Sunday best. A 
parent fro m Dr. Collie r¡¯s school waved at me; an officia l fro m the CHA with who m I¡¯d had several run-ins nodded 
curtly. I shunted through to the center of a row and stuffed myself between a plu mp o lder wo man who fa iled to scoot 
over and a young family of four, the father a lready sweating in h is coarse woolen jacket, the mother telling  the two 
young boys beside her to stop kicking each other. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¡°Where¡¯s God?¡± I overheard the toddler ask his brother. 
¡°Shut up,¡± the older boy replied. 
¡°Both of you settle down right now,¡± the mother said. 
Trin ity¡¯s associate pastor, a middle -aged wo man  with graying ha ir and a no-nonsense demeanor, read the bulletin and 
led sleepy voices through a few tradit ional hy mns. Then the choir filed down the aisle  dressed in white robes and kente-
cloth shawls, clapping and singing as they fanned out behind the altar, an organ following the quickening dru ms:  
I¡¯m so glad, Jesus lifted me! 
I¡¯m so glad, Jesus lifted me! 
I¡¯m so glad, Jesus lifted me! 
Singing Glory, Ha -le -lu -yah! 
Jesus lifted me ! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As the congregation joined in, the deacons, then Reverend Wright, appeared beneath the large cross that hung from 
the rafters. The reverend re ma ined silent wh ile  devotions were read, scanning the faces in front of him, watching the 
collection basket pass fro m hand to hand. When the collection was over, he stepped up to the pulpit and read the 
names of those who had passed away that week, those who were ailing, each na me causing a flutter some where in the 
¡°Let us join hands,¡± the reverend said, ¡°as we kneel and pray at the foot of an old rugged cross - 
crowd, the murmu r of recognition. 
 
 
 
¡± ¡° Yes¡­¡± 
¡°Lord, we co me  first to thank you for what you¡¯ve already done for us¡­. We come  to thank you most of all for Jesus. 
 
Lord, we co me  fro m diffe rent wa lks of life. So me considered high, and some low¡­but all on equal ground at the foot 
of this cross. Lord, thank you! For Jesus, Lord¡­our burden bearer and heavy load sharer, we thank you¡­.¡±  
 
The title of Reverend Wright¡¯s sermon that morn ing was ¡°The Audacity of Hope.¡± He  began with a passage from the 
Book of Sa mue l-the story of Hannah, who, barren and taunted by her rivals, had wept and shaken in prayer before her 
God. The story re minded him, he said, of a  sermon a fe llo w pastor had preached at a conference some years before, in 
which the pastor described going to a museum and being confronted by a painting titled Hope.  
 
¡°The painting depicts a harpist,¡± Reverend Wright explained, ¡°a woman who at first glance appears to b e sitting atop a 
great mountain. Until you take a closer look and see that the woman is bruised and bloodied, dressed in tattered rags, the 
harp reduced to a single frayed string. Your eye is then drawn down to the scene below, down to the valley below, where 
everywhere are the ravages of famine, the drumbeat of war, a world groaning under strife and deprivation. 
 
¡°It is this world, a world where  cruise ships throw away more food in a day than most residents of Port -au-
Prince see in a year, where white folks¡¯ greed runs a world in need, apartheid in one he misphere, apathy in 
another hemisphere¡­That¡¯s the world! On wh ich hope sits!¡± 
 
And so it went, a meditation on a fallen world. While the boys next to me doodled on their church bulletin, Reverend 
Wright spoke of Sharpsville and Hiroshima, the callousness of policy makers in the White House and in the State House. As 
the sermon unfolded, though, the stories of strife became more prosaic, the pain more immediate. The 
 
 
 
 
reverend spoke of the hardship that the congregation would face to morro w, the pain of those far fro m the mountain -
top, worrying about paying the light bill. But a lso the pain of those closer to the metaphorical su mmit: the middle -class 
wo man who seems to have all her worldly needs taken care of but whose husband is treating her like  ¡°the ma id, the 
household service, the jitney service, and the escort service all rolled into one¡±; the child whose wealthy parents worry 
more  about ¡°the texture of hair on the outside of the head than the quality of education inside the head.¡± 
 
¡°Isn¡¯t that¡­the world that each of us stands on?¡± 
¡° Yessuh!¡± 
¡°Like  Hannah, we  have known bitter t imes! Daily, we face re jection 
and despair!¡± ¡°Say it!¡±  
 
 
¡°And yet consider once again the painting before us. Hope! Like Hannah, that harpist is looking upwards, a fe w 
faint notes floating upwards towards the heavens. She dares to hope¡­. She has the audacity¡­to make  
music¡­and pra ise God¡­on the one string¡­she has left!¡± 
 
People began to shout, to rise fro m their seats and clap and cry out, a forceful wind carry ing the reverend¡¯s voice 
up into the rafters. As I watched and listened from my seat, I began to hear all the notes from the past three years 
swirl about me . The courage and fear of Ruby and Will. The race  pride and anger of men like Rafiq. The desire  to let 
go, the desire to escape, the desire to give oneself up to a God that could somehow put a floor on despair.  
 
And in that single note-hope!-I heard something else; at the foot of that cross, inside the thousands of churches across the 
city, I imagined the stories of ordinary black people merging with the stories of David and Goliath, Moses and 
 
Pharaoh, the Christians in the lion¡¯s den, Ezekiel¡¯s field of dry bones. Those stories-of survival, and freedo m, and 
hope-became our story, my story; the blood that had spilled was our blood, the tears our tears; until this black church, 
on this bright day, seemed once more a vessel carrying the story of a people into future g enerations and into a larger 
world. Ou r trials and triu mphs became at once unique and universal, blac k and more than black; in chronic ling our 
journey, the stories and songs gave us a means to reclaim me mo ries that we d idn¡¯t need to feel shamed about, 
me mo ries more  accessible than those of ancient Egypt, me mo ries that all people might study and cherish -and with 
which we could start to rebuild. And if a part o f me continued to feel that this Sunday communion sometimes 
simp lified our condition, that it could sometimes disguise or suppress the very real conflicts among us and would 
fulfill its pro mise only through action, I a lso felt for the first time how that spirit carried within it, nascent, incomplet e, 
the possibility of moving beyond our narrow drea ms.  
 
¡°The audacity of hope! I still re me mber my  grandmother, singing in the house, ¡®There¡¯s a bright side 
somewhere¡­don¡¯t rest till you find it ¡­.¡¯¡±  
 
¡°That¡¯s right!¡± 
 
¡°The audacity of hope! Times when we couldn¡¯t pay the bills. Times when it looked like I wasn¡¯t ever going to 
amount to anything¡­at the age of fifteen, busted for grand larceny auto theft¡­and yet and still my  mo mma  and 
daddy would break into a song¡­ 
 
 
Thank you, Jesus. Thank you, Jesus. 
Thank you, Jesus. Thank you, Jesus. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thank you, Je-sus, 
Thank you, Lo-ord. 
You brought me fro-o m 
A mighty long way, mighty long way. 
¡°And it made no sense to me, this singing! Why were they thanking Him for a ll of their troubles? I¡¯d ask myself. 
 
But see, I was only looking at the horizontal d imension of their lives!¡± 
¡°Tell it now!¡± 
¡°I didn¡¯t understand that they were talking about the vertical dimension! About their re lationship to God! I d idn¡¯t 
understand that they were thanking Him in advance for all that they dared to hope for in me! Oh, I thank you, Jesus, 
for not letting go of me when I let go of you! Oh yes, Jesus, I thank you¡­.¡±  
 
As the choir lifted back up into song, as the congregation began to applaud those who were wa lkin g to the altar to 
accept Reverend Wright¡¯s call, I felt a  light touch on the top of my hand. I looked down to see the older of the two 
boys sitting beside me, his face slightly apprehensive as he handed me a pocket t issue. Beside him, h is mother 
glanced at me with a fa int smile before turning back toward the altar. It was only as I thanked the boy that I fe lt the 
tears running down my cheeks. 
 
¡°Oh, Jesus,¡± I heard the older wo man beside me whisper softly. ¡°Thank you for carry ing us this far.¡±  
CHAPTER FIFTEEN 
I FLEW OUT OF HEATHROW A irport under stormy skies. A group of young British men dressed in ill-fitting 
blaze rs filled the back of the plane, and one of the m-a pa le, gangly youth, still t roubled with acne-took the seat beside 
me . He read over the e mergency instructions twice with great concentration, and once we were a irborne, he turned to 
ask where I was headed. I told h im I was traveling to Na irobi to visit my fa mily.  
 
¡°Nairobi¡¯s a beautiful place, I hear. Wouldn¡¯t mind stopping off there one of these days. Going to Johannesburg, I 
am.¡± He e xp lained that as part of a degree progra m in geology, the British government had arranged for h im and his 
classmates to work with South African mining co mpanies for a year. ¡°See ms like they have a shortage of trained people 
there, so if we¡¯re  luc ky they¡¯ll take us on for a permanent spot. Best chance we have for a decent wage, I rec kon -unless 
you¡¯re willing to free ze out on some bleeding North Sea oil rig. Not fo r me , thank you.¡± 
 
I mentioned that if g iven the chance, a lot of blac k South Africans might be interested in getting such training. ¡°Well, 
I¡¯d imagine you¡¯re right about that,¡± he said. ¡°Don¡¯t much agree with the race policy there. A sha me, that.¡± He  
 
thought for a mo ment. ¡°But then the rest of Africa ¡¯s falling apart now, isn¡¯t it? Least fro m what I can tell. The blac ks in  
 
 
 
 
South Africa aren¡¯t starving to death like they do in some of these Godforsa ken countries. Don¡¯t envy them, mind 
you, but compared to some poor bugger in Ethiopia -¡± 
 
A stewardess came down the aisle with headphones for rent, and the young man pulled out his wa llet. ¡°¡¯Course, I t ry 
and stay out of politics, you know. Figure it¡¯s none of my business. Same  thing back ho me-everybody on the dole, the 
old  men  in  Pa rlia ment  talking  the  same  old  rubbish.  Best  thing  to do  is  mind  your  own  little  corner  of  the  world, 
that¡¯s what I say.¡± He found the outlet for the headphones and slipped them over his ears. 
 
¡°Wake me up when they bring the food, will you,¡± he said before reclining his seat for a nap.  
I pulled out a book fro m my  carry -on bag and tried to read. It was a portrait of several African countries written by a 
 
Western journalist who¡¯d spent a decade in Africa; an old Africa  hand, he would be called, someone who apparently 
prided himself on the balanced assessment. The book¡¯s first few chapters discussed the history of colonialis m at some 
length: the man ipulation of tribal hatreds and the caprice of colonia l boundaries, the displacements, the detentions, the 
indignities la rge and small. The early herois m of independence figures like Kenyatta and Nkru mah was duly noted, 
their later drift towa rd despotism attributed at least in part to various Co ld War machinations. 
 
But by the book¡¯s third chapter, images fro m the present had begun to outstrip the past. Fa mine, disease, the coups 
and countercoups led by illiterate young men wie ld ing AK-47s like shepherd sticks-if Africa had a h istory, the writer 
seemed to say, the scale of current suffering had rendered such history meaningless. 
 
Poor buggers. Godforsaken countries. 
 
 
I set the book down, feeling a fa milia r anger flush through me, an anger all the mo re maddening for its lack of a  clear 
target. Beside me the young Brit was snoring softly now, his glasses askew on his fin -shaped nose. Was I angry at him? 
I wondered. Was it his fault  that, for a ll my education, all the theories in my  possession, I had had no ready answers to 
the questions he¡¯d posed? How much could I bla me  him for wanting to better his lot? Maybe I was just angry because 
of his easy familia rity with me , his  assumption that I, as an American, even a blac k A me rican, might naturally share in 
his dim vie w of Africa; an assumption that in his world at least ma rked a  progress of sorts, but that for me  only 
underscored my own uneasy status: a Westerner not entirely  at ho me in the West, an African on his way to a land fu ll 
of strangers. 
 
I¡¯d been feeling this way a ll through my stay in Europe-edgy, defensive, hesitant with strangers. I hadn¡¯t planned it 
that way. I had thought of the layover there as nothing more than a whimsica l detour, an opportunity to visit places I 
had never been before. For three wee ks I had traveled a lone, down one side of the continent and up the other, by bus 
and by train mostly, a guidebook in hand. I took tea by the Thames and watched child ren chase each other through the 
chestnut groves of Lu xe mbourg Garden. I crossed the Plaza Me jor at h igh noon, with its De Ch irico shadows and 
sparrows swirling across cobalt skies; and watched night fall over the Pa latine, wa iting for the first stars to a ppear, 
listening to the wind and its whispers of mortality. 
 
And by the end of the first week or so, I realized that I¡¯d made a mistake. It wasn¡¯t that Europe wasn¡¯t beautiful; 
everything was just as I¡¯d imagined it. It just wasn¡¯t mine. I felt as if I were living out someone else¡¯s romance; the 
incompleteness of my own history stood between me and the sites I saw like a hard pane of glass. I began to suspect that my 
European stop was just one more means of delay, one more attempt to avoid coming to terms with the Old Man. Stripped of 
language, stripped of work and routine-stripped even of the racial obsessions to which I¡¯d become so 
 
 
 
 
accustomed and which I had taken (perversely) as a sign of my o wn maturation-I had been forced to look inside 
myself and had found only a great emptiness there. 
 
Would this trip to Kenya finally fill that e mptiness? The folks back in Ch icago thought so. It¡¯ll be just like Roots,  
Will had said at my going-away party. A p ilgrimage, Asante had called it. For them, as for me, Africa had become an 
idea more than an actual place, a new pro mised land, fu ll of anc ient traditions and sweeping vistas, noble struggles and 
talking dru ms. With the benefit of distance, we engaged Africa in a selective e mb race-the same sort of e mb race I¡¯d 
once offered the Old Man. What would happen once I re linquished that distance? It was nice to believe that the truth 
would somehow set me free. But what if that was wrong? What if the truth only disappointed, and my father¡¯s death 
meant nothing, and his leaving me behind meant nothing, and the only tie that bound me to him, or to Africa, was a 
name, a blood type, or wh ite people¡¯s scorn? 
 
I switched off the overhead light and closed my eyes, letting my mind drift back to an African I¡¯d met while traveling 
through Spain, another man on the run. I had been waiting for a night bus in a roadside tavern about halfway between 
Madrid and Barcelona. A few old men sat at tables and drank wine from short, cloudy glasses. There was a pool table off to 
one side, and for some reason I had racked up the balls and started to play, remembering those late evenings with Gramps 
in the bars on Hotel Street, with their streetwalkers and pimps and Gramps the only white man in the joint. 
 
As I was fin ishing up the table, a man in a thin wool sweater had appeared out of nowhere and asked if he could buy 
me  some coffee. He spoke no English, and his Spanish wasn¡¯t much better than mine, but  he had a winning s mile and 
the urgency of someone in need of co mpany. Standing at the bar, he told me he was fro m Senegal, and was 
crisscrossing Spain for seasonal work. He showed me a battered photograph he kept in his wa llet of a young girl with 
round, smooth cheeks. His wife, he said; he had had to leave her behind. They would be reunited as soon as he saved 
the money. He  would write and send for her. 
 
We ended up riding to Barcelona together, neither of us talking much, him turning to me every so often  to try to explain 
the jokes on the Spanish program being shown on a TV-video contraption hooked up above the driver¡¯s seat. 
 
Shortly before dawn, we were  deposited in front of an old bus depot, and my friend gestured me over to a short, thick 
palm that grew beside the road. Fro m his knapsack he pulled out a toothbrush, a comb, and a bottle of water that he 
handed to me with great cere mony. And together we washed ourselves under the morning mist, before hoisting our 
bags over our shoulders and heading toward town. 
 
What was his name? I couldn¡¯t re me mber now; just another hungry man fa r away fro m home , one of the many 
children of forme r colonies -Algerians, West Indians, Pakistanis -now breaching the barricades of their fo rmer masters, 
mounting their o wn ragged, haphazard invasion. And yet, as we walked toward the Ra mb las, I had fe lt as if I kne w him 
as well as any man; that, coming fro m opposite ends of the earth, we we re somehow making the same journey. When 
we finally parted co mpany, I had re ma ined in the street for a long, long time, watching h is slender, bandy-legged image 
shrink into the distance, one part of me  wishing then that I could go with him into a life of open roads and other blue 
morn ings; another part realizing that such a wish was also a romance, an idea, as partia l as my image of the Old Man or 
my image of Africa. Until I settled on the fact that this man fro m Senegal had bought me coffee and offe red me water, 
and that was real, and maybe that was all any of us had a right to expect: the chance encounter, a shared story, the act of 
small kindness¡­. 
 
 
 
 
The airp lane shook with some turbulence; the flight crew ca me to serve us dinner. I woke up the young Brit, who 
ate with impressive precision, describing, between bites, what it had been like to grow up in Manchester. Eventually 
I dozed off into a fit ful sleep. When I a woke, the stewardess was passing out customs forms in preparation for 
landing. Outside it was still dark, but, pressing my face  against the glass, I began to see scattered lights, soft and hazy 
like fireflies, gradually swarming into the shape of a city below. A fe w minutes later, a slope of rounded hills 
appeared, black against a long strand of light on the eastern horizon. As we touched down on an A frican dawn I saw 
high thin clouds streak the sky, their underbellies glowing with a reddish hue. 
 
Kenyatta International Airport was almost e mpty. Officia ls sipped at their morning tea as they checked over passports; 
in the baggage area, a creaky conveyor belt slowly d isgorged luggage. Auma was nowhere in sight, so I took a seat on 
my ca rry-on bag and lit a cigarette. Afte r a few minutes, a security guard with a wooden club started to walk toward 
me . I looked a round for an ashtray, thinking I must be in a  no-smoking area, but instead of scolding me , the guard 
smiled and asked if I had another cigarette to spare. 
 
¡°This is your first trip to Kenya, yes?¡± he asked as I gave him a  light. 
¡°That¡¯s right.¡± 
 
 
 
¡°I see.¡± He squatted down beside me. ¡° You are fro m A me rica. You know my  brother¡¯s son, perhaps. Samson 
Otieno. He is studying engineering in Te xas.¡±  
 
I told him that I¡¯d never been to Te xas and so hadn¡¯t had the opportunity to meet his nephew. This seemed to 
disappoint him, and he took several puffs fro m his c igarette in quic k succession. By this time, the last of the other 
passengers on my flight had left the terminal. I asked the guard if any more  bags were co ming. He shook his head 
doubtfully. 
 
¡°I don¡¯t think so,¡± he said, ¡°but if you will just wa it here, I will find someone who can help you.¡± 
He disappeared around a narrow corridor, and I stood up to stretch my back. The rush of anticipation had drained 
away, and I s miled with the me mo ry of the homeco ming I had once imagined for myself, c louds lift ing , old de mons 
flee ing, the earth tre mbling as ancestors rose up in celebration. Instead I fe lt tired and abandoned. I was about to search 
for a telephone when the security guard reappeared with a strikingly beautifu l wo man, dark, slender, c lose to six feet 
tall, dressed in a British Airways uniform. She introduced herself as Miss Omoro and e xp lained that my bag had 
probably been sent on to Johannesburg by mistake.  
 
¡°I¡¯m awfully sorry about the inconvenience,¡± she said. ¡°If you will just fill out this form, we can ca ll 
Johannesburg and have it delivered to you as soon as the next flight comes in.¡±  
 
I co mpleted the form and Miss Omo ro gave it the once-over before looking back at me . ¡° You wouldn¡¯t be re lated to 
Dr. Oba ma , by any chance?¡± she asked. 
 
¡°Well, yes-he was my father.¡± 
Miss Omoro s miled sy mpathetically. ¡° I¡¯m very sorry about his passing. Your father was a close friend of my  
fa mily¡¯s. He would often come  to our house when I was a child.¡±  
 
We began to talk about my v isit, and she told me  of her studies in London, as well as her interest in traveling to the 
States. I found myself t rying to prolong the conversation, encouraged less by Miss Omoro¡¯s beauty -she had mentioned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a fianc&# 233;-than by the fact that she¡¯d recognized my na me. That had never happened before, I rea lized; not in  
 
Hawa ii, not in Indonesia, not in L.A. or New York o r Chicago. Fo r the first time in my life , I fe lt the comfort, the 
firmness of identity that a name might provide, how it could carry an entire history in other people¡¯s me mories, so that 
they might nod and say knowingly, ¡°Oh, you are so and so¡¯s son.¡± No one here in Kenya would ask how to spell my 
name, or mangle  it with an unfamiliar tongue. My  name be longed and so I belonged, drawn into a web of 
relationships, alliances, and grudges that I did not yet understand. 
 
¡°Barac k!¡± I turned to see Auma ju mp ing up and down behind another guard, who wasn¡¯t letting her pass into the 
baggage area. I e xcused myself and rushed over to her, and we laughed and hugged, as silly as the first time  we ¡¯d met.  
 
A tall, brown-skinned wo man was smiling beside us, and Auma turned and said, ¡°Barack, this is our Auntie 
Zeituni. Our father¡¯s sister.¡± 
 
¡°Welcome ho me,¡±  Zeituni said, kissing me on both cheeks. 
I told the m about my bag and said that there was someone here who had known the Old Man. But when I looked 
back to where I¡¯d been standing, Miss Omoro was nowhere in sight. I asked the security guard where she had gone. 
He shrugged and said that she must have left for the day. 
 
Auma drove an old, baby-blue Vo lkswagen Beetle. The car was something of a business venture for her: Since 
Kenyan nationals living abroad could ship a car back to Kenya free of a hefty import ta x, she had figured that she 
could use it during the year that she¡¯d be teaching at the University of Na irobi and then sell it for the cost of shipping 
and perhaps a small profit. Unfortunately, the engine had come down with a tubercular knock, and the muffler had 
fallen off on the way to the airport. As we sputtered out onto the four-lane highway, Au ma c lutching the steering wheel 
with both hands, I couldn¡¯t keep fro m laughing. 
 
¡°Should I get out and push?¡± 
Zeituni frowned. ¡° Eh, Ba rry, don¡¯t say anything about this car. This is a beautifu l car. It just needs some new paint.  
 
In fact, Au ma has already pro mised that I will have this car after she leaves.¡± 
 
Auma shook her head. ¡°Your aunt is trying to cheat me now, Barack. I promised we would talk about it, that¡¯s all.¡± 
¡°What¡¯s there to talk about?¡± Zeituni said, winking at me. ¡°I tell you, Auma, I will give you the best price.¡± 
 
The two of the m began to talk at the same t ime , asking how my  trip had been, telling me a ll the plans they had made, 
listing all the people I had to see. Wide plains stretched out on either side of the road, savannah grass mostly, an 
occasional thorn tree against the horizon, a landscape that seemed at once ancient and raw. Gradually the traffic 
thickened, and crowds began to pour out of the countryside on their way to work, the men still buttoning their flimsy 
shirts; the women straight-backed, their heads  wrapped in bright-colored scarves. Cars meandered across lanes and 
roundabouts, dodging potholes, bicycles, and pedestrians, while ric kety jitneys -called matatus, I was told-stopped 
without any warning to cra m on mo re passengers. It all seemed strangely fa miliar, as if I had been down the same road 
before. And then I re me mbered other morn ings in Indonesia, with my mother and Lo lo talking in the front seat, the 
same sme ll of burn ing wood and diesel, the same stillness that lingered at the center of the morn ing rush, the same look 
on people¡¯s faces as they made their way into a new day, with few e xpectations other than ma king it through, and 
perhaps a mild hope that their luck would change, or at least hold out. 
 
 
 
 
We went to drop off Zeituni at Kenya Brewe ries, a  la rge, drab co mple x where she worked as a computer 
programme r. Stepping out of the car, she leaned over again to kiss me on the cheek, then wagged her finger at Auma.  
 
¡° You take good care of Barry  now,¡± she said. ¡°Make sure he doesn¡¯t get lost again.¡± 
 
Once we were  back on the highway, I asked Auma what Ze ituni had meant about my getting lost. Auma shrugged. 
 
¡°It¡¯s a common expression here,¡± she said. ¡°Usually, it means the person hasn¡¯t seen you in a while. ¡®You¡¯ve been lost,¡¯ 
they¡¯ll say. Or ¡®Don¡¯t get lost.¡¯ Sometimes it has a more serious meaning. Let¡¯s say a son or husband moves to the city, or to 
the West, like our Uncle Omar, in Boston. They promise to return after completing school. They say they¡¯ll send for the 
family once they get settled. At first they write once a week. Then it¡¯s just once a month. Then they stop writing completely . 
No one sees them again. They¡¯ve been lost, you see. Even if people know where they are.¡± 
 
The Volkswagen struggled up an ascending road shaded by thick groves of eucalyptus and liana vines. Elegant old 
homes receded behind the hedges and flower beds, homes that had once been exc lusively British, Auma  said, but that 
now mostly served government offic ia ls and foreign e mbassy staffs. At the top of the rise we made a sharp right and 
parked at the end of a gravel driveway ne xt to a ye llo w two -story apartment building that the university rented out to 
its faculty. A huge lawn sloped down fro m the apartments to meet patches of banana trees and high forest and, 
farther down, a narrow, murky strea m that ran through a wide gully pitted with stones. 
 
Auma¡¯s apart ment, a sma ll but comfortable space with French doors that let sunlight wash through the rooms, was 
on the first floor. There were stacks of books everywhere, and a collage of photographs hanging on one wall, studio 
portraits and Polaroid shots, a patchwork of fa mily that Auma had stitched together for herself. Above Auma ¡¯s bed, I 
noticed a large poster of a black wo man, her face  tilted upward toward an unfold ing blossom, the words ¡°I Have a 
Drea m¡±  printed below. 
 
 
¡°So what¡¯s your dream, Au ma?¡± I said, setting down my bags. 
Auma laughed. ¡°That¡¯s my biggest problem, Ba rack. Too many drea ms. A wo man with drea ms always has 
problems.¡± 
 
My exhaustion fro m the trip must have showed, because Auma suggested that I take a nap while she went to the 
university to teach her class. I dropped onto the cot she¡¯d prepared and fell asleep to the buzz o f insects outside the 
window. When I awo ke it  was dusk and Auma was still gone. Fro m the kitchen, I noticed a troop of blac k-faced 
monkeys gathered beneath a banyan tree. The older ones sat warily at the tree¡¯s base watching with knotte d brows as 
pups scampered about through the long, winding roots. Rinsing my face in the sink, I put water on fo r tea, then 
opened the door that led into the yard. The monkeys all froze in their trac ks; their eyes turned toward me in unison. A 
few feet away, the a ir filled with the beat of huge green wings, and I watched the drea my ascent of a long -necked 
bird as it sent out a series of deep-throated cries and drifted toward distant canopies. 
 
We decided to stay in that night, cooking stew and catching up on  each other¡¯s news. The next morning we walked into 
town and wandered without any particular destination in mind, just taking in the sights. The city center was smaller than I¡¯d  
expected, with much of the colonial architecture still intact: row after row o f worn, whitewashed stucco from the days when 
Nairobi was little more than an outpost to service British railway construction. Alongside these buildings, another city 
emerged, a city of high-rise offices and elegant shops, hotels with lobbies that seemed barely 
 
 
 
 
distinguishable fro m their counterparts in Singapore or Atlanta. It was an into xicating, e lusive mixtu re, a contrast that 
seemed to repeat itself wherever we went: in front of the Mercedes-Ben z deale rship, where a  train of Masai wo men 
passed by on the way to market, their heads shaven clean, their slender bodies wrapped in red shukas, their earlobes 
elongated and ringed with bright beads; or at the entrance to an open -air mosque, where we watched a group of bank 
office rs carefully re move their wing-tipped shoes and bathe their feet before join ing farme rs and ditchdiggers in 
afternoon prayer. It was as if Na irobi¡¯s history refused to settle in orderly layers, as if what was then  and what was now 
fell in constant, noisy collision. 
 
We wandered into the old marketplace, a cavernous building that smelled of ripe fruit and a nearby butchery. A 
passage to the rear of the building led into a ma ze  of open -air stalls where  merchants hawked fabrics, baskets, 
brass jewe lry, and other curios. I stopped in front of one of the m, where a  set of small wooden carvings was set 
out for display. I recognized the figures as my father¡¯s long -ago gift to me: elephants, lions, dru mmers in triba l 
headdress. They are only small things, the Old Man had said¡­.  
 
¡°Co me, mister,¡± the young man who was mind ing the stall said to me . ¡°A beautiful necklace  for your 
wife.¡± ¡°Th is is my sister.¡± 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¡°She is a very beautiful sister. Co me , this is nice for her.¡± 
¡°How much?¡± 
¡°Only five hundred shillings. Beautifu l.¡±  
Auma frowned and said something to the man in Swah ili. ¡°He ¡¯s giving you the wazungu price,¡± she e xp lained. ¡°The 
white man¡¯s price.¡±  
 
The young man s miled. ¡° I¡¯m very sorry, sister,¡± he said. ¡°For a Kenyan, the p rice  is three hundred only.¡± 
 
Inside the stall, an o ld wo man who was stringing glass beads together pointed at me and said something 
that made Auma  smile . 
 
¡°What¡¯d she say?¡± 
¡°She says that you look like an American to her.¡± 
¡°Tell her I¡¯m Luo,¡± I said, beating my chest. 
The old wo man laughed and asked Auma my na me. The answer made the old wo man laugh even harder, and she 
called for me  to stand beside her, taking my hand. ¡°She says you don¡¯t look much like a  Luo,¡± Au ma said, ¡°but 
you have a kind face. She says she has a daughter you should meet and that, if you buy her a soda, you can have 
two carvings and the necklace she¡¯s making for five hundred shillings.¡± 
 
The young man went to buy sodas for all of us, and we sat on wooden stools that the old woman pulled out fro m 
behind a large chest. She told us about her business, the rent she had to pay the government for the use of her stall, how 
her other son joined the army because there was no land left to work in their village. Across from us, anothe r wo man 
wove colored straw into baskets; beside her, a man cut a hide into long strips to be used for some purse straps. 
 
I watched these nimble  hands stitch and cut and weave, and listened to the old wo man¡¯s voice roll over the sounds of  
work and barter, and for a mo ment the world seemed entirely t ransparent. I began to imagine an unchanging rhythm of 
days, lived on firm soil where  you could wake up each morn ing and know that all was how it had been yesterday, 
where you saw how the things  that you used had been made and could rec ite the lives of those who had made the m and  
 
 
 
 
could believe that it would all hang together without computer terminals or fa x machines. And  all of this while a  steady 
procession of black faces passed before your eyes, the round faces of babies and the chipped, worn faces of the old; 
beautiful faces that made me  understand the transformation that Asante and other black A me ricans cla imed to hav e 
undergone after their first visit to Africa. For a span of weeks or months, you could experience the freedo m that comes 
fro m not fee ling watched, the freedom of believing that your hair gro ws as it¡¯s supposed to grow and that your ru mp 
sways the way a ru mp is supposed to sway. You could see a man talking to himself as just plain cra zy, or read about the 
criminal on the front page of the daily paper and ponder the corruption of the human heart, without having to think 
about whether the criminal or lunatic said something about your own fate. Here  the world was blac k, and so you were 
just you; you could discover all those things that were unique to your life without living a lie or co mmitt ing betrayal. 
How te mpting, I thought, to fly away with this mo ment int act. To have this feeling of ease wrapped up as neatly as the 
young man was now wrapping Au ma¡¯s necklace, and take it back with me to A merica to slip on whenever my spirits 
flagged. 
 
But of course that wasn¡¯t possible. We finished our sodas. Money changed hands. We left the 
ma rketplace . The mo ment slipped away. 
 
We turned onto Kimathi Street, na med afte r one of the leaders of the Mau -Mau rebellion. I had read a book about 
Kimathi before leaving Chicago and re me mbe red a photograph of him: one in a  group of dreadlocked men who lived 
in the forest and spread secret oaths among the native population -the prototype guerrilla fighter. It was a c lever 
costume he had chosen for himself (Kimathi and the other Mau-Mau leaders had served in British regiments in their 
previous lives), an image that played on all the fears of the colonia l West, the same sort of fear that Nat Turner had 
once evoked in the antebellum South and coke-crazed muggers now evoked in the minds of whites in Ch icago. 
 
Of course, the Mau-Mau lay in Kenya¡¯s past. Kimathi had been captured and executed. Kenyatta had been released 
fro m prison and inaugurated Kenya¡¯s first president. He had immediate ly assured whites who were busy packing their 
bags that businesses would not be nationalized, that landholdings would be kept intact, so long as the black man 
controlled the apparatus of government. Kenya became  the West¡¯s most stalwart pupil in Africa, a model of stability, 
a useful contrast to the chaos of Uganda, the failed socialism of Tan zania. Forme r freedo m fighters returned to their 
villages or joined the civ il service or ran for a  seat in Parlia ment. Kimathi beca me a na me  on a street sign, thoroughly 
tamed for the tourists. 
 
I took the opportunity to study these tourists as Auma and I sat down for lunch in the outdoor caf&#233; of the Ne w 
Stanley Hotel. They were  everywhere-Germans, Japanese, Brit ish, Ame ricans -taking p ictures, hailing ta xis, fending 
off street peddlers, many of the m d ressed in safari suits like  e xtras on a movie set. In Ha waii, when we  we re still 
kids, my friends and I had laughed at tourists like these, with their sunburns and their pale , skinny legs, basking in the 
glow of our obvious superiority. He re in Africa, though, the tourists didn¡¯t seem so funny. I felt the m as an 
encroachment, somehow; I found their innocence vaguely insulting. It occurred to me that in their utter lac k of self -
consciousness, they were e xp ressing a freedom that neither Au ma nor I could ever e xpe rience, a bedrock confidence 
in their o wn parochialis m, a  confidence reserved for those born into imperia l cultures.  
 
Just then I noticed an American fa mily sit down a fe w tables away fro m us. Two of the African waiters immed iately 
sprang into action, both of them smiling fro m one ear to the other. Since Au ma and I hadn¡¯t yet been served, I began to 
 
 
 
 
wave at the two wa iters who re ma ined standing by the kitchen, thinking they must have somehow fa iled to see us. For 
some time  they managed to avoid my g lance, but eventually an older man with sleepy eyes relented and brought us 
over two menus. His manner was resentful, though, and after several more minutes he showed no signs of ever coming 
back. Au ma¡¯s face began to pinch with anger, and again I waved to our wa iter, who continued in his silence as he 
wrote down our orders. At this point, the Americans had already received their food and we still had no place settings. I 
overheard a young girl with a blond ponytail co mpla in that there wasn¡¯t any ketchup. Auma stood up. 
 
¡°Let¡¯s go.¡± 
She started heading for the e xit, then suddenly turned and walked back to the wa iter, who was watching us with an 
impassive stare. 
 
 
¡° You should be ashamed of yourself,¡± Au ma said to him, her voice shaking. ¡° You should be ashamed.¡±  
The waiter replied brusquely in Swahili. 
¡°I don¡¯t care how many mouths you have to feed, you cannot treat your own people like dogs. Here¡­¡± Au ma snapped 
open her purse and took out a crumpled hundred -shilling note. ¡° You see!¡± she shouted. ¡°I can pay for my own da mn 
food.¡± 
 
She threw the note to the ground, then marched out onto the street. For several minutes we wandered without apparent 
direction, until I finally suggested we sit down on a bench beside the central post office. 
 
¡° You okay?¡± I asked her. 
 
 
 
She nodded. ¡°That was stupid, throwing away money like that.¡± She set down her purse beside her and we watched 
the traffic  pass. ¡°You know, I can¡¯t go to a club in any of these hotels if I¡¯m with another African wo man,¡±  she said 
eventually. ¡°The askaris will turn us away, thinking we a re prostitutes. The same in any of these big office buildings. 
 
If you don¡¯t work there, and you are African, they will stop you until you tell the m your business. But if you¡¯re with 
a German friend, then they¡¯re all s miles. ¡®Good evening, miss,¡¯ they¡¯ll say. ¡®How a re you tonight?¡¯¡± Auma shook her 
head. ¡°That¡¯s why Kenya, no matter what its GNP, no matter how many things you can buy here, the rest of Africa 
laughs. It¡¯s the whore of Africa, Barac k. It opens its legs to anyone who can pay.¡± 
 
I told Au ma she was being too hard on the Kenyan, that the same sort of thing happened in Djaka rta or Me xico City -
just an unfortunate matter of economics. But as we started back toward the apartment, I knew my  words had done 
nothing to soothe her bitterness. I suspected that she was right: not all the tourists in Nairobi had co me for the wild life. 
Some  ca me because Kenya, without shame, offered to re-c reate an age when the lives of whites in foreign lands rested 
comfo rtably on the backs of the darker races ; an age of innocence before Kimathi and other angry young men in 
Soweto or Det roit or the Mekong De lta started to lash out in street crime  and revolution. In Kenya, a wh ite man could 
still wa lk through Isak Dinesen¡¯s home and imag ine ro mance with a mysterious young baroness, or sip gin under the 
ceiling fans of the Lo rd De la mare  Hotel and admire  portraits of He mingway smiling after a successful hunt, 
surrounded by grim-faced coolies. He could be served by a black man without fear or guilt, marve l at the e xchange 
rate, and leave a generous tip; and if he fe lt a touch of indigestion at the sight of leprous beggars outside the hotel, he 
could always administer a ready tonic. Blac k ru le has come, after all. This is their country. We¡¯re only visitors. 
 
Did our wa iter know that black ru le had come?  Did it mean anything to him?  Maybe once, I thought to myself.  
 
He would be old enough to reme mber independence, the shouts of ¡°Uhuru!¡± and the raising of new flags. But such 
 
 
 
 
me mo ries may see m a lmost fantastic to him now, distant and naive. He¡¯s learned that the same people who controlled 
the land before independence still control the same land, that he still cannot eat in the restaurants or stay  in the hotels 
that the white man has built. He sees the money of the city swirling above his head, and the technology that spits out 
goods from its robot mouth. If he¡¯s a mbit ious he will do his best to learn the white man ¡¯s language and use the white 
man¡¯s mach ines, trying to ma ke ends meet the same  way the co mputer repairman in Ne wark or the bus driver back in 
Chicago does, with a lternating spurts of enthusiasm or frustration but mostly with resignation. And if you say to him 
that he¡¯s serving the interests of neocolonialis m or some other such thing, he will rep ly that yes, he will serve if that 
is what¡¯s required. It is the luc ky ones who serve; the unlucky ones drift into the murky tide of hustles and odd jobs; 
many will drown. 
 
Then again, maybe that¡¯s not all that the waiter is feeling. Maybe a part of him still clings to the stories of Mau -Mau, the 
same part of him that remembers the hush of a village night or the sound of his mother grinding corn under a stone pallet. 
Something in him still says that the white man¡¯s ways are not his ways, that the objects he may use every day are not of his 
making. He remembers a time, a way of imagining himself, that he leaves only at his peril. He can¡¯t escape the grip of his 
memories. And so he straddles two worlds, uncertain in each, always off balance, playing whichever game staves off the 
bottomless poverty, careful to let his anger vent itself only on those in the same condition. 
 
A voice says to him yes, changes have come, the old ways lie  broken, and you must find a way as fast as you can to 
feed your belly and stop the white man fro m laughing at you. 
 
A voice says no, you will sooner burn the earth to the ground. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
That evening, we  drove east to Karia ko, a  sprawling apart ment co mp le x surrounded by dirt  lots. The  moon 
had dropped behind thick clouds, and light drizzle had begun to fa ll. As we c limbed the dark stairwell, a  young 
man  bounded past us onto the broken pavement and into the night. At the top of three flights, Auma pushed 
against a door that was slightly ajar. 
 
¡°Barry! You¡¯ve finally co me!¡±  
A short, stocky woman with a cheerful brown face gave me a tight squeeze around the waist. Behind her were fifteen or s o 
people, all of them smiling and waving like a crowd at a parade. The short woman looked up at me and frowned. 
 
¡° You don¡¯t reme mbe r me , do 
you?¡± ¡°I¡­¡± 
 
¡°I¡¯m your Aunt Jane. It is me that called you when your father died.¡± She s miled and took me by the hand. ¡°Co me . 
You must meet everybody here. Zeituni you have already met. Th is¡­¡± she said, lead ing me to a handsome older 
wo man in a  green patterned dress, ¡°this is my sister, Ke zia. She is mother to Auma  and to Roy Oba ma.¡±  
 
Kezia took my hand and said my na me together with a fe w words of 
Swahili. ¡° She says her other son has finally co me ho me,¡±  Jane said.  
¡°My son,¡± Kezia repeated in English, nodding and pulling me into a hug. ¡°My son has come home.¡±  
We continued around the room, shaking hands with aunts, cousins, nephews, and nieces. Everyone greeted me with 
cheerful curiosity but very little awkwardness, as if meeting a relative for the first time was an everyday occurrence. I 
 
 
 
 
had brought a bag of chocolates for the children, and they gathered around me  with polite stares as the adults tried to 
e xpla in  who  I  was.  I  noticed  a  young  man,  sixteen  or  seventeen,  standing  against  the  wall  with  a  watchful 
e xpression. ¡°That¡¯s one of your brothers,¡± Auma said to me. ¡°Be rnard.¡±  
 
I went over to the young man and we shook hands, studying each other¡¯s faces. I found myself at a  loss for words 
but managed to ask him how he had been. 
 
¡°Fine, I guess,¡± he answered softly, which brought a round of laughter fro m everyone. 
After the introductions were over, Jane pushed me towa rd a sma ll table set with bowls of goat curry, fried fish, 
collards, and rice. As we ate, people asked me  about everyone back in Hawa ii, and I tried to describe my life in 
Chicago and my wo rk as an organizer. They nodded politely but seemed a bit puzzled, so I mentioned that I¡¯d 
be studying law at Ha rvard in the fall. 
 
¡°Ah, this is good, Barry,¡± Jane said as she sucked on a bone from the curry. ¡° Your father studied at this school, 
Harvard. You will ma ke us all proud, just like  him. You see, Bernard, you must study hard like your brother.¡± 
¡°Bernard thin ks he¡¯s going to be a football star,¡± Ze ituni said. 
 
I turned to Bernard. ¡°Is that right, Bernard?¡± 
¡°No,¡± he said, uncomfortable that he¡¯d attracted attention. ¡°I used to play, that¡¯s all.¡± 
¡°Well¡­maybe we can play somet ime.¡±  
He shook his head. ¡°I like to play basketball now,¡± he said earnestly. ¡° Li ke Magic  Johnson.¡± 
The mea l s mothered some of the initia l e xc ite ment, and the children turned to a large b lack -and-white TV that was 
showing the munificence of the president: the president opens a school; the president denounces foreign journalists 
and various Commun ist ele ments; the president encourages the nation to follow the path of nyayo -¡°footsteps toward 
progress.¡± I went with Au ma to see the rest of the apartment, which consisted of two bedrooms, both jammed fro m one 
end to the other with old mattresses. 
 
¡°How many people live here?¡±  I asked. 
¡°I¡¯m not sure right now,¡± Auma said. ¡°It a lways changes. Jane doesn¡¯t know how to say no to anybody, so any 
relative who moves to the city or loses a job ends up here. Sometimes they stay a long time. Or they leave their 
children here. The Old Man and my mu m le ft Bernard here a  lot. Jane practically ra ised him.¡±  
 
¡°Can she afford it?¡± 
¡°Not really. She has a job as a telephone operator, which doesn¡¯t pay so much. She doesn¡¯t compla in, though. She 
can¡¯t have her own children, so she looks after others¡¯.¡± 
 
We returned to the living roo m, and I sank down into an old sofa. In th e kitchen, Ze ituni directed the younger 
wo men in c leaning the dishes; a few of the children we re now a rguing about the chocolate I¡¯d brought. I let my eyes 
wander over the scene-the well-worn furniture, the two -year-old ca lendar, the fad ing photographs, the blue ceramic 
cherubs that sat on linen doilies. It was just like the apartments in Altgeld, I realized. The sa me chain o f mothers and 
daughters and children. The sa me noise of gossip and TV. The perpetual motion of cooking and cleaning and nursing 
hurts large and small. The sa me absence of men. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We said our good-byes around ten, promising to visit each and every re lative in turn. As we walked to the door, Jane 
pulled us aside and lowe red her voice. ¡° You need to take   Barry  to see your Aunt Sarah,¡± she wh ispered to Auma. 
And then to me: ¡°Sarah is your father¡¯s older sister. The firstborn. She wants to see you very badly.¡± 
 
¡°Of course,¡± I said. ¡°But why wasn¡¯t she here tonight? Does she live far a way?¡± 
Jane looked at Auma , and some unspoken thought passed between them. ¡°Co me  on, Barac k,¡± Au ma said 
finally. ¡° I¡¯ll e xp la in it to you in the car.¡±  
 
The roads were e mpty and slick with ra in. ¡°Jane is right, Barac k,¡± Au ma told me as we passed the university. 
¡° You should go see Sarah. But I won¡¯t go with you.¡± 
 
¡°Why not?¡± 
¡°It¡¯s this business with the Old Man¡¯s estate. Sarah is one of the people who has disputed the will. She¡¯s been telling 
people that Roy, Bernard, myself-that none of us are the Old Man¡¯s children.¡± Au ma sighed. ¡°I don¡¯t know. A part of 
me  sympathizes with her. She¡¯s had a hard life . She never had the chances the Old Man had, you see, to study or go 
abroad. It made her very bitter. She thin ks that somehow my mu m, myself, that we  are to bla me fo r her situation.¡± 
¡°But how much could the Old Man¡¯s estate be worth?¡± 
 
¡°Not much. Maybe a small govern ment pension. A piece of worthless land. I t ry to stay out of it. Whatever is there 
has probably been spent on lawyers by now. But you see, everyone expected so much fro m the Old Man. He made 
them think that he had everything, even when he had nothing. So now, instead of getting on with their lives, they 
just wait and argue a mong themselves, thinking that the Old Man somehow is going to rescue them fro m his grave.  
 
Bernard¡¯s learned this same wait ing attitude. You know, he¡¯s really sma rt, Barac k, but he just sits around all day 
doing nothing. He dropped out of school and doesn¡¯t have much prospect for finding work. I¡¯ve told him that I would 
help him get into some sort of trade school, whatever he wants, just so he¡¯s doing somet hing, you know. He ¡¯ll say 
okay, but when I ask if he¡¯s gotten any applications or talked to the schoolmasters, nothing¡¯s been done. So metimes I 
feel like , unless I take every step with him, nothing will happen.¡± 
 
¡°Maybe I can help.¡± 
 
 
 
¡° Yes. Maybe you can talk to him. But now that you¡¯re here, co ming fro m A merica, you¡¯re part of the inheritance, 
you see. That¡¯s why Sarah wants to see you so much. She thin ks I¡¯m hid ing you from her because you¡¯re the one 
with everything.¡± 
 
The rain had started up again as we parked the car. A single light bulb jutting fro m the side of the building sent 
webbed, liquid shadows across Auma¡¯s face. ¡°The whole thing gets me so tired, Ba rack,¡± she said softly. ¡°You 
wouldn¡¯t believe how much I missed Kenya when I was in Ge rmany. All I could do was think about getting back 
home. I thought how I never feel lonely here , and fa mily is everywhere, nobody sends their parents to an old people¡¯s 
home or leaves their children with strangers. Then I¡¯m here and everyone is asking me for help, and  I feel like they are 
all just grabbing at me  and that I¡¯m going to sink. I feel guilty because I was luckie r than them. I went to a university. 
 
I can get a job. But what can I do, Barac k? I¡¯m only one person.¡± 
 
I took Auma¡¯s hand and we remained in the car for several minutes, listening to the rain as it slackened. ¡°You asked me 
what my dream was,¡± she said finally. ¡°Sometimes I have this dream that I will build a beautiful house on our 
grandfather¡¯s land. A big house where we can all stay and bring our families, you see. We could plant fruit trees like  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
our grandfather, and our children would rea lly know the land and speak Luo and learn our ways fro m the old people. It 
would belong to them.¡±  
 
¡°We can do all that, Auma .¡±  
She shook her head. ¡°Let me te ll you what I start thinking then. I think of who will ta ke care o f the house if I¡¯ m not 
here? I think, who can I count on to make  sure that a leak gets fixed or that the fence gets mended? It¡¯s terrib le, 
selfish, I know. All I can do when I thin k this way is to get mad at the Old Man because he didn¡¯t build this house for 
us. We are the children, Barac k. Why do we have to take care  of everyone? Everything is upside down, crazy. I had to 
take care of myself, just like Be rnard. Now I¡¯m used to living my o wn life, just like a German. Everything is 
organized. If so mething is broken, I fix it. If something goes wrong, it¡¯s my own fault. If I have it , I send money to the 
fa mily, and they can do with it what they want, and I won¡¯t depend on them, and they won¡¯t depend on me.¡±  
 
¡°It sounds lonely.¡± 
¡°Oh, I know, Barac k. That¡¯s why I keep coming ho me. That¡¯s why I¡¯m still drea ming.¡± 
After two days, I still hadn¡¯t recovered my bag. The airline office  downtown told us to call the airport, but 
whenever we tried the lines were a lways busy. Auma finally suggested that we drive out there ourselves. At t he 
British Airways desk we found two young women discussing a nightclub that had just opened. I interrupted 
their conversation to ask about my bag, and one of them thumbed listlessly through a stack of papers. 
 
¡°We have no record of you here,¡± 
she said. ¡°Please check again.¡±  
The wo man shrugged. ¡°If you wish, you can come back tonight at midnight. A flight fro m Johannesburg comes in 
at that time.¡± 
 
¡°I was told my bag wou ld be delive red to me.¡±  
¡°I¡¯m sorry, but I have no record of your bag here. If you like , you can fill out another 
form.¡±  ¡°Is Miss Omoro here? She-¡± 
¡°Omoro is on vacation.¡± 
Auma bu mped me aside. ¡°Who else can we talk to here, since you don¡¯t seem to know anything.¡±  
¡° Go downtown if you want to talk to someone else,¡± the wo man said curt ly before returning to her conversation. 
 
Auma was still muttering under her breath when we stepped into the Brit ish Airways downtown office . It was in 
a high-rise building whose elevators announced each floor e lectronically in crisp Victorian tones; a receptionist 
sat beneath photographs of lion cubs and dancing children. She repeated that we should check the airport.  
 
¡°Let me  talk to the manager,¡± I said, trying not to 
shout. ¡°I¡¯m sorry, but Mr. Maduri is in a meeting.¡±  
 
¡°Look, miss, we have just come fro m the a irport. They told us to come here . Two days ago I was told my bag would 
be delivered. Now I¡¯m told that no one even knows it¡¯s missing. I-¡± I stopped in midsentence. The receptionist had  
withdrawn behind a stony mask, a  place where neither p leading nor bluster could reach. Au ma apparently saw the same 
thing, for the air seemed to go out of her as we ll. Together we slu mped into a pair o f lounge chairs, not knowing what  
 
 
 
 
to do next, when a hand suddenly appeared on Auma¡¯s shoulder. Auma  turned to find the hand attached to a 
dark, wiry man d ressed in a blue bla ze r. 
 
¡°Eh, Uncle ! What are you doing here?¡± 
 
 
 
 
Auma introduced me to the man, who was related to us in a sequence that I couldn¡¯t quite follow. He asked us if 
we were p lanning a trip, and Auma told h im what had happened. 
 
¡°Listen, don¡¯t worry,¡± our uncle said. ¡°Maduri, he is a good friend of mine. In fact, just no w I a m about to have lunch 
with him.¡± Our uncle  turned crossly to the receptionist, who had been watching our conversation with considerable 
interest. 
 
¡°Mr. Maduri already knows you are here,¡± she said, smiling. 
Mr. Maduri turned out to be a heavyset man with a bulbous nose and a raspy voice. After we had repeated our 
story, he immediately p icked up the phone. ¡°Hello? Yes, this is Maduri. Who is this? Listen, I have Mr. Oba ma here 
who is looking for his luggage. Yes, Oba ma . He has been expecting his bag for some  time  now. What? Yes, look 
now, please.¡± A fe w minutes later the phone rang. ¡°Yes¡­o kay, send it to¡­¡±  He re layed Auma¡¯s office address, 
then hung up the phone and told us that the bag would be delivered there  that same afternoon. 
 
¡°Call me if you have any more proble ms,¡± he said. 
We thanked both men profusely and immed iately e xcused ourselves, worried that our luc k might change at any 
mo ment. Downstairs, I stopped in front of a large photograph of Kenyatta that was hanging in an office window. 
His eyes dazzled with confidence and cunning; his powerful, be jewe led hand clutched the carved staff of a 
Kikuyu chieftain. Auma  ca me and stood beside me.  
 
¡°That¡¯s where it a ll starts,¡± she said. ¡°The Big Man. Then his assistant, or his fa mily, or h is friend, or h is tribe. It¡¯s the 
same whether you want a phone, or a visa, or a job. Who are your relat ives? Who do you know? If you don¡¯t know 
somebody, you can forget it. That¡¯s what the Old Man never understood, you see. He  ca me back here  thinking that 
because he was so educated and spoke his proper English and understood his charts and graphs everyone would 
somehow put him in charge. He forgot what holds everything together here.¡± 
 
¡°He was lost,¡± I said quietly. 
Walking back to the car, I re me mbered a story Auma had told me about the Old Man a fter his fa ll fro m grace. One 
evening, he had told Auma to go to the store and fetch him some  cigarettes. She re minded him that they had no 
money, but the Old Man had shaken his head impatiently. 
 
¡°Don¡¯t be silly,¡± he told her. ¡°Just tell the storekeeper that you are Dr. Oba ma¡¯s daughter and that I will pay him 
later.¡± 
 
Auma went to the store and repeated what the Old Man had said. The storekeeper laughed and sent her away. 
Afraid to go home , Au ma called on a cousin the Old Man had once helped get a job, who lent her the few shillings 
she needed. When she got home, the Old Man took the cigarettes, scolding her for taking so long. 
 
¡° You see,¡± he said to her as he opened the pack. ¡°I told you that you would have no problems. Everyone here 
knows Oba ma.¡± 
 
I feel my father¡¯s presence as Auma and I walk through the busy street. I see him in the schoolboys who run past us, their 
lean, black legs moving like piston rods between blue shorts and oversized shoes. I hear him in the laughter of the 
 
 
 
 
pair of university students who sip sweet, creamed tea and eat samosas in a dimly lit teahouse. I smell h im in the 
cigarette smoke o f the businessman who covers one ear and shouts into a pay phone; in the sweat of the day 
laborer who loads gravel into a wheelbarro w, h is face and bare chest covered with dust. The Old Man¡¯s here, I 
think, a lthough he doesn¡¯t say anything to me. He¡¯s here, asking me to understand. 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER SIXTEEN 
B ERNARD RA NG THE DOORBELL at ten o¡¯c lock sharp. He  wore  faded blue shorts a nd a T-shirt several sizes 
too small; in his hands was a bald orange basketball, he ld out like an o ffering.  
 
¡°Ready?¡± he asked. 
¡°Almost. Give me  a second to put on my shoes.¡± 
He fo llo wed me into the apartment and stepped over to the desk where I had been working. ¡° You¡¯ve been reading 
again, Ba rry,¡±  he said, shaking his head. ¡° Your wo man will get bored with you, always spending time  with books.¡±  
 
I sat down to tie my sneakers. ¡°I¡¯ve been told.¡± 
 
He tossed the ball into the air. ¡°Me, I¡¯m not so interested in books. I¡¯m a man of action. Like  Ra mbo.¡±  
I smiled. ¡° Okay, Ra mbo,¡±  I said, standing up and opening the door. ¡° Let¡¯s see how you do running down to the 
courts.¡± 
 
Bernard looked at me  doubtfully. ¡°The courts are far away. Where¡¯s the car?¡±  
¡°Auma took it to work.¡± I went out onto the veranda and started stretching. ¡°Anyway, she told me it¡¯s just 
a mile. Good for wa rming up those young legs of yours.¡± 
 
He fo llo wed me ha lfheartedly through a few stretching e xerc ises before we started up the graveled driveway onto 
the ma in road. It  was a perfect day, the sun cut with a steady breeze, the road empty e xcept fo r a d istant woman, 
walking with a basket of kindling on top of her head. After less than a quarter of a mile, Bernard stopped dead in 
his tracks, beads of sweat forming on his high, smooth forehead. 
 
¡°I¡¯m wa rmed up, Barry,¡± he said, gulping fo r a ir. ¡°I thin k now we should walk.¡±  
 
 
 
 
 
The University of Nairobi ca mpus took up a couple of acres near the center of town. The courts were above the 
athletic field on a slight rise, their pebbled asphalt cracked with weeds. I watched Bernard as we took turns shooting, 
and thought about what a generous and easy companion he¡¯d been these last few days, taking it upon himself to guide 
me  through the city while Au ma was busy grading exa ms. He  would c lutch my hand protectively as we made our way 
through the crowded streets, infinite ly patient whenever I stopped to look at a  building or read a sign that he passed by 
every day, amused by my odd ways but with none of the elaborate gestures of boredom or resistance that I would 
have shown at his age. 
 
That sweetness, the lack of guile, made him seem much younger than his seventeen years. But he was seventeen, I 
reminded myself, an age where a little more independence, a sharper edge to his character, wouldn¡¯t be such a bad thing. I 
realized that he had time for me partly because he had nothing better to do. He was patient because  he had no 
 
 
 
 
particular p lace he wanted to go. I needed to talk to him about that, as I¡¯d promised Auma I would -a man-to-
man ta lk¡­. 
 
¡° You have seen Magic Johnson play?¡± Bernard asked me now, gathering himself for a shot. The ball went through the 
netless rim, and I passed the ball back out to him. 
 
¡°Just on TV.¡± 
Bernard nodded. ¡°Everybody has a car in A merica. And a telephone.¡± They were mo re statements than questions. 
¡°Most people. Not everybody.¡± 
He shot again and the ball clanged noisily off the rim. ¡° I thin k it is better there,¡± he said. ¡°Maybe I will co me to 
America. I can he lp you with your business.¡± 
 
¡°I don¡¯t have a business right now. Maybe after I finish la w school-
¡± ¡°It must be easy to find work.¡±  
¡°Not for everybody. Actually, lots of people have a tough time in the States. Black people 
especially.¡± He held the ball. ¡° Not as bad as here.¡± 
We looked at each other, and I tried to picture the basketball courts back in the States. The sound of gunshots 
 
 
nearby, a guy peddling nickel hits in the stairwe ll-that was one picture. The laughter of boys playing in their suburban 
backyard, their mother ca lling the m in for lunch. That was true, too. The two p ictures collided, leav ing me tongue -
tied. Satisfied with my silence, Bernard returned to his dribbling.  
 
When the sun became too strong, we walked to an ice -crea m pa rlor a fe w b locks fro m the university. Be rnard ord ered 
a chocolate sundae and began eating methodically, measuring out the ice crea m half a teaspoon at a time. I lit a 
cigarette and leaned back in my  chair. 
 
¡°Auma tells me that you¡¯re thinking about trade school,¡± 
I said. He nodded, his expression noncommittal. 
¡°What kind of courses are you interested in?¡± 
 
 
¡°I don¡¯t know.¡± He d ipped his spoon in his sundae and thought for a mo ment. ¡°Maybe auto mechanics. 
Yes¡­I think auto mechanics is good.¡± 
 
¡°Have you tried to get into some sort of program?¡±  
¡°No. Not really.¡± He stopped to take another bite. ¡° You must pay 
fees.¡± ¡°How o ld are you now, Be rnard?¡± 
¡°Seventeen,¡± he said cautiously. 
¡°Seventeen.¡± I nodded, blowing s moke at the ceiling. ¡° You know what that means, don¡¯t you? It means you¡¯re 
almost a man. So mebody with responsibilities. To your fa mily. To yourself. What I¡¯m trying to say is, it¡¯s time  you 
decided on something that interested you. Could be auto mechanics. Could be something else. But whatever it is, 
you¡¯re gonna have to set some goals and follow through. Auma and I can help you with school fees, but we can¡¯t live 
your life for you. You¡¯ve got to put in some effort. You understand?¡± 
 
Bernard nodded. ¡°I understand.¡± 
We both sat in silence for a while, watching Bernard¡¯s spoon twirl through the now-liquid mess. I began to imagine how 
hollow my words must be sounding to this brother of mine, whose only fault was having been born on the wrong 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
side of our father¡¯s c loven world. He didn¡¯t resent me  for this, it  seemed. Not yet. Only he must have been wondering 
why I was pretending that my rules somehow applied to him. A ll he wanted was a fe w tokens of our relat ionship -Bob 
Marley cassettes, maybe my basketball shoes once I was gone. So little to ask for, and yet anything else that I offered -
advice, scoldings, my a mb itions for him-would seem even less. 
 
I stamped out my c igarette and suggested we get going. As we stepped into the street, Bernard d raped his arm over my 
shoulder. 
 
¡°It¡¯s good to have a big brother around,¡± he said before wav ing good -bye and vanishing into the crowd. 
 
 
 
 
What is a fa mily? Is it just a genetic chain, parents and offspring, people like me?  Or is it a  social construct, an 
economic  unit,  optima l  fo r  child  rea ring  and  div isions  of  labor?  Or  is  it  so mething  else  entire ly:  a   store  of 
shared me mories, say? An ambit of love? A reach acro ss the void? 
 
I could list various possibilit ies. But I¡¯d never arrived at a definite answer, awa re early on that, given my 
circu mstances, such an effort was bound to fail. Instead, I drew a series of c irc les around myself, with borders that 
shifted as time passed and faces changed but that nevertheless offered the illusion of control. An inner c irc le, where  
love was constant and claims unquestioned. Then a second circle, a  rea lm o f negotiated love, commit ments free ly 
chosen. And then a circle  for co lleagues, acquaintances; the cheerful gray-haired lady who rang up my g roceries back 
in Chicago. Unt il the circ le fina lly widened to embrace a nation or a race, or a part icular mora l course, and the 
commit ments were no longer tied to a face or a na me but were  act ually co mmit ments I¡¯d made to myself. 
 
In Africa, this astronomy of mine a lmost immed iately collapsed. For fa mily seemed to be everywhere : in stores, at 
the post office, on streets and in the parks, all of them fussing and fretting over Obama ¡¯s long -lost son. If I mentioned 
in passing that I needed a notebook or shaving cream, I could count on one of my aunts to insist that she take me to 
some far-off corner of Na irobi to find the best bargains, no matter how long the trip took or how much it might 
inconvenience her. 
 
¡°Ah, Barry ¡­what is mo re important than helping my brother¡¯s son?¡± 
If a cousin discovered, much to his distress, that Auma had left me to fend for myself, he might walk the two miles to  
 
Auma¡¯s apart ment on the off chance that I was there and needed company. 
 
¡°Ah, Barry, why didn¡¯t you call on me?  Co me, I will take  you to meet some o f my friends.¡±  
And in the evenings, well, Au ma and I simply surrendered ourselves to the endless invitations tha t came our way 
fro m uncles, nephews, second cousins or cousins once removed, all o f whom de manded, at the risk of insult, that we sit 
down for a mea l, no matter what time it happened to be or how many mea ls we had already eaten. 
 
¡°Ah, Barry ¡­we may not have much in Kenya-but so long as you are here, you will always have something to eat!¡± 
At first I reacted to all this attention like a  child to its mother¡¯s bosom, full of simple , unquestioning gratitude. It 
conformed to my idea of Africa  and Africans, an obvious contrast to the growing isolation of A merican life, a contrast 
I understood, not in racial, but in cu ltural terms. A measure of what we sacrificed for technology and mobility, but that 
here-as in the ka mpongs outside Djaka rta or in the country villages of Ireland or Greece-re ma ined essentially intact: 
the insistent pleasure of other people¡¯s company, the joy of hu man wa rmth.  
 
 
 
 
As the days wore on, though, my joy beca me te mpered with tension and doubt. Some o f it had to do with what Au ma 
had talked about that night in the car-an acute awareness of my relative good fortune, and the troublesome questions 
such good fortune implied. Not that our relatives were  suffering, e xactly. Both Jane and Zeituni had steady jobs; Kezia 
made do selling cloth in the markets. If cash got too short, the children could be sent upcountry for a time; that¡¯s where 
another brother, Abo, was staying, I was told, with an uncle in Kend u Bay, where  there we re a lways chores to 
perform, food on the table and a roof over one¡¯s head. 
 
Still, the situation in Na irobi was tough and getting tougher. Clothes were mostly secondhand, a doctor¡¯s visit 
reserved for the direst eme rgency. Almost all the fa mily¡¯s younger me mbe rs were une mployed, including the two or 
three who had managed, against stiff co mpetition, to graduate fro m one of Kenya¡¯s universities. If Jane or Ze ituni 
ever fell ill, if their co mpanies ever c losed or laid the m off, there was n o government safety net. There was only 
fa mily, ne xt  of kin; people burdened by similar hardship.  
 
Now I was fa mily, I re minded myself; now I had responsibilit ies. But what did that mean e xactly? Bac k in the States, 
 
I¡¯d been able to translate such feelings into politics, organizing, a  certain self -denia l. In Kenya, these strategies seemed 
hopelessly abstract, even self-indulgent. A commit ment to black e mpowerment couldn¡¯t help find Be rnard a job. A 
faith in pa rtic ipatory democracy couldn¡¯t buy Jane a new set of sheets. For the first time in my life, I found myself 
thinking deeply about money: my o wn lac k of it, the pursuit of it, the crude but undeniable peace it could buy. A part 
of me wished I could live up to the image that my new re latives imagined for me : a  corporate la wyer, an A me rican 
businessman, my hand poised on the spigot, ready to rain down like manna the largesse of the Western world. 
 
But of course I wasn¡¯t either of those things. Even in the States, wea lth involved trade-offs for those who weren¡¯t 
born to it, the same sorts of trade-offs that I could see Auma now ma king as she tried, in her own way, to fu lfill the 
fa mily¡¯s e xpectations. She was working two jobs that summe r, teaching Ge rman c lasses to Kenyan businessmen along 
with her job at the university. With the money she saved, she wanted not only to fix up Granny¡¯s house in Alego but 
also to buy a bit of land around Nairobi, something that would appreciate in value, a  base fro m which to build. She had 
plans, schedules, budgets, and deadlines -all the things she¡¯d learned were required to negotiate a modern world. The 
problem was that her schedules also meant begging off fro m fa mily a ffa irs; her budgets meant saying no to the 
constant requests for money that came her way. And when this happened-when she insisted on going home before Jane 
served dinner because things had started two hours late, or when she refused to let eight people pile into her VW 
because it was designed for four and they would tear up the seats-the looks of unspoken hurt, barely distinguishable 
fro m resentment, would flash across the room. He r restlessness, her independence, her constant willingness to project 
into the future-all of this struck the fa mily as unnatural somehow. Unnatural¡­an d un-African. 
 
It was the same dile mma that old Frank had posed to me the year I left Ha waii, the same tensions that certain children 
in Altgeld might suffer if they took too much pleasure in doing their schoolwork, the same pe rverse survivor¡¯s guilt that 
 
I could e xpect to e xperience if I ever d id try to ma ke money and had to pass the throngs of young black men on the 
corner as I made my way to a downtown office. W ithout power for the group, a group larger, even, than an extended 
fa mily, our success always  threatened to leave others behind. And perhaps it was that fact that left me so unsettled -the 
fact that even here, in Africa, the same  maddening patterns still he ld sway; that no one here could tell me what my  
blood ties demanded or how those demands could be reconciled with some larger idea of human association. It was as  
 
 
 
 
if we-Au ma, Roy, Bernard, and I-we re a ll ma king it up as we went a long. As if the map that might have once 
measured the direction and force of our love, the code that would unlock our b lessings, had been lost long ago, 
buried with the ancestors beneath a s ilent earth. 
 
Toward the end of my first wee k in Nairobi, Ze ituni took me to visit our other aunt, Sarah. Au ma had re mained 
unwilling to go, but because it turned out that her mechanic lived near Sarah, she offered to give us a ride to her 
garage; fro m there, she said, we could trave l by foot. On Saturday morning, Au ma and I p icked up Ze ituni and 
headed east, past cinder-block apart ments and dry, garbage-strewn lots, until we fina lly ca me to the rim of a wide 
valley known as Mathare. Auma pulled off to the shoulder and I looked out the window to see the shantytown below, 
miles and miles of corrugated rooftops shimmering under the sun like wet lily pads, buckling and dipping in an 
unbroken sequence across the valley floor. 
 
¡°How many people live there?¡± I asked. 
 
 
 
Auma shrugged and turned to our aunt. ¡°What would you say, Auntie? Half a million, 
maybe?¡± Ze ituni shook her head. ¡°That was last week. This wee k, it must be one million.¡± 
Auma started the car back up. ¡°Nobody knows  for sure, Barac k. The p lace is growing all the time. People co me in 
fro m the countryside looking for work and end up staying permanently. For a while, the city council tried to tear the 
settlement down. They said it was a health ha zard-an affront to Kenya¡¯s image, you see. Bu lldo zers ca me, and 
people lost what little  they had. But of course, they had nowhere else to go. As soon as the bulldozers left, people 
rebuilt just like before .¡± 
 
We came to a stop in front of a  slanting tin shed where a mechanic and several apprentices emerged to look 
Auma¡¯s car over. Pro mising to be back in an hour, Zeituni and I left Au ma at the garage and began our walk down a 
wide, unpaved road. It was already hot, the road bereft of shade; on either side were ro ws of sma ll hovels , their walls 
a patchwork of wattle, mud, pieces of cardboard, and scavenged plywood. They were neat, though, the packed earth 
in front of each home c leanly swept, and everywhere we could see tailors and shoe repairers and furniture ma kers 
plying their trades out of roadside stalls, and women and children selling vegetables from wobbly wood tables. 
 
Eventually we ca me  to one edge of Mathare, where a series of concrete buildings stood along a paved road. The 
buildings were e ight, maybe twelve stories tall, and yet curiously unfinished, the wood beams and rough cement 
e xposed to the elements, like they¡¯d suffered an aeria l bo mbard ment. We entered one of them, climbed a narrow flight 
of stairs, and eme rged at the end of a long unlit hallway, at the other end of which we saw a teenage girl hanging out 
clothes to dry on a small ce ment patio. Ze ituni went to talk to the girl, who led us wordlessly to a low, scuffed door. 
We knocked, and a dark, middle-aged wo man appeared, short but sturdily built, with hard, g lassy  eyes set in a wide, 
rawboned face. She took my  hand and said something in Luo.  
 
¡°She says she is ashamed to have her brother¡¯s son see her in such a miserable  place,¡± Ze ituni translated. 
We were shown into a sma ll roo m, ten feet by twelve, la rge enough t o fit a bed, a dresser, two chairs, and a sewing 
mach ine. Ze ituni and I each took one of the chairs, and the young woman who had shown us Sarah¡¯s room returned 
with two warm sodas. Sarah sat on the bed and leaned forward to study my face. Auma  had said tha t Sarah knew so me 
 
 
 
 
English, but she spoke mostly in Luo now. Even without the benefit of Zeituni¡¯s translation, I guessed that she 
wasn¡¯t happy. 
 
¡°She wants to know why you have taken so long to visit her,¡± Zeituni e xp lained. ¡°She says that she is the eldest 
child of your grandfather, Hussein Onyango, and that you should have come to see her first.¡±  
 
¡°Tell her I meant no disrespect,¡± I said, looking at Sarah but not sure what she understood. ¡°Everything¡¯s been so 
busy since my arrival-it was hard to come  sooner.¡± 
 
Sarah¡¯s tone became sharp. ¡°She says that the people you stay with must be telling you lies.¡±  
 
 
 
 
 
¡°Tell her that I¡¯ve heard nothing said against her. Tell her that the dispute about the Old Man¡¯s estate has just made 
Auma uncomfortable about coming here.¡±  
 
Sarah snorted after the translation and started up again, her voice ru mb ling against the close walls. When 
she finally stopped, Zeituni re ma ined quiet. 
 
¡°What¡¯d she say, Zeituni?¡± 
Zeituni¡¯s eyes stayed on Sarah as she answered my question. ¡°She says the trial is not her fault. She says that it¡¯s 
Kezia ¡¯s doing-Auma¡¯s mu m. She says that the children who cla im to be Oba ma¡¯s are not Oba ma ¡¯s. She says they have 
taken everything of his and left his true people living like beggars.¡± 
 
Sarah nodded, and her eyes began to smolder. ¡° Yes, Ba rry,¡±  she said suddenly in English. ¡°It is me who looks after 
your father when he is a sma ll boy. My mother, Aku mu, is also your father¡¯s mother. Aku mu  is your true grandmother, 
not this one you call Granny. Aku mu, the wo man who gives your father life -you should be helping her. And me , your 
brother¡¯s sister. Look how I live. Why don¡¯t you help us, instead of these others?¡± 
 
Before  I could answer, Ze ituni and Sarah began to argue with each other in Luo. Eventually, Ze ituni stood up and 
straightened her skirt. ¡°We should go now, Ba rry.¡±  
 
I began to rise out of my cha ir, but Sarah took my hand in both of hers, her 
voice softening. ¡°Will you give me something? For your grandmother?¡± 
I  reached  for  my  wallet  and  felt   the  eyes  of  both  aunts  as  I  counted  out  the  money  I  had  on  me -perhaps  thirty 
dollars¡¯ worth of shillings. I pressed them into Sarah¡¯s dry, chapped hands, and she quickly slipped the money down 
the front of her blouse before clutching my hand again. 
 
¡°Stay here, Barry,¡±  Sarah said. ¡° You must meet-¡± 
¡° You can come back later, Barry,¡± Ze ituni said. ¡° Let¡¯s go.¡± 
Outside,  a  ha zy  yellow  light  bathed  the  road;  my  c lothes  hung  limp   against  my  body  in  the  windless  heat. 
Zeituni  was  quiet  now,  v isibly  upset.  She  was  a  proud  wo man,  this  aunt;  the  scene  with  Sarah  must  have 
embarrassed her. And then, that thirty dollars -Lord knows, she could have used it herself¡­. 
 
We had walked for ten minutes before I asked Zeituni what she and Sarah had been arguing about. 
 
¡°Ah, it¡¯s nothing, Barry. This is what happens to old women who have no husbands.¡±  Zeituni tried to smile, 
but the tension creased the corners of her mouth. 
 
¡°Co me on, Auntie. Te ll me  the truth.¡± 
 
 
 
 
Zeituni shook her head. ¡°I don¡¯t know the truth. At least not all of it. I know that even growing up, Sarah was always 
closer to her real mum, Akumu. Barack, he cared only for my mum, Granny, the one who raised them after 
 
Akumu left.¡± 
 
¡°Why did Akumu leave?¡± 
¡°I¡¯m not sure. You will have to ask Granny about that.¡± 
Zeituni signaled for us to cross the street, then resumed talking. ¡° You know, your father and Sarah were actually 
very similar, even though they did not always get along. She was smart like him. And independent. She used to tell 
me , when we were ch ildren, that she wanted to get an education so that she would not have to depend on any man. 
That¡¯s why she ended up married to four different husbands. None of them lasted. The first one died, but the others 
she left, because they were la zy, or tried to abuse her. I ad mire her for this. Most wo men in Kenya put up with 
anything. I did, for a long time. But Sa rah also paid a price for her independence.¡± 
 
Zeituni wiped the sweat on her forehead with the back of her hand. ¡°Anyway, after Sarah¡¯s first husband died, 
she decided that your father should support her and her child, since he had rece ived all the education. That¡¯s why 
she disliked Ke zia and her children. She thought Kezia was just a pretty girl who wanted to take everything. You 
must understand, Barry-in Luo custom, the ma le child inherits everything. Sarah feared that once your 
grandfather died, everything would belong to Barac k and his wives, and she would be left with nothing.¡±  
 
I shook my head. ¡°That¡¯s no e xcuse for ly ing about who the Old Man¡¯s 
children are .¡± ¡° You¡¯re right. But¡­¡±  
¡°But what?¡± 
Zeituni stopped walking and turned to me. She said, ¡°After your father went off to live with h is American wife,  
 
Ruth¡­we ll, he wou ld go to Kezia so metimes. You must understand that traditionally she was still his wife. It was 
during such a visit that Kezia beca me p regnant with Abo, the brother you haven¡¯t met. The thing was, Ke zia  also lived 
with another man briefly during this time. So when she became pregnant again, with Berna rd, no one was sure who -¡± 
Zeituni stopped, letting the thought finish itself. 
 
¡°Does Bernard know about this?¡± 
 
 
 
 
 
¡° Yes, he knows by now. You understand, such things made no diffe rence to your fat her. He would say that they were 
all his children. He drove this other man a way, and would g ive Ke zia money for the children whenever he could. But 
once he died, there was nothing to prove that he¡¯d accepted them in this way.¡±  
 
We turned a corner onto a busier road. In front of us, a pregnant goat bleated as it scuttered out of the path of an oncoming 
matatu. Across the way, two little girls in dusty red school uniforms, their round heads shaven almost clean, held hands and 
sang as they skipped across a gutter. An old woman with her head under a faded shawl motioned to us to look at her wares: 
two margarine tins of dried beans, a neat stack of tomatoes, dried fish hanging from a wire like a chain of silver coins. I 
looked into the old woman¡¯s face, drawn beneath the shadows. Who was this woman? I wondered. My grandmother? A 
stranger? And what about Bernard-should my feelings for him somehow be different now? I looked over at a bus stop, 
where a crowd of young men were streaming out into the road, all of them tall and black and slender, their bones pressing 
against their shirts. I suddenly imagined Bernard¡¯s face on all of them, multiplied across the landscape, across continents. 
Hungry, striving, desperate men, all of them my brothers¡­. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¡°Now you see what your father suffered.¡± 
¡°What?¡± I rubbed my eyes and looked up to find my aunt staring at me.  
¡° Yes, Ba rry, your father suffered,¡± she repeated. ¡°I a m te lling you, his proble m was t hat his heart was too big. When 
he lived, he would just give to everybody who asked him. And they all asked. You know, he was one of the first in the 
whole district to study abroad. The people back home , they didn¡¯t even know anyone else who had ridden in  an 
airplane before . So they e xpected everything fro m h im. ¡®Ah, Barac k, you are a  big shot now. You should give me 
something. You should help me.¡¯ A lways these pressures from fa mily. And he couldn¡¯t say no, he was so gener ous. 
You know, even me he had to take care of when I became  pregnant, he was very disappointed in me. He had wanted 
me  to go to college. But I would not listen to him, and went off with my husband. And despite this thing, when my 
husband became abusive and I had to leave, no money, no job, who do you think took me in? Yes -it was him. That¡¯s 
why, no matter what others sometimes say, I will always be grateful to him.¡±  
 
We were approaching the garage shop; up ahead, we could see Auma talking to her mechanic and hear the engine of 
the old VW whine. Beside us, a naked boy, maybe three years o ld, wandered out fro m behind a ro w of oil dru ms, his 
feet caked with what looked like tar. Again Ze ituni stopped, this time as if suddenly ill, and spat into the dust. 
 
¡°When your father¡¯s luck changed,¡± she said, ¡°these same people he had helped, they forgot him. They laughed at 
him. Even fa mily refused to have him stay in their houses. Yes, Barry! Refused! They would tell Ba rack it was too 
dangerous. I knew this hurt him, but he wouldn¡¯t pass blame. You r father never held a g rudge. In fact, when he was 
rehabilitated and doing well again, I would find out that he was giving help to these same people who had betrayed 
him. Ah, I could not understand this thing. I would tell him, ¡®Barac k, you should only loo k after yourself and your 
children! These others, they have treated you badly. They are just too lazy to work for the mselves.¡¯ And you know 
what he would say to me? He would say, ¡®Ho w do you know that man does not need this small thing more  than me? ¡¯¡± 
My aunt turned away and, forcing a s mile, waved to Auma. And as we began to walk forward, she added, ¡°I tell you 
this so you will know the pressure your father was under in this place. So you don¡¯t judge him too harshly. And you 
must learn fro m his life . If you have something, then everyone will want a p iece of it. So you have to draw the line 
somewhere. If everyone is fa mily, no one is fa mily. Your father, he never understood this, I think.¡±  
 
I re me mbe r a conversation I had once in Ch icago when I was still org anizing. It was with a wo man who¡¯d grown up 
in a big fa mily in rural Georg ia. Five brothers and three sisters, she had told me , a ll crowded under a single roof. She 
told me  about her father¡¯s ultimate ly futile efforts to farm h is sma ll plot of land, her mo ther¡¯s vegetable garden, the two 
pigs they kept penned out in the yard, and the trips with her siblings to fish the murky waters of a river nearby. 
Listening to her speak, I began to realize that two of the three sisters she¡¯d mentioned had actually died a t birth, but 
that in this woman¡¯s mind they had rema ined with her a lways, spirits with na mes and ages and characters, two sisters 
who accompanied her while she wa lked to school or did chores, who soothed her cries and calmed her fears. Fo r this 
wo man, fa mily had never been a vessel just for the living. The dead, too, had their c la ims, their voices shaping the 
course of her dreams. 
 
 
 
 
So now it was for me. I re me mber how, a  fe w days after my visit to Sa rah¡¯s, Auma and I happened to run into an 
acquaintance of the Old Man¡¯s outside Barc lay¡¯s Bank. I could tell that Auma d idn¡¯t re me mbe r his na me, so I he ld out 
my hand and introduced myself. The man s miled and said, ¡°My, my -you have grown s o tall. How¡¯s your mother? And 
your brother Mark-has he graduated from university yet?¡± 
 
At first I was confused. Did I know this person? And then Auma e xpla ined in a low voice that no, I was a different 
brother, Barac k, who gre w up in A me rica , the child of a d ifferent mother. David had passed away. And then the 
awkwardness on all sides -the man nodding his head (¡°I¡¯m sorry, I didn¡¯t know¡±) but taking another look at me , as if to 
ma ke sure what he¡¯d heard was true; Auma trying to appear as if the situation, while sad, was somehow the normal 
stuff of tragedy; me standing to the side, wondering ho w to feel after having been mistaken for a ghost. 
 
Later, back in her apart ment, I asked Au ma when she had last seen Mark and Ruth. She leaned her head 
against my shoulder and looked up at the ceiling.  
 
¡°David¡¯s funeral,¡± she said. ¡°Although by then they h ad stopped speaking to us for a 
long time.¡± ¡°Why?¡± 
 
¡°I told you that Ruth¡¯s divorce fro m the Old Man was very bitter. After they separated, she married a  Tan zanian and 
had Mark and David ta ke his na me. She sent them to an international school, and they were ra ised like foreigners. She  
told them that they should have nothing to do with our side of the fa mily.¡±  
 
Auma sighed. ¡°I don¡¯t know. Maybe because he was older, Mark ca me  to share Ruth¡¯s attitudes and had no contact 
with us after that. But for some  reason, once David was a teenager, he began to rebel against Ruth. He told her he was 
an African, and started calling himself Oba ma . So met imes he would sneak off fro m school to visit the Old M an and 
the rest of the family, wh ich is how we got to know h im. He  became  everybody¡¯s favorite. He was so sweet, you 
know, and funny, even if he was sometimes too wild.  
 
¡°Ruth tried to enroll h im in a boarding school, hoping it would settle him down. But Dav id ended up running away 
instead. Nobody saw him for months. Then Roy happened to bump into him outside a rugby match. He was dirty, 
thin, begging money fro m strangers. He laughed when he saw Roy, and bragged ab out his life on the streets, hustling 
bhang with his friends. Roy told him to go home , but he refused, so Roy took David to his own apart ment, sending 
word to Ruth that her son was safe and staying with him. When Ruth heard this, she was relieved but also furious. She 
begged David to come back, but when he again refused, she tacitly accepted the arrangement with Roy, hoping that 
eventually David wou ld change his mind.¡± 
 
Auma sipped on her tea. ¡°That¡¯s when David died. While he was living with Roy. His death  broke everybody¡¯s 
heart-Roy¡¯s especially. The t wo of the m were really c lose, you see. But Ruth never understood that. She thought 
we had corrupted David. Stolen her baby away. And I don¡¯t think she¡¯s ever forgiven us for it.¡±  
 
I decided to stop talking about David after that; I could tell that Auma  found the me mo ries too painful.  But only a 
few days later, Au ma and I ca me ho me to find a ca r wait ing for us outside the apartment. The driver, a  brown  -skinned 
man with a pro minent Adam¡¯s apple, handed Auma a n ote. 
 
¡°What is it?¡± I asked. 
 
¡°It¡¯s an invitation fro m Ruth,¡± she said. ¡°Mark¡¯s back fro m A merica for the summe r. She wants to have us 
over for lunch.¡± 
 
 
 
 
 
¡°Do you want to go?¡± 
Auma shook her head, a look of d isgust on her face. ¡°Ruth knows I¡¯ve been here a lmost six months now. She doesn¡¯t 
care about me. The only reason she¡¯s invited us is because she¡¯s curious about you. She wants to compare you to 
Mark.¡± 
 
¡°I think maybe I should go,¡± I said quietly. 
 
Auma looked at the note again, then handed it back to the driver and said something to him in Swahili. ¡°We¡¯ll both 
go,¡± she said, and walked into the apartment. 
 
Ruth lived in Westlands, an enclave of expensive homes set off by wide  la wns and well-tended hedges, each one with 
a sentry post manned by brown-uniformed guards. It was rain ing as we drove toward her house, sending a soft, gentle 
spray through the big, leafy t rees. The coolness reminded me of the streets around Punahou, Manoa, Tantalus, the 
streets where some of my  wea lthier classmates had lived back in Hawa ii. Sta ring out Auma¡¯s car window, I thought 
back to the envy I¡¯d felt towa rd those classmates whenever they invited me over to play in their b ig backyards or swim 
in their swimming pools. And along with that envy, a different imp ression -the sense of quiet desperation those big, 
pretty houses seemed to contain. The sound of someone¡¯s sister crying softly behind the door. The sight of a mother 
sneaking a tumble r of g in in mida fternoon. The e xpression on a father¡¯s face as he sat alone in his den, his features 
clenched as he flic ked between college football ga mes on TV. An impression of loneliness that perhaps wasn¡¯t true, 
perhaps was just a projection of my own heart, but th at, either way, had made me  want to run, just as, an ocean away, 
David had run, back into the marketplace and noisy streets, back into disorder and the laughter disorder produced, 
back into the sort of pain a boy could understand. 
 
We came to one of the more  modest houses on the block and parked along the curve of a looping driveway. A wh ite 
wo man with a long ja w and graying ha ir ca me out of the house to meet us. Beh ind her was a blac k man  of my  height 
and comple xion with a bushy Afro and horn-rimmed g lasses. 
 
¡°Co me in, co me  in,¡±  Ruth said. The four of us shook hands stiffly and entered a la rge liv ing room, where a  balding, 
older blac k man in a safari jacket was bouncing a young boy on his lap. ¡°This is my husband,¡± Ruth said, ¡°and th is is 
Mark¡¯s little  brother, Joey.¡±  
 
¡°Hey, Joey,¡± I said, bending down to shake his hand. He  was a beautiful boy, with honey -colored skin and two  front 
teeth missing. Ruth tousled the boy¡¯s big curls, then looked at her husband and said, ¡°Weren¡¯t you two o n your way to 
the club?¡± 
 
¡° Yes, yes,¡± the man said, standing up. ¡°Come on, Joey¡­it was nice to meet you both.¡± The boy stood fast, staring up 
at Auma and me with a bright, curious smile until his father fina lly p icked h im up and carried h im out the door. ¡° Well, 
here we a re,¡± Ruth said, leading us to the couch and pouring le monade. ¡°I must say it was quite a surprise to 
 
find out you were here, Ba rry. I told Ma rk that we just had to see how this other son of Oba ma¡¯s turned out. Your 
name is Oba ma, isn¡¯t it? But your mother re married. I wonder why she had you keep your name?¡±  
 
I smiled as if I hadn¡¯t understood the question. ¡°So, Mark,¡± I said, turning to my brother, ¡° I hear you¡¯re at 
Berke ley.¡± ¡°Stanford,¡± he corrected. His voice was deep, his accent perfectly A merican. ¡°I¡¯m in my last year of the 
physics program there.¡±  
 
¡°It must be tough,¡± Auma offered. 
 
 
 
 
 
Mark shrugged. ¡°Not really.¡± 
¡°Don¡¯t be so modest, dear,¡± Ruth said. ¡°The things Mark studies are so complicated only a handful of people really 
understand it all.¡±  She patted Mark on the hand, then turned to me. ¡°And Barry, I understand you¡¯ll be going to  
 
Harvard. Just like Oba ma . You must have gotten some of his brains. Hopefully not the rest of him, though. You know 
 
Oba ma was quite cra zy, don¡¯t you? The drinking made it wo rse. Did you ever meet him?  Oba ma , I 
mean?¡± ¡° Only once. When I was ten.¡± 
¡°Well, you were lucky then. It probably e xp la ins why you¡¯re doing so well.¡±  
That¡¯s how the next hour passed, with Ruth alternating between stories of my father¡¯s failure and stories of Mark¡¯s 
accomplishments. Any questions were directed exclusively to me, leaving Auma to fiddle silently with Ruth¡¯s lasagna. 
 
I wanted to leave as soon as the meal was over, but Ruth suggested that Mark show us the family a lbu m while 
she brought out the dessert. 
 
¡°I¡¯m sure they¡¯re not interested, Mother,¡± Mark said. 
¡°Of course they¡¯re interested,¡± Ruth said. Then, her voice oddly distant: ¡°There are  pictures of Oba ma. Fro m 
when he was young¡­.¡± 
 
We follo wed Mark to the bookcase, and he pulled down a large photo album. Together we sat on the couch, slowly 
thumbing through laminate pages. Auma and Roy, dark and skinny and tall, a ll legs and big eyes, holding the two 
smaller children protectively in their a rms. The Old Man and Ruth mugging it up at a beach some where. The entire 
fa mily dressed up for a night out on the town. They were happ y scenes, all of them, and all strangely fa milia r, as if I 
were g limpsing some a lternative universe that had played itself out behind my back. They were  re flect ions, I 
realized, of my  own long-held fantasies, fantasies that I¡¯d kept secret even from myself. The fantasy of the Old 
Man¡¯s having taken my mother and me back with him to Kenya. The wish that my mother and father, sisters and 
brothers, were all under one roof. He re it  was, I thought, what might have been. And the recognition of how wrong it 
had all turned out, the harsh evidence of life  as it had really been lived, made me  so sad that after only a fe w minutes 
I had to look a way. On the drive back, I apologized to Auma for having put her through the ordeal. She waved it off.  
 
¡°It could have been worse,¡± she said. ¡°I fee l sorry for Mark, though. He seems so alone. You know, it¡¯s not easy 
being a mixed child in Kenya.¡±  
 
I looked out the window, thin king about my mother, Toot, and Gra mps, and how grateful I was to them -for who 
they were, and for the stories they¡¯d told. I turned back to Auma, and said, ¡°She still hasn¡¯t gotten over him, has she?¡± 
¡°Who?¡± 
 
¡°Ruth. She hasn¡¯t gotten over the Old Man.¡± 
Auma thought for a mo ment. ¡°No, Ba rack. I guess she hasn¡¯t. Just like the rest of us.¡± 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The following week, I called Mark and suggested that we go out to lunch. He seemed a  bit hesitant, but eventually 
agreed to meet me  at an Indian restaurant downtown. He was more re la xed than he had been during our first meeting, 
ma king a fe w self-deprecatory jokes, offe ring his observations about Califo rnia and academic infighting. As the meal 
wore on, I asked him how it fe lt being back for the summe r.  
 
 
 
 
¡°Fine,¡± he said. ¡° It¡¯s nice to see my mo m and dad, of course. And Joey-he¡¯s really a great kid.¡± Mark cut off a bite 
of his samosa and put it into his mouth. ¡°As for the rest of Kenya, I don¡¯t fee l much of an attachment. Just another 
poor African country.¡± 
 
¡° You don¡¯t ever think about settling here?¡± 
Mark took a  sip fro m his Coke. ¡° No,¡± he said. ¡° I mean, there¡¯s not much work for a physicist, is there, in 
a country where the average person doesn¡¯t have a telephone.¡± 
 
I should have stopped then, but something-the certainty in this brother¡¯s voice, maybe, or our rough resemb lance, 
like looking into a foggy mirror-made me  want to push harder. I asked, ¡°Don¡¯t you ever fee l like you might be 
losing something?¡± 
 
Mark put down his kn ife and fork, and for the first time  that afternoon his eyes looked straight into mine. 
 
¡°I understand what you¡¯re getting at,¡± he said flatly. ¡° You th ink that somehow I¡¯m cut off fro m my  roots, that sort of 
thing.¡± He wiped his mouth and dropped the napkin onto his plate. ¡°Well, you¡¯re right. At a certa in point, I made a 
decision not to think about who my real father was. He was dead to me even when he was still a live. I knew that he 
was a drunk and showed no concern for his wife  or children. That was enough.¡± 
 
¡°It made you mad.¡±  
¡°Not mad. Just numb.¡± 
¡°And that doesn¡¯t bother you? Being numb, I mean?¡±  
¡°Towards him, no. Other things move me . Beethoven¡¯s symphonies. Shakespeare¡¯s sonnets. I know -it¡¯s not what an 
African is supposed to care about. But who¡¯s to tell me what I should and shouldn¡¯t care about? Understand, I¡¯m not 
ashamed of being half Kenyan. I just don¡¯t ask myself a  lot of questions about what it all means. About who I really 
am.¡± He shrugged. ¡°I don¡¯t know. Maybe I should. I can acknowledge the possibility that if I loo ked more care fully 
at myself, I would ¡­¡±  
 
For the brie fest mo ment I sensed Mark hesitate, like  a roc k climbe r losing his footing. Then, almost immed iately, 
he regained his composure and waved for the check.  
 
¡°Who knows?¡± he said. ¡°What¡¯s certain is that I don¡¯t need the stress. Life ¡¯s hard enough without all that e xcess 
baggage.¡± 
 
We stood up to leave, and I insisted on paying the bill. Outside we e xchanged addresses and promised to write, with a 
dishonesty that made my heart ache. When I got home , I told  Auma  how the meet ing had gone. She looked  away for a  
mo ment, then broke out with a short, bitter laugh. 
 
¡°What¡¯s so funny?¡± 
¡°I was just thinking about how life  is so strange. You know, as soon as the Old Man died, the lawyers contacted 
all those who might have a claim to the inheritance. Unlike  my   mu m,  Ruth has all the documents needed to prove 
who Mark¡¯s father was. So o f a ll of the Old Man¡¯s kids, Mark¡¯s claim is the only one that¡¯s uncontested.¡±  
 
Again Auma laughed, and I looked up at the picture hangin g on her wall, the sa me picture pasted inside 
Ruth¡¯s album, of three brothers and a sister, smiling sweetly for the ca me ra.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 
T OWARD THE END OF my second week in Kenya, Au ma and I went on a safari.  
 
 
 
 
 
Auma wasn¡¯t thrilled with the idea. When I first showed her the brochure, she grimaced and shook her head. Like 
most Kenyans, she could draw a straight line between the game parks an d colonialism. ¡° How many Kenyans do you 
think can affo rd to go on a safari?¡± she asked me. ¡°Why should all that land be set aside for tourists when it could be 
used for farming? These wa zungu care more about one dead elephant than they do for a hundred bla ck child ren.¡± 
For several days we parried. I told her she was letting other people¡¯s attitudes prevent her from seeing her own 
country. She said she didn¡¯t want to waste the money. Eventually she re lented, not because of my persuasive powers 
but because she took pity on me . 
 
¡°If some  anima l ate you out there,¡± she said, ¡°I¡¯d never forgive myself.¡±  
And so, at seven o¡¯clock on a Tuesday morning, we watched a sturdily built Kikuyu driver na med Franc is load 
our bags onto the roof of a wh ite minivan. W ith us were a spindly cook na med Rafae l, a da rk-haired Italian na med 
Mauro, and a Brit ish couple in their early forties, the Wilke rsons. 
 
We drove out of Nairobi at a  modest pace, passing soon into countryside, green hills and red dirt paths and small 
shambas surrounded by plots of wilting, widely spaced corn. Nobody spoke, a discomfit ing silence that re minded me 
of simila r mo ments back in the States, the pause that would sometimes accompany my personal integration of a bar o r 
hotel. It made me  think about Auma and Mark, my grandparents back in Ha waii, my mother still in Indonesia, and the 
things Zeituni had told me. 
 
If everyone is fa mily, then no one is fa mily. 
 
 
Was Zeituni right? I¡¯d co me to Kenya thinking that I could somehow force my many wo rlds into a single,  
harmonious whole. Instead, the divisions seemed only to have become more mu ltip lied, popping up in the midst of 
even the simp lest chores. I thought back to the previous morning, when Auma  and I had gone to book our tic kets. 
The travel agency was owned by Asians; most small businesses in Nairob i were owned by Asians. Right away, Au ma 
had tensed up. 
 
¡° You see how arrogant they are?¡± she had whispered as we watched a young Indian woman order her blac k c lerks 
to and fro. ¡°They call the mselves Kenyans, but they  want nothing to do with us. As soon as they make their  money, 
they send it off to London or Bo mbay.¡± 
 
Her attitude had touched a nerve. ¡°How can you blame  Asians for sending their money out of the country,¡± I had 
asked her, ¡°after what happened in Uganda?¡± I had gone on to tell her about the close Indian and Pakistani friends I 
had back in the States, friends who had supported black causes, friends who had lent me money when I was tight and 
taken me into their homes when I¡¯d had no place to stay. Auma had been unmoved. 
 
¡°Ah, Barac k,¡± she had said. ¡°So metimes you¡¯re so naive.¡± 
 
I looked at Au ma now, her face turned toward the window. What had I e xpected my little lecture to acco mp lish? My 
simp le  formu las for Third World solidarity had  little  application  in  Kenya. He re, persons of  Indian e xt raction  were  
like the Chinese in Indones ia, the Koreans in the South Side of Ch icago, outsiders who knew how to trade and kept to  
 
 
 
 
themselves, working the marg ins of a racia l caste system, mo re visible  and so more vulnera b le to resentment. 
It was nobody¡¯s fault necessarily. It was just a matter of history, an unfortunate fact of life.  
 
Anyway, the divisions in Kenya didn¡¯t stop there; there were always finer lines to draw. Between the country¡¯s forty black tribes, 
for example. They, too, were a fact of life. You didn¡¯t notice the tribalism so much among Auma¡¯s friends, younger university -
educated Kenyans who¡¯d been schooled in the idea of nation and race; tribe was an issue with them only when they were 
considering a mate, or when they got older and saw it help or hinder careers. But they were the exceptions. M ost Kenyans still 
worked with older maps of identity, more ancient loyalties. Even Jane or Zeituni could say things that surprised me. ¡°The Luo are 
intelligent but lazy,¡± they would say. Or ¡°The Kikuyu are money -grubbing but industrious.¡± Or ¡°The 
Kalenjins-well, you can see what¡¯s happened to the country since they took over.¡± 
 
Hearing my aunts traffic in such stereotypes, I would try to e xp lain to the m the erro r of their ways. ¡°It¡¯s thinking 
like that that holds us back,¡± I would say. ¡°We¡¯re all part o f one tribe. The blac k tribe. The hu man tribe. Look what 
tribalism has done to places like Nigeria or Liberia .¡± 
 
And Jane would say, ¡°Ah, those West Africans are all c razy anyway. You know they used to be cannibals, 
don¡¯t you?¡± 
 
And Zeituni would say, ¡° You sound just like  your father, Ba rry. He a lso had such ideas about people.¡± 
Meaning he, too, was naive; he, too, liked to argue with history. Look what happened to him¡­.  
The van suddenly came  to a stop, shaking me out of my reverie . We we re in front of a sma ll shamba, and our driver, 
Francis, asked us all to stay put. A few minutes later, he e me rged fro m the house with a young African girl, maybe 
twelve or thirteen, who was dressed in jeans and a neatly pressed blouse and carried a sma ll duffe l bag. Francis helped 
her into the back and pointed to the seat next to Auma.  
 
 
¡°Is this your daughter?¡± Auma asked, scooting over to make  roo m for the girl.  
¡°No,¡± Francis said. ¡°My sister¡¯s. She likes to see the anima ls and is always nagging me to take  her a long. 
 
Nobody minds, I hope.¡±  
 
Everyone shook their heads and smiled at the girl, who suffered bravely under the attention. 
¡°What is your name?¡± the British wo man, M rs. Wilke rson, 
asked. ¡°Elizabeth,¡± the girl whispered. 
¡°Well, Elizabeth, you can share my tent if you like,¡± Au ma said. ¡°My brother, I thin k he snores.¡± 
I made a face. ¡° Don¡¯t listen to her,¡± I said, and held out a package of biscuits. Elizabeth took one and 
nibbled neatly around its edges. Auma reached for the bag and turned to Mauro. 
 
¡°Want some?¡± she asked. 
The Italian smiled and took one, before Au ma passed them around to the others. 
We  followed the  road  into  cooler  hills,  where  women  walked  barefoot  carrying  firewood  and  water  and small  boys 
switched at donkeys from their rickety carts. Gradually the shamb as became less frequent, replaced by tangled bush and 
forest, until the trees on our left dropped away without warning and all we could see was the wide-open sky. 
 
¡°The Great Rift Valley,¡± Francis announced. 
We piled out of the van and stood at the edge of the escarpment looking out toward the western horizon. Hundreds of 
feet below, stone and savannah grass stretched out in a flat and endless plain, before it met the sky and carried the eye 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
back through a series of high white clouds. To the right, a solitary mountain rose like an island in a silent sea; beyond 
that, a row of worn and shadowed ridges. Only t wo signs of man¡¯s presence were v isible -a  slender road leading west, 
and a satellite station, its massive white d ish cupped upward toward the sky. 
 
A few miles north, we turned off the main h ighway onto a road of pulverized tarmac . It was slow going: at ce rtain 
points the potholes yawned across the road¡¯s entire width, and  every so often trucks would approach from the opposite 
direction, forcing Francis to drive onto embankments. Eventually, we a rrived at the road we¡¯d seen fro m above and 
began to make our way across the valley floor. The landscape was dry, mostly bush grass and scruffy thorn trees, 
gravel and patches of hard dark stone. We began to pass small herds of gaze lle; a solitary wildebeest feeding at the 
base of a tree; zebra and a giraffe , bare ly visible  in the distance. For a lmost an hour we saw no other person, until a 
solitary Masai herdsman appeared in the distance, his figure as lean and straight as the staff that he carried, leading a 
herd of long-horned cattle across an empty flat. 
 
I hadn¡¯t met many Masai in Nairobi, although I¡¯d read quite a bit about them. I knew that their pastoral ways and 
fie rceness in war had earned them a g rudging respect from the British, so that even as treaties had been broken and 
the Masai had been restricted to reservations, the tribe had become mythologized in its defeat, like t he Cherokee o r 
Apache, the noble savage of picture postcards and coffee table books. I a lso knew that this Western infatuation with 
the Masai infuriated other Kenyans, who thought their ways something of an embarrassment, and who hankered after 
Masai land. The government had tried to impose compulsory education on Masai children, and a system of land title 
among the adults. The black man ¡¯s burden, offic ials e xp lained: to civilize our less fortunate brethren. 
 
I wondered, as we drove deeper into their country, how long the Masai could hold out. In Naro k, a  sma ll trading 
town where we stopped for gas and lunch, a group of children dressed in khaki shorts and old T -shirts surrounded our 
van with the aggressive enthusiasm of their Na irobi counterparts, peddling cheap jewe lry and snacks. Two hours later, 
when we arrived at the adobe gate leading into the preserve, a tall Masai man in a  Yan kees cap and smelling of beer 
leaned through the window of our van and suggested we take a tour of a tradit ional Masai bo ma.  
 
¡°Only forty shillings,¡± the man said with a s mile. ¡°Pictures e xtra.¡±  
 
While Francis attended to some business in the game warden¡¯s office, the rest of us got out and followed the Masai 
man into a la rge circular co mpound walled in by thornbrush. Along the pe rimeter were s mall mud -and-dung huts; in 
the center of the compound, several cattle and a fe w naked toddlers stood side by side in the dirt. A group of wo men 
waved us over to look at their bead-covered gourds, and one of them, a lovely young mother with a baby slung on 
her back, showed me a U.S. quarter that someone had foisted on her. I agreed to e xchange it for Kenya shillings, and 
in return she invited me into her hut. It was a cra mped, pitch -blac k space with a five-foot-high ceiling. The wo man 
told me  her fa mily cooked, slept, and kept newborn calves in it. The smo ke was blinding, and after a minute I had to 
leave, fighting the urge to brush away the flies that formed t wo solid rings around the baby¡¯s puffed eyes. 
 
Francis was wa iting fo r us when we returned to the van. We drove through the gate, following the road up a small, 
barren rise. And there, on the other side of the rise, I saw as beautiful a land as I¡¯d ever seen. It swept out forever, flat  
plains undulating into gentle hills, dun-colored and as supple as a lion¡¯s back, creased by long gallery fo rests and dotted 
with thorn trees. To our le ft, a huge herd of zebra, ridicu lously symmetrica l in their stripes, harvested the wheat -colored 
grass; to our right, a troop of gazelle leaped into bush. And in the center, thousands of wildebeest, with mournful heads  
 
 
 
 
and humped shoulders that seemed too much for their slender legs to carry. Franc is began to inch the van through 
the herd, and the anima ls parted before us, then merged in our wake  like a school of fish, their hoofs beating against 
the earth like a wave against the shore. 
 
I looked over at Au ma. She had her arm around Elizabeth, and the two of them we re wea ring the same  word less smile. 
We set up camp above the banks of a winding brown strea m, beneath a big fig tree  filled with noisy blue starlings. It 
was getting late, but after setting up our tents and gathering firewood, we had time for a  short drive to a nearby 
watering hole where topi and gaze lle had gathered to drink. A fire was going when we got back, and as we sat down to 
feed on Rafae l¡¯s stew, Francis began telling us  a little b it about himself He had a wife and six ch ild ren, he said, liv ing 
on his homestead in Kikuyuland. They tended an acre of coffee and corn; on his days off, he did the heavier work of 
hoeing and planting. He said he enjoyed his work with the travel agency but disliked being a way fro m his fa mily. ¡°If I 
could, I might prefer fa rming full-t ime,¡±  he said, ¡°but the KCU ma kes it impossible.¡± 
 
¡°What¡¯s the KCU?¡± I asked. 
¡°The Kenyan Coffee Union. They are thieves. They regulate what we  can plant and when we can plant it. I can 
only sell my coffee to them, and they sell it  overseas. They say to us that prices are dropping, but I know they 
still get one hundred times what they pay to me. The rest goes where?¡± Francis shook his head with disgust. ¡°It¡¯s 
a terrib le thing when the government steals fro m its own people.¡± 
 
¡° You speak very freely,¡±  Auma  said. 
Francis shrugged. ¡°If more people spoke up, perhaps things might change. Look at the road that we traveled this 
morn ing co ming into the valley. You know, that road was supposed to have been repaired only last year. But they 
used only loose gravel, so it washed out in the first rains. The money that was saved probably went into building some 
big man¡¯s house.¡± 
 
Francis looked into the fire, co mb ing his mustache with his fingers. ¡°I suppose it is not only the government¡¯s fault,¡± 
he said after a wh ile. ¡° Even when things are done properly, we  Kenyans don¡¯t like to pay ta xes. We don¡¯t trust the idea 
of giving our money to someone. The poor man, he has good reason for this suspicion. But the big men who own the 
trucks that use the roads, they also refuse to pay their share. They would rather have their equip ment break down a ll the 
time than give up some of their profits. This is how we like to thin k, you see. So mebody e lse¡¯s problem.¡± 
 
I tossed a stick into the fire. ¡°Attitudes aren¡¯t so different in A merica,¡± I told Francis.  
¡° You are probably right,¡± he said. ¡°But you see, a rich country like A merica can perhaps afford to be stupid.¡± 
At that moment, t wo Masai approached the fire. Francis welco med the m, and as they sat down on one of the 
benches, he exp lained that they would provide security during the night. They were quiet, handsome men, their high 
cheekbones accentuated by the fire, their lean limbs jutting out of their b lood-red shukas, their spears stuck into the 
ground before them, casting long shadows toward the trees. One of them, who said his na me was Wilson, spoke 
Swahili, and he told us that he lived in a  boma a  fe w miles to t he east. His silent companion began to pan the darkness 
with the bea m of h is flashlight, and Auma asked if the ca mp had ever been attacked by anima ls. Wilson grinned. 
 
¡°Nothing serious,¡± he said. ¡°But if you have to go to the bathroom at night, you should call one of us to go with you.¡± 
 
Francis began to question the men about the movement of various animals, and I drifted away from the fire to glance up at 
the stars. It had been years since I¡¯d seen them like this; away from the lights of the city, they we re thick and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
round and bright as jewels. I noticed a  patch of haze  in the otherwise c lear sky and stepped farther away fro m the fire , 
thinking  perhaps  it  was  the  smoke,  then  deciding  that  it  must  be  a  cloud.  I  was  wondering  why  the  cloud  hadn¡¯t 
moved when I heard the s ound of footsteps behind me. 
 
¡°I believe that¡¯s the Milky Way,¡± Mr. Wilkerson said, looking up at 
the sky. ¡°No kidding.¡± 
 
He held up his hand and traced out the constellations for me, the points of the Southern Cross. He was a slight, soft -
spoken man with round glasses and pasty blond hair. Init ially I had guessed he spent his life indoors, an accountant or 
professor. I noticed, though, as the day had passed, that he possessed all sorts of practical knowledge, the kinds of 
things I had never got around to knowing but wished that I had. He could ta lk at length with Francis about Land 
Rover engines, had his tent up before I drove in my first stake, and seemed to know the na me of every bird and every 
tree that we saw. 
 
I wasn¡¯t surprised, then, when he told me that he had spent his childhood in Kenya, on a tea plantation in the White 
Highlands. He see med re luctant to talk about the past; he said only that his family had sold the land after 
independence and had moved back to England, to settle in a quiet suburb o f London. He had gone to medica l school, 
then practiced with the National Hea lth Serv ice in Liverpool, where  he had met his wife, a psychiatrist. After a fe w 
years, he had convinced her to return with him to Africa. They had decided against living in Kenya , where there was a 
surplus of doctors relative to the rest of the continent, and instead settled on Malawi, where  they both had worked 
under government contract for the past five years. 
 
¡°I oversee eight doctors for a region with a population of half a million,¡± he told me now. ¡°We never have enough 
supplies-at least half of what the government purchases ends up on the black market. So we can only focus on the basic, 
which in Africa is really what¡¯s needed anyway. People die from all sorts of preventable disease. Dysentery. Chicken pox. 
And now AIDS-the infection rate in some villages has reached fifty percent. It can be quite maddening.¡± 
 
The stories were grim, but as he continued to tell me the tasks of his life-d igging we lls, tra ining outreach workers to 
inoculate child ren, distributing condoms -he seemed neither cynica l nor sentimental. I asked him why he thought he 
had come back to Africa and he answered without a pause, as if he¡¯d heard the question many times. 
 
¡°It¡¯s my ho me, I suppose. The people, the land¡­¡±  He  took off his glasses and wiped them with a handkerch ief. ¡°It¡¯s 
funny, you know. Once you¡¯ve lived here for a time , the life in England seems terribly cra mped. The British have so  
much more , but seem to enjoy things less. I felt a  fore igner there.¡±  
 
He put his glasses back on and shrugged. ¡°Of course, I know that in the long run I need to be replaced. That¡¯s part of 
my job-ma king myself unnecessary. The Malawian doctors I work with  are e xcellent, really. Co mpetent. Dedicated. If 
we could just build a train ing hospital, some decent facilit ies, we could t rip le their number in no t ime. And then¡­¡± 
¡°And then?¡± 
 
He turned toward the campfire, and I thought his voice began to waver. ¡°Perhaps I can never call this place home,¡± he 
said. ¡°Sins of the father, you know. I¡¯ve learned to accept that.¡± He paused for a moment, then looked at me. 
 
¡°I do love this place, though,¡± he said before walking back to his tent. 
 
 
 
 
Dawn. To the east, the sky lightens above a black grove of trees, deep blue, then orange, then crea my ye llo w. 
The clouds lose their purple tint slowly, then dissipate, leaving behind a single star. As we pu ll out of ca mp, 
we see a  caravan of giraffe, their  long necks at a  co mmon slant, seemingly b lack before  the rising red  sun, 
strange markings against an ancient sky. 
 
It was like that for the rest of the day, as if I were  seeing as a child once again, the world a pop-up book, a fab le, a  
painting by Rousseau. A pride of lions, yawning in  the broken grass. Buffa lo in the ma rshes, their horns like  cheap 
wigs, tic k b irds scavenging off their mudcrusted backs. Hippos in the shallow riverbeds, pink eyes and nostrils like  
ma rbles bobbing on the water¡¯s surface. Elephants fanning their vegetable ears. 
 
And most of all the stillness, a silence to match the ele ments. At twilight, not far fro m our ca mp, we ca me  upon a 
tribe of hyenas feeding on the carcass of a wildebeest. In the dying orange light they looked like de mon dogs, their 
eyes like c lu mps of blac k coal, their chins dripping with blood. Beside them, a ro w of vultures waited with stern, 
patient gazes, hopping away like hunchbacks whenever one of the hyenas got t oo close. It was a savage scene, and we 
stayed there for a long time , watching life feed on itself, the silence interrupted only by the crack of bone or the rush 
of wind, or the hard thump of a vulture¡¯s wings as it strained to lift itself into the current , until it fina lly found the 
higher air and those long and graceful wings became motionless and still like the rest. And I thought to myself: Th is is 
what Creation looked like . The same  stillness, the same crunching of bone. There in the dusk, over that hill, I 
imagined the first man stepping forward, naked and rough -skinned, grasping a chunk of flint in his clu msy hand, no 
words yet for the fear, the antic ipation, the awe he feels at the sky, the glimmering knowledge of his own death. If 
only we could re me mber that first common step, that first common word-that time before  Babe l. 
 
At night, after dinner, we spoke further with our Masai guardsmen. Wilson told us that both he and his friend had 
recently been moran, me mbers of the bachelor c lass of young warriors who we re at the center of the Masai legend. 
They had each killed a lion to prove their manhood, had participated in numerous cattle ra ids. But now there were no 
wars, and even cattle raids had become co mplicated-only last year, another friend had been shot by a Kikuyu rancher. 
Wilson had finally decided that being a mo ran was a waste of time. He had gone to Nairobi in search of work, but he 
had little schooling and had ended up as a security guard at a bank. The boredom drove him cra zy, and eventually he 
had returned to the valley to marry and tend to his cattle. Recently one of the cattle had been killed by a lion, and 
although it was illegal now, he and four others had hunted the lion into the preserve. 
 
¡°How do you kill a  lion?¡± I asked. 
 
 
 
¡°Five men surround it and throw their spears,¡± Wilson said. ¡°The lion will choose one man  to pounce. That 
man, he curls under his shield wh ile  the other four finish the job.¡± 
 
¡°It sounds dangerous,¡± I said stupidly. 
Wilson shrugged. ¡°Usually there are only scratches. But sometimes only four will co me bac k.¡±  
The man d idn¡¯t sound like he was boasting-more  like a mechanic  trying to e xpla in a d ifficu lt repair. Perhaps it was 
that nonchalance that caused Auma to ask him where the Masai thought a man went after he d ied. At first, Wilson 
didn¡¯t seem to understand the question, but eventually he smiled and began shaking his head. 
 
¡°This is not a Masai belief,¡±  he said, almost laughing, ¡°this life after you die. After you die, you are nothing. 
You return to the soil. That is all.¡±  
 
 
 
 
 
¡°What do you say, Francis?¡± Mauro asked. 
For some t ime Francis had been reading a sma ll, red -bound Bible . He looked up now and smiled. ¡°These Masai are 
brave men,¡±  he said. 
 
¡°Were you raised a Christian?¡± Auma asked Francis. 
Francis nodded. ¡°My parents converted before I was born.¡± 
 
Mauro spoke, staring into the fire. ¡°Me, I leave the Church. Too many rules. Don¡¯t you think, Francis, that 
sometimes Christianity not so good? For Africa , the missionary changes everything, yes? He brings¡­how do y ou 
say?¡± ¡°Colonialism,¡±  I o ffered. 
 
¡° Yes-colonialism. White re ligion, no?¡± 
 
 
Francis placed the Bible in h is lap. ¡° Such things troubled me when I was young. The missionaries we re men, and they 
erred as men. No w that I a m older, I understand that I also can fail. That is not God¡¯s failure. I also re me mber that some 
missionaries fed people during drought. Some taught children to read. In this, I believe they were doing God¡¯s work.  
 
All we can do is aspire to live like  God, though we will always fall short.¡± 
 
Mauro went to his tent and Francis returned to his Bib le. Beside him, Au ma began to read a story with Elizabeth. 
Dr. Wilke rson sat with his knees together, mending his pants while h is wife stared at the fire beside him. I looked at 
the Masai, their faces silent and watchful, and wondered what they made of the rest of us. They might be a mused, I 
decided. I knew that their courage, their hardness, made me question my own noisy spirit. And yet, as I looked around 
the fire, I thought I saw a courage no less admirable in Francis, and in Au ma, and in the Wilkersons as well. Maybe it 
was that courage, I thought, that Africa most desperately needed. Honest, decent men and wo men with attainable 
amb itions, and the determination to see those ambit ions through. 
 
The fire began to die, and one by one the others made their way to bed, until only Francis and I and the Masai 
re mained. As I stood up, Francis began to sing a deep -voiced hymn in Kikuyu, with a me lody that I vaguely 
recognized. I listened a while, lost in my own thoughts. Walking back to my tent, I felt I understood Francis¡¯s 
plaintive song, imagin ing it transmitting upward, through the clear black night, direct ly to God.  
 
The day we got back fro m Mara, Auma and I rece ived word that Roy had arrived, a week  earlier than e xpected. He  
had suddenly appeared in Karia kor with a suitcase in hand, saying that he¡¯d felt restless waiting around in D.C. and had 
managed to talk his way onto an earlier flight. The fa mily was thrilled by his arriva l and had held off on a  b ig feast only 
until Auma  and I returned. Berna rd, who brought us the news, said that we were e xpected soon; he fidgeted as he 
spoke, as if every minute away fro m our e ldest brother were  a dereliction of duty. But Auma , still stiff fro m sleeping in 
tents for the past two days, insisted on taking the time for a  bath. 
 
¡°Don¡¯t worry,¡± she said to Bernard. ¡° Roy just likes to make  everything seem so dramat ic.¡±  
Jane¡¯s apartment was in a hubbub when we arrived. In the kitchen, the wo men we re clean ing colla rds an d yams, 
chopping chicken and stirring ugali. In the liv ing room, younger children set the table or served sodas to the adults. 
And at the center of this rush sat Roy, his legs spread out in front of him, h is arms flung along the back of the sofa, 
nodding with approval. He waved us over and offered us each a hug. Auma, who hadn¡¯t seen Roy since he¡¯d moved to 
the States, stepped back to get a better look. 
 
 
 
 
 
¡° You¡¯ve become so fat!¡± she said. 
¡°Fat, eh?¡± Roy laughed. ¡°A man needs a man-sized appetite.¡± He turned toward the kitchen. 
¡°Which re minds me¡­where ¡¯s that other beer?¡± 
 
No sooner had the words fallen fro m his mouth than Kezia ca me up with a beer in hand, smiling happily. ¡° Barry ,¡± she 
said in English, ¡°this is the eldest son. Head of the fa mily.¡±  
 
Another  wo man  who m  I  had  never  seen  before,  plu mp   and  heavy -breasted,  with  bright  red  lipstick,  sidled   up 
beside Roy and put her arm a round him. Ke zia ¡¯s smile  subsided, and she drifted back into the kitchen. 
 
¡°Baby,¡± the wo man said to Roy, ¡°do you have the cigarettes?¡± 
¡° Yeah, hold on¡­.¡± Roy patted his shirt pockets carefully. ¡°Have you met my brother, Ba rack?  Ba rack, this is A my. 
And you reme mber Auma .¡± Roy found the cigarettes and lit one for A my. A my took a  long drag and leaned forward 
toward Auma, e xha ling round puffs of smoke  as she spoke. 
 
¡°Of course I re me mber Auma . How a re you? Let me tell you, you look wonderful! And I like what you¡¯ve done 
to your hair. Really, it¡¯s so¡­natural!¡±  
 
Amy reached for Roy¡¯s bottle, and Roy went to the dinner table. He  grabbed himself a  plate and bent down to smell 
the steaming pots. ¡°Chapos!¡± he exc laimed, dropping three chapatis onto his plate. ¡°Suku ma -wiki!¡±  he shouted at the 
collard greens before spooning a heap onto his plate. ¡°Ugali!¡± he holle red, cutting off t wo big wedges of cornmea l 
cake. Bernard and the children fo llo wed his every step, repeating Roy¡¯s words at a more  tentative volume. Around the 
table, our aunts and Kezia bea med with satisfaction. It was the happiest I had seen any of them since my a rrival. After 
dinner, wh ile  A my helped the aunts wash up, Roy sat between Auma and me and announced that he had come back 
with big p lans. He was going to start an import-e xport co mpany, he said, selling Kenyan curios in the States. 
 
¡°Chondos. Fabrics. Wood carvings. These things are big over there! You sell them at festivals, art shows, specialty 
stores. I already bought some sa mples to take back with me.¡±  
 
¡°That¡¯s a great idea,¡± Auma said. ¡°Show me  what you¡¯ve got.¡± 
Roy told Bernard to fetch several pin k plastic bags fro m one of the bedroo ms. Inside the bags were several wood 
carvings, the sort of slick, mass -produced pieces that were sold at quic k turnover to th e tourists downtown. Auma 
turned them around in her hands with a doubtful e xpression on her face. 
 
¡°How much did you pay for these?¡± 
¡°Only four hundred shillings each.¡± 
¡°So much! Brother, I think you¡¯ve been cheated. Bernard, why did you let h im pay so much?¡± 
Bernard shrugged. Roy looked a b it wounded. 
¡°I told you, these are Just samples,¡± he said as he folded the carvings back in their wrapping. ¡°An investment, so 
I will know what the market wants. You can¡¯t make money unless you spend money, eh, Barac k?¡± 
 
¡°That¡¯s what they say.¡± 
Roy¡¯s enthusiasm quickly returned. ¡° You see? Once I know the market, then I will send orders back to Zeituni. We¡¯ ll 
build  the  business up slowly,  you  see.  Slow-ly.  Then,  when  we  have  a  regular  system,  Be rnard  and  Abo  can go  to 
work for the company. Eh, Be rnard? You can work for me.¡±  
 
Bernard nodded vaguely. Auma studied her younger brother, then turned back to Roy. ¡° So what¡¯s the other big plan?¡± 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roy smiled. ¡°A my,¡± 
he said. ¡°Amy?¡±  
¡°Amy. I¡¯m going to marry he r.¡±  
¡°What? How long has it been since you last saw 
her?¡±  ¡°Two years.  Three. What does  it  matter?¡± 
¡°You haven¡¯t had much time to think about it.¡± 
¡°She¡¯s an African woman. I know that! She understands me. Not like these European women, always arguing with their 
 
 
 
 
 
men.¡± Roy nodded emphatically, and then, as if he were being yanked by an invisible string, he jumped out of his seat 
and headed toward the kitchen. Taking Amy in one arm, he lifted his bottle of beer toward the ceiling. 
 
¡°Listen, everybody! Now that we  are a ll here, we must have a toast! To those who are no t with us! And to 
a happy ending!¡± With solemn deliberation, he started to pour his beer onto the floor. At least half of the 
beer splashed on Auma¡¯s shoes. 
 
¡°Aggh!¡± Auma shouted, jump ing back. ¡°What are you doing?¡± 
¡°The ancestors must drink,¡± Roy said cheerfully. ¡° It is the African way.¡±  
 
 
Auma grabbed a napkin to wipe the beer off her legs. ¡°That¡¯s outdoors, Roy! Not in somebody¡¯s house! I swear, 
sometimes you¡¯re so careless! Who will c lean this up now? You?¡± 
 
Roy was about to answer when Jane rushed up with a rag in her hand. ¡°Don¡¯t worry, don¡¯t worry!¡±  she 
said, wip ing up the floor. ¡°We a re just happy to have this one home.¡±  
 
It had been decided that after dinner we wou ld all go out dancing at a nearby club. As Auma and I headed down the 
stairs ahead of the others, I heard her muttering to herself in the darkness. 
 
¡° You Oba ma men !¡± she said to me. ¡° You get away with anything! Have you noticed how they treat him? As far as 
they are concerned, he can do no wrong. Like this thing with A my. This is just an idea that has popped into his head 
because he¡¯s lonely. I have nothing against Amy, but she¡¯s as irresponsible as he is. When they¡¯re together, they ma ke 
each other worse. My mu m, Jane, Zeituni-they all know this. But will they say anything to him? No. Because they¡¯re so 
afraid to offend him, even if it ¡¯s for his own good.¡± 
 
Auma opened the car door and looked back at the rest of the fa mily. They had just emerged fro m the shadows of 
the apartment building, Roy¡¯s figure towering over the others like  a tree, h is arms spread out like  branches over the 
shoulders of his aunts. The sight of him softened Auma¡¯s face  just a bit. 
 
¡° Yah, it¡¯s not really h is fault, I suppose,¡± she said, starting up the car. ¡° You see how he is with them. 
He¡¯s always been more of a fa mily person than me. They don¡¯t feel judged with him.¡± 
 
The club, Ga rden Square, turned out to be a low-roofed, dimly lit place. It was already packed when we arrived, the 
air thic k with cigarette smo ke. The c lientele was a lmost all African, an older, after work c rowd of cle rks, secretaries, 
government worke rs, all gathered around wobbly Formica tables. We pushe d together two e mpty tables away fro m the 
small stage, and the waiter took our o rders. Auma sat down ne xt to Amy .  
 
 
¡°So, A my. Roy tells me you two are thin king about getting married.¡±  
¡° Yes, isn¡¯t it wonderful! He ¡¯s so much fun! When he settles down, he says I can come to stay with him in A merica.¡±  
 
 
 
 
 
¡° You don¡¯t worry about being apart? I mean ¡­¡±  
¡°Other wo men?¡± A my laughed and winked at Roy. ¡°I te ll you honestly, I don¡¯t care about that.¡± She swung 
her fleshy arm over Roy¡¯s shoulder. ¡°As long as he treats me we ll, he can do what he likes. Right, baby?¡±  
 
Roy  maintained  a  poker  face,  as  if  the  conversation didn¡¯t  concern him.  Both  he  and  Amy  had  the  sheen of  too 
many beers, and I saw  Jane sneak an an xious look at  Ke zia. I decided to change the subject, and asked Ze ituni  if 
she¡¯d been to Garden Square befo re. 
 
¡°Me?¡± Zeituni ra ised her eyebrows at my impert inence. ¡° Let me tell you, Barry -if there is dancing somewhere, then I 
have been to that place. These people here will te ll you that I a m the champ ion dancer. What do you say, Auma?¡± 
¡°Zeituni¡¯s the best.¡± 
 
Zeituni tilted her head proudly. ¡° You see? Rea lly, Barry, your auntie can dance! And you want to know who was  
always my best partner? Your father! That guy, he rea lly loved to dance. We entered many contests together when we 
were young. In fact, I¡¯ll tell you this story about his dancing. It was when he had come  home  to Alego one time to visit 
with your grandfather. He had pro mised that evening to do some chore for the old man -I don¡¯t re me mber what it was -
but instead of doing his work, he went out to meet Ke zia  and take her dancing. You re me mber, Ke zia?  This is before 
they were married. I wanted to go with them, but Ba rack said I was too young. 
 
¡°Anyway, they came home late that night, and Barack had had a few too many beers. He tried to sneak Kezia into his hut, 
but the old man was still awake and heard their footsteps in the compound. Even as an old man, your grandfather¡¯s hearing 
was very keen. So right away he shouts for Barack to come. When Barack comes in, the old man doesn¡¯t say a word. He just 
looks at Barack and snorts like an angry bull. Hmmmph! Hmmmph! And this whole time, 
 
I a m pee king through the window of the old man¡¯s house, because I¡¯m sure that the old man will cane Barac k and 
I¡¯m still angry at Barack, for not letting me go to the dance hall.  
 
¡°What happened next, I couldn¡¯t believe. Instead of apologizing for co ming ho me late, Barac k walked over to  the 
old man¡¯s phonograph and started to play a record! Then he turned and shouted to Kezia , who was hiding outside. 
¡®Woman!¡¯ Barac k shouted. ¡®Co me here!¡¯ Right away Ke zia ca me into the house, too frightened to refuse, and Barack 
took her in h is arms and began to dance with her, around and around in the old man ¡¯s house, as if he we re dancing in 
a palace ballroo m.¡±  
 
Zeituni shook her head and laughed. ¡°Well now¡­no one treated your grandfather this way, not even Barack. I was sure 
now that for this thing Barack must be beaten severely. For a long time, your grandfather said nothing. He just sat there, 
watching his son. Then, like an elephant, he shouted out even louder than Barack. ¡®Woman! Come here!¡¯ 
 
And right away my mu m, the one you call Granny, rushed in fro m her own hut, where she had been mending clothes. 
She asked why everyone was shouting, and your grandfather stood up and held out his hand. My mum shook her head 
and accused your grandfather of trying to ma ke a  fool o f her, but the old man was so determined that soon all four of 
them were dancing in the hut, the two men looking very serious, the women looking at each other as if now they were 
sure that their husbands were cra zy.¡±  
 
We all laughed at the story, and Roy ordered another round for everyone. I started to ask Zeituni more about our 
grandfather, but just then the band took up their positions on stage. The group looked a bit ragged at first, but the 
moment they struck their first note, the place was transformed. Immediately, people began pouring out onto the dance 
 
 
 
 
floor, stepping to the soukous beat. Zeituni grabbed my hand, and Roy took Au ma¡¯s, and Amy took Be rnard ¡¯s, and 
soon we were  all dancing into a sweat, arms and hips and rumps swaying softly; tall, ink-b lack Luos and short, brown 
Kikuyus, Ka mba and Meru and Kalen jin, everyone smiling and shouting and having a ball. Roy threw his arms over 
his head to do a slow, funky turn a round Auma, who was laughing at her brother¡¯s silliness, and right then I saw in 
my brother¡¯s face the sa me look I had seen years ago in Toot and Gra mps¡¯s apartment back in Hawa ii, when the Old 
Man had first taught me how to dance-that same look of unquestioned freedom. 
 
After three or four nu mbers, Roy and I both relinquished our partners and carried our beers into the open courtyard 
out back. The cool air tic kled my nose, and I fe lt a bit t ipsy. 
 
 
¡°It¡¯s good to be here,¡± I said. 
¡° You know it. Like a poet.¡± Roy laughed, sipping his beer. 
¡°No, rea lly, I mean it. It ¡¯s just good to be here, with you and Auma and everyone. It¡¯s as if we -¡± 
Before  I could finish, we heard a  bottle crash to the floor behind us. I spun around to see two men at the far side of 
the courtyard pushing another, sma lle r, man down onto the ground. With one hand, the man on the ground appeared to 
be covering a cut on his head; with his free  arm he was trying to shield himself fro m the swings of a billy c lub. I too k a  
step forward, but Roy pulled me back. 
 
¡°Mind your own business, brother,¡± he whispered. 
¡°But-¡± 
¡°They may be police. I tell you, Barac k, you don¡¯t know what it¡¯s like to spend a night in a Na irobi ja il.¡±  
By now, the man on the ground had curled up into a tight ball, trying to protect himself fro m the haphazard blows. 
Then, like a  trapped animal who senses an opening, the man suddenly jumped to his feet and climbed onto one of the 
tables to scramble  over the wooden fence. His assailants looked as if they we re going to give chase but apparently 
decided that it wasn¡¯t worth it. One of the m noticed Roy and me but said nothing, and together the two of them 
sauntered back inside. I suddenly felt very sober. 
 
¡°That was terrible ,¡± I said. 
¡° Yah, we ll¡­you don¡¯t know what the other guy did first.¡± 
I rubbed the back of my neck. ¡°When were you in ja il anyway?¡± 
Roy took another swig of beer and fe ll into one of the metal chairs. ¡°The n ight David died.¡±  
I sat down beside him and he told me  the story. They had gone out to drink, he said, in search of a party. They had 
taken Roy¡¯s motorcycle to a nearby club, and there Roy had met a wo man. He had taken a fancy to her, and they started 
talking. He  had bought her a beer, but before long another man had co me up and started getting in Roy¡¯s face. The man 
said he was the woman¡¯s husband and grabbed her by the arm. The wo man struggled and fell, and Roy told the man to 
leave her alone. A fight broke out. The police ca me, and Roy didn¡¯t have his identification papers, so they took him 
down to the station. He was thrown in a  cell and left there fo r several hours, until David finally managed to get in to see 
him. 
 
Give me the keys to the motorcycle, David had said, and I can get you the papers you need. 
No. Just go home. 
You can¡¯t stay here all night, brother. Give  me the keys¡­.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roy stopped talking. We sat and stared at the shadows, oversized and faint off the lattice 
fence. ¡°It was an accident, Roy,¡± I said finally. ¡°It wasn¡¯t your fault. You need to let it go.¡± 
Before  I could say anything else, I heard A my holle ring behind us, her voice slurring slightly over 
the music. ¡° Hey, you two! We¡¯ve been looking all over for you!¡±  
I started to wave her off, but Roy jerked out of his chair, t ipping it to the ground. 
¡°Co me on, wo man,¡± he said, taking A my by the waist. ¡° Let¡¯s go dance.¡± 
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A T FIVE-THIRTY IN the evening, our tra in ru mbled out of the old Na irobi t rain station heading west for Kisumu. 
Jane had decided to stay behind, but the rest of the family was on board -Ke zia, Ze ituni, and Au ma in one 
compart ment; Roy, Be rnard, and myself in the ne xt. While everyone busied themselves with storing their luggage, I 
jiggled open a window and looked out at the curve of the tracks behind us, a line of trac k that had helped usher in 
Kenya¡¯s colonial history. 
 
The railway had been the single largest engineering effo rt in the history of the Brit ish Emp ire  at the time it was built -
six hundred miles long, fro m Mo mbasa on the Indian Ocean to the eastern shores of La ke Victoria. The project took 
five years to comp lete, as we ll as the lives of several hundred imported Indian worke rs. When it was finished, the 
British rea lized there were no passengers to help defray the costs of their conceit. And so the push for white settlers; 
the consolidation of lands that could be used to help lure newco mers; the cultivation of cash crops like coffee and tea; 
the necessity of an administrative apparatus that could extend as far as the tracks, into the heart of an unknown 
continent. And missions and churches to vanquish the fear that an unknown land produced. 
 
It seemed like ancient history. And yet I knew that 1895, the year that the first beams we re laid, had a lso been the 
year of my grandfather¡¯s birth. It was the lands of that same man, Hussein Onyango, to which we we re now trave ling. 
The thought made the history of the train come  alive for me, and I tried to imagine the sensations some name less 
British officer might have felt on the train¡¯s maiden voyage, as he sat in his gas -lit co mpart ment and looked out over 
miles of receding bush. Would he have felt a sense of triu mph, a confidence that the guiding light of Western 
civilizat ion had finally penetrated the African darkness? Or did he feel a sense of foreboding, a sudden realization that 
the entire enterprise was an act of folly, that this land and its people would outlast imperial drea ms? I tried to imagine 
the African on the other side of the glass window, watching this snake of steel and black s moke passing his village fo r 
the first time . Would he have looked at the train with envy, imagining himse lf one day sitting in the car where the 
Englishman sat, the load of his days somehow eased? Or would he have shuddered with visions of ruin and wa r?  
 
My imagination fa iled me, and I returned to the present landscape, no longer bush but the roofto ps of Mathare 
stretching into the foothills beyond. Passing one of the slum¡¯s open -air ma rkets, I saw a ro w of s ma ll boys wave to the 
train. I waved back, and heard Ke zia¡¯s voice, speaking in Luo, behind me. Be rnard yanked on my shirt.  
 
¡°She says you should keep your head inside. Those boys will throw stones at you.¡± 
 
 
 
 
One of the train ¡¯s crew ca me  in to take our bedding order and tell us that food service had started, and so we all went 
into the dining car and found ourselves a table. The car was a picture of faded elegance -the original wood paneling still 
intact but dull, the silver real but not perfectly matched. The food was just fine, though, and the beer served cold, and 
by the end of the meal I was feeling content. 
 
¡°How long will it take  to get to Home  Square?¡± I asked, wiping the last bit of sauce off my  
plate. ¡°All night to Kisumu,¡± Au ma said. ¡°We¡¯ll take  a bus or matatu fro m there-another five 
hours, maybe.¡± ¡°By the way,¡± Roy said to me, lighting a c igarette, ¡°it¡¯s not Ho me Square. It¡¯s 
Ho me Squared.¡± ¡°What does that mean?¡± 
 
¡°It¡¯s something the kids in Nairobi used to say,¡± Auma e xp lained. ¡°There ¡¯s your ordinary house in Nairobi. And 
then there¡¯s your house in the country, where your people co me fro m. Your ancestral ho me. Even the biggest minister 
or businessman thinks this way. He may have a mansion in Na irobi and build only a s ma ll hut on his land in the 
country. He may go there only once or twice  a year. But if you ask him where he is fro m, he will tell you that that hut 
is his true home. So, when we were  at school and wanted to tell somebody we were  going to Alego, it was home t wice 
over, you see. Home Squared.¡± 
 
Roy took a sip of h is beer. ¡°For you, Barac k, we  can call it Ho me  Cubed.¡± 
Auma s miled and leaned back in her seat, listening to the rhythm of the train on the tracks. ¡°This tra in brings 
back so many me mories. You re me mber, Roy, how much we used to look forward to g oing home?  It is so 
beautiful, Barac k! Not at a ll like Nairobi. And Granny -she¡¯s so much fun! Oh, you will like her, Barac k. She has 
such a good sense of humor.¡±  
 
¡°She had to have a good sense of humor,¡± Roy said, ¡° living with the Terror for 
so long.¡± ¡°Who¡¯s the Terror?¡± 
Auma said, ¡°That¡¯s what we  used to call our grandfather. Because he was so mean.¡± 
Roy shook his head and laughed. ¡°Wow, that guy was mean! He  would ma ke you sit at the table for d inner, and 
served the food on china, like an Englishman. If  you said one wrong thing, or used the wrong fork-pow! He  would 
hit you with his stick. So metimes when he hit you, you wouldn¡¯t even know why until the ne xt day.¡±  
 
Zeituni waved them off, unimp ressed. ¡°Ah, you children kne w him only when he was old and wea k. When he was 
younger, aay! I was his favorite, you know. His pet. But still, if I did something wrong, I would h ide fro m him all day, 
I would be so scared! You know, he was strict even with his guests. If they came  to his house, he would kill many 
chickens in their honor. But if they broke custom, like washing their hands before someone who was older, he would 
have no hesitation in hitting them, even the adults.¡± 
 
¡°Doesn¡¯t sound like he was real popular,¡±  I said. 
 
Zeituni shook her head. ¡°Actually, he was  we ll respected because he was such a good farmer. His co mpound in 
Alego was one of the biggest in the area. He  had such a green thumb, he could ma ke anything grow. He had studied 
these techniques from the Brit ish, you see. When he worked for the m as a coo k.¡± 
 
¡°I didn¡¯t know he was a cook.¡±  
¡°He had his lands, but for a long time  he was a cook for wa zungu in Na irobi. He  worked fo r some very important 
people. During the World War he served a captain in the Brit ish army.¡±  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roy ordered another beer. ¡°Maybe that¡¯s what made him so mean.¡±  
¡°I don¡¯t know,¡± Zeituni said. ¡° I thin k my father was always that way. Very strict. But fair. I will te ll you one story I 
re me mber, fro m when I was only a young girl. One day a man ca me to the edge of our co mpound with a goat on a 
leash. He wanted to pass through our land, because he lived on the other side, and he didn¡¯t want to walk around. So 
your grandfather told this man, ¡®When you are alone, you are a lways free  to pass through my land. But today you 
cannot pass, because your goat will eat my  plants.¡¯ Well, this man would not listen. He argued for a long time with 
your grandfather, saying that he would be careful and that the goat would do no harm. This man talked so much your 
grandfather finally ca lled me  over and said, ¡®Go  bring me Alego.¡¯ That¡¯s what he called h is panga, you see -¡± 
 
¡°His machete.¡± 
 
¡° Yes, his machete. He had two that he kept very, very sharp. He  would rub them on a stone all day. One p anga he 
called A lego. The other he called Kogelo. So I ran back to h is hut and brought him the one he called A lego. And now 
your grandfather tells this man, ¡®See he re. I have already told you that you should not pass, but you are too stubborn to 
listen. So now I will ma ke a  bargain with you. You can pass with your goat. But if even one leaf is harmed -if even one 
half of one leaf o f my p lants is harmed-then I will cut down your goat also.¡¯ 
 
¡°Well, even though I was very young at the time , I kne w that this man must be so stupid, because he accepted my 
father¡¯s offer. We began to walk, the man and his goat in front, me  and the old man following closely behind. We had 
walked maybe twenty steps when the goat stuck out its neck and started nibbling at a leaf. Then -Whoosh! My dad cut 
one side of the goat¡¯s head clean through. The goat owner was shocked, and started to cry out. ¡®Aalieey! Aaiieey! 
What have you done now, Hussein Onyango.¡¯ And your grandfather just wiped off his panga and said, ¡®If I say I will 
do something, I must do it. Otherwise how will people know that my word is true?¡¯ Later, the owner o f the goat tried 
to sue your grandfather before the council of elders. The e lders all fe lt pity for the man, for the death of a goat was 
not such a small thing. But when they heard his story, they had to send him away. They knew that your grandfather 
was right, because the man had been warned.¡± 
 
Auma shook her head. ¡°Can you imag ine, Barac k?¡± she said, looking at me. ¡° I swear, sometimes I think that the 
problems in this fa mily a ll started with him. He is the only person whose opinion I think the Old Man rea lly wo rried 
about. The only person he feared.¡± 
 
By this time , the dining car had empt ied and the waiter was pacing back and forth impatiently, so we a ll decided to  
turn in. The bunks were narrow, but the sheets were cool and inviting, and I stayed up late listening to the trembling 
rhythm of the tra in and the even breath of my brothers, and thinking about the stories of our grandfather. It had all 
started with him, Au ma had said. That sounded right somehow. If I could just piece together his story, I thought, 
then perhaps everything else might fall into place. 
 
I finally fell asleep, and dreamed I was walking along a village road. Children, dressed only in strings of beads, played in 
front of the round huts, and several old men waved to me as I passed. But as I went farther along, I began to notice that 
people were looking behind me fearfully, rushing into their huts as I passed. I heard the growl of a leopard and started to 
run into the forest, tripping over roots and stumps and vines, until at last I couldn¡¯t run any longer and fell to my knees in 
the middle of a bright clearing. Panting for breath, I turned around to see the day turned night, and a giant figure looming as 
tall as the trees, wearing only a loincloth and a ghostly mask. The lifeless eyes bored into me, and I 
 
 
 
 
heard a thunderous voice saying only that it was time , and my entire  body began to shake violently with the sound, as if  
 
I we re brea king apart ¡­. 
 
I je rked up in a sweat, h itting my head against the wall la mp that stuck out above the bunk. In the darkness, my 
heart slowly evened itself, but I couldn¡¯t get back to sleep again. 
 
We arrived in Kisumu at daybreak and walked the half mile  to the bus depot. It was crowded with buses and 
matatus honking and jockeying for space in the dusty open -air lot, their fenders painted with names like ¡° Love 
Bandit¡± and ¡°Bush Baby.¡± We found a sad-looking vehicle  with balding, c racked t ires that was heading our 
way. Au ma boarded first, then stepped back out, looking mo rose. 
 
¡°There are no seats,¡± she said. 
 
 
 
 
¡°Don¡¯t worry,¡± Roy said as our bags were hoisted up by a series of hands to the roof of the bus. ¡°This is 
Africa, Auma¡­not Europe.¡± He turned and smiled down at the young man who was collecting fa res. ¡° You can 
find us some seats, eh, brother?¡± 
 
The man nodded. ¡°No proble m. Th is bus is first-class.¡± 
An hour later Auma was sitting on my lap, a long  with a basket of yams and somebody else¡¯s baby girl. 
¡°I wonder what third-c lass looks like,¡± I said, wip ing a strand of spittle off my hand.  
Auma pushed a strange elbow out of her face. ¡° You won¡¯t be joking after we hit the first pothole.¡±  
Fortunately, the highway was well paved, the landscape mostly dry bush and low hills, the occasional cinder  -bloc k 
house soon replaced by mud huts with thatched, conical roofs. We got off in  Ndori and spent the next two hours 
sipping on warm sodas and watching stray dogs snap at each other in the dust, until a matatu finally appeared to take us 
over the dirt road heading north. As we drove up the rocky incline a  fe w shoeless children waved but did not smile, 
and a herd of goats ran before us, to drink at a  narrow stream. Then the road widened and we finally stopped at a 
clearing. Two young men were  sitting there, under the shade of a tree, and their faces broke into smiles as they saw us. 
Roy ju mped out of the matatu to gather the two men into his arms.  
 
¡°Barac k,¡± Roy said happily, ¡°these are our uncles. This is Yusuf,¡± he said, pointing to the slightly built man with a 
mustache. ¡°And this,¡± he said, pointing to the larger, c lean -shaven man, ¡°this is our father¡¯s youngest brother, Sayid.¡± 
¡°Ah, we have heard many great things about this one,¡± Sayid said, smiling at me. ¡°Welco me, Ba rry. Welco me. 
Co me, let me have your bags.¡± 
 
We follo wed Yusuf and Sayid down a path running perpendicular to the main road, until we c rossed a wall of tall 
hedges and entered a large co mpound. In the middle of the compound was a low, rectangular house with a corrugated -
iron roof and concrete wa lls that had crumb led on one side, leaving their b rown mud base e xposed. Bougainvillea , red 
and pink and yello w with flowe rs, spread along one side in the direction of a large concrete water tank, and across the 
packed earth was a sma ll round hut lined with earthenware pots where a fe w chic kens pecked in an a lternating 
rhythm. I could see two more huts in the wide grass yard that stretched out be hind the house. Beneath a tall mango 
tree, a pair of bony red cows looked up at us before returning to feed.  
 
Ho me Squared. 
 
 
 
 
¡°Eh, Oba ma!¡±  A big wo man with a scarf on her head strode out of the main house drying her hands on the sides of 
her flowered skirt. She had a face like  Sayid¡¯s, s mooth and big -boned, with sparkling, laughing eyes. She hugged 
Auma and Roy as if she were going to wrestle them to the ground, then turned to me and grabbed my hand in a hearty 
handshake. 
 
¡°Halo!¡± she said, attempting 
English. ¡°Musawa!¡± I said in Luo. 
She laughed, saying something to Auma. 
 
 
 
 
¡°She says she has dreamed about this day, when she would finally meet  this son of her son. She says you¡¯ve 
brought her a great happiness. She says that now you have finally co me ho me.¡±  
 
Granny nodded and pulled me into a hug before leading us into the house. Small windows let in little of the afternoon light, 
and the house was sparsely furnished-a few wooden chairs, a coffee table, a worn couch. On the walls were various family 
artifacts: the Old Man¡¯s Harvard diploma; photographs of him and of Omar, the uncle who had left for 
 
America t wenty-five years ago and had never come back. Beside these were two o lder, ye llo wing photographs, the 
first of a tall young woman with smoldering eyes, a p lu mp in fant in her lap, a young girl standing beside her; the 
second of an older man in a high-backed chair. The man was dressed in a starched shirt and a kanga; his legs were 
crossed like  an Englishman¡¯s, but across his lap was what appeared to be some so rt of club, its heavy head wrapped in 
an animal skin. His high cheekbones and narrow eyes gave his face an almost Oriental cast. Auma ca me up beside me.  
 
¡°That¡¯s him. Ou r grandfather. The wo man in the picture is our other grandmother, A ku mu. The girl is Sa rah. And the 
baby¡­that¡¯s the Old Man.¡± 
 
I studied the pictures for some  time, until I noticed one last picture  on the wa ll. It was a v intage print, the kind that 
grace old Coca-Co la ads, of a white wo man with thick dark hair and slightly drea my eyes. I asked what the print was 
doing there, and Auma turned to Granny, who answered in Luo.  
 
¡°She says that that is a picture of one of our grandfather¡¯s wives. He told people that he had married her in 
Burma  when he was in the war.¡± 
 
 
Roy laughed. ¡°She doesn¡¯t look very Burmese, eh, Barac k?¡± 
I shook my head. She looked like  my mother. 
We sat down in the living roo m and Granny made us some tea. She e xp lained that things were we ll, a lthough she had 
given away some of the land to relatives, since she and Yusuf could not work it a ll by themselves. She made up the lost 
income  by selling lunches to the children at the nearby school and bringing goods from Kisumu to the loca l ma rket 
whenever she had some spare cash. Her only rea l proble ms were with the roof of the h ouse-she pointed to a few threads 
of sunlight that ran from the ceiling to the floor-and the fact that she hadn¡¯t heard anything from her son Omar in over a 
year. She asked if I had seen him, and I had to say no. She grunted something in Luo, then started to gather up our cups. 
 
¡°She says when you see him, you should tell him she wants nothing from him,¡± Au ma whispered. ¡°Only that he should 
come v isit his mother.¡± 
 
I looked at Granny, and for the first time since our arriva l, her age showed on her face. 
After we unpacked our bags, Roy gestured for me  to follow him out into the backyard. At the edge of a neighboring 
cornfield, at the foot of a mango tree, I saw two long rectangles of ce ment jutting out of the earth like a pa ir of  
 
 
 
 
e xhumed  coffins. There was a p laque on one of the graves: HUSSEIN ONYANGO OBAMA, B. 1895. D. 1979. The 
other was covered with yello w bathroom tiles, with a bare space on the headstone where the plaque should have been. 
Roy bent down and brushed away a train of ants that marched along the length of the grave. 
 
¡°Six years,¡± Roy said. ¡°Six years, and there¡¯s still nothing to say who is buried here. I te ll you now, Barack -when I 
die, you make  sure that my na me is on the grave.¡± He shook his head slowly before heading back toward the house. 
 
How to e xp la in the e motions of that day? I can summon each mo ment in my  mind almost fra me  by fra me. I 
re me mber Au ma and myself jo ining Granny at the afternoon market, the same c learing where the matatu had first 
dropped us off, only now fu ll of wo men who s at on straw mats, their smooth brown legs sticking straight out in front 
of them fro m under wide skirts; the sound of their laughter as they watched me help Granny pic k stems off collard 
greens that she¡¯d brought from Kisumu, and the nutty -sweet taste of a sugarcane stalk that one of the women put into 
my hand. I re me mbe r the rustle of corn leaves, the concentration on my uncles¡¯ faces, the sme ll of our sweat as we 
mended a hole in the fence bounding the western line of the property. I re me mber how, in the afternoon, a young boy 
named Godfrey appeared in the compound, a boy who Auma e xpla ined was staying with Granny because his family 
lived in a village where  there was no school; I re me mber Godfrey¡¯s frantic steps as he chased a big black rooster 
through the banana and papaya trees, the knot in his young brow as the bird kept flapping out of his reach, the look in 
his eyes when finally Granny grabbed the rooster fro m behind with one hand and unceremoniously drew her knife  
across the bird¡¯s neck-a look that I re me mbered as my own. 
 
It wasn¡¯t simply joy that I fe lt in each of these mo ments. Rather, it  was a sense that everything I was doing, every 
touch and breath and word, carried the fu ll we ight of my life; that a circle  was beginning to close, so that I might finally 
recognize myself as I was, here, now, in one place . On ly once that afternoon would I fee l that mood broken, when, on 
our way back fro m the ma rket, Auma  ran ahead to get her ca mera, leaving Granny and me  alone in the middle  of the 
road. After a long pause, Granny looked at me  and smiled. ¡°Ha lo!¡± she said. ¡°Musawa!¡± I said. Our mutual voca bulary 
e xhausted, we stared ruefully down at the dirt until Au ma finally returned. And Granny then turned to Auma and said, 
in a tone I could understand, that it pained her not to be able to speak to the son of her son. 
 
¡°Tell her I¡¯d like to learn Luo, but it¡¯s hard to find time  in the States,¡± I said. ¡°Te ll her how busy I am.¡±  
 
¡°She understands that,¡± Auma said. ¡° But she also says that a man can never be too busy to know his own people.¡±  
 
I looked at Granny, and she nodded at me, and I knew then that at s ome point the joy I was feeling wou ld pass and 
that that, too, was part of the circle : the fact that my life  was neither t idy nor static, and that even after this trip hard  
choices would always re ma in. 
 
Night fe ll quickly, the wind making swift tracks thro ugh the darkness. Bernard, Roy, and I went to the water tank 
and bathed ourselves in the open air, our soapy bodies glowing fro m the light of an almost full moon. When we 
returned to the house, the food was waiting for us, and we ate purposefully, without words. After dinner, Roy left, 
muttering that he had some people he wanted to visit. Yusuf went to his hut and brought back an old transistor radio 
that he said had once belonged to our grandfather. Fiddling with the knob, he caught a scratchy BBC newscast , 
fading in and out of range, the voices like ha lluc inatory frag ments fro m another world. A mo ment later we heard a 
strange, low-pitched moan off in the distance. 
 
 
 
 
 
¡°The night runners must be out tonight,¡± Auma 
said. ¡°What are night runners?¡± 
¡°They¡¯re like wa rlocks,¡± Auma  said. ¡°Spirit men. When we were  children, these people here¡± -she pointed at Granny 
and Zeituni-would te ll us stories about them to ma ke us behave. They told us that in daylight the night runners are like 
ordinary men. You might pass them in the market, or even have them to your house for a mea l, and never know their 
true natures. But at night they take on the shape of leopards and speak to all the ani ma ls. The most powerful night 
runners can leave their bodies and fly to faraway p laces. Or he x you with only a glance. If you ask our neighbors, they 
will tell you that there are still many night runners around here.¡± 
 
¡°Auma! You act as if it is not true!¡± 
In the flic kering light of the kerosene la mp, I couldn¡¯t tell if Zeituni was jo king. ¡° Let me tell you, Barry,¡± she said, 
¡°When I was young the night runners caused people many proble ms. They would steal our goats. Sometimes they 
took even our cattle. Only your grandfather was not afraid of the m. I re me mber one time he heard h is goats bleating in 
their pen, and when he went to check on them, he saw what looked like a huge leopard standing on its hind legs, like a 
man. It had a baby goat in its jaws, and when it saw your grandfather, it cried out in Luo before running into the 
forest. Your grandfather chased it deep into the hills, but just as he was about to strike it with his panga, the night 
runner fle w up into the trees. Luckily, it dropped the goat when  it ju mped, and the goat suffered only a broken leg. 
Your grandfather brought the goat back to the compound and showed me how to make a  splint. I cared fo r that goat 
myself until it was back to health.¡± 
 
We became quiet again; la mplight grew low and people began drifting off to bed. Granny brought out blankets and 
a twin-sized cot for Bernard and me, and we arranged ourselves on the narrow bed before blowing out the lamp. My 
body ached from e xhaustion; ins ide Granny¡¯s bedroom, I could hear the murmur of her and Auma ta lking. I 
wondered where Roy had gone to, and thought about the yellow t iles on the Old Man¡¯s grave. 
 
¡°Myself, I thin k there is no such thing as a night runner. They are probably just thieves who use these stories 
to ma ke people afraid.¡±  
 
¡° You may be right.¡± 
¡°Barry,¡± Bernard whispered. ¡°Are 
you awake?¡± ¡° Yeah.¡±  
¡°Did you believe what Ze ituni told you? About night 
runners?¡± ¡°I don¡¯t know.¡± 
There was a long 
pause. ¡°Barry?¡± 
¡°What?¡± 
¡°What made you finally co me ho me?¡±  
¡°I¡¯m not sure, Bernard. So mething told me it was time.¡±  
Bernard rolled over onto his side without answering. A mo ment later, I heard h is soft snores beside me, and I 
opened my eyes to the darkness, wait ing for Roy to return. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the mo rning, Say id and Yusuf suggested that Auma and I take a  tour of the lands. As we followed the m across 
the backyard and down a dirt path, through fields of corn and millet, Yusuf turned to me  and said, ¡°It must seem 
very primitive to you, co mpared to farms in A merica.¡±  
 
I told him that I didn¡¯t know much about farming but that, as far as I could tell, the land seemed quite fertile. ¡°Yes, 
yes,¡± Yusuf said, nodding. ¡°The land is good. The problem is that people here are uneducated. They don¡¯t 
 
understand much about development. Proper agricultura l techniques and so forth. I try to e xp lain to the m about 
capital improve ments and irrigation, but they refuse to listen. The Luo are very stubborn in this way.¡±  
 
I noticed Sayid frown ing at his brother, but he said nothing. After a fe w minutes we ca me to a s mall, brown strea m. 
Sayid shouted out a warning, and two young women e merged on the opposite bank, wrapped in their kangas, their hair 
still g lea ming fro m their mo rning baths. They smiled shyly and stepped b ehind an island of rushes, and Sayid pointed 
to the hedges running alongside the water. 
 
¡°This is where the land ends,¡± he said. ¡°Befo re, when my father lived, the fie lds were much b igger. But as 
my mother said, much of the land has now been given away.¡± 
 
Yusuf decided to go back at this point, but Sayid led Auma and me along the stream for a while, then across more fields, 
past the occasional compound. In front of some huts, we saw women sorting through millet spread across square strips of 
cloth, and we stopped to talk to one of them, a middle-aged woman in a faded red dress and red, laceless sneakers. She set 
aside her work to shake our hands and told us that she remembered our father-they had herded goats together as children, 
she said. When Auma asked how life had been treating her, she shook her head slowly. 
 
¡°Things have changed,¡± she said in a flat voice. ¡° The young men leave for the city. Only the old men, wo men, and 
children re main. All the wea lth has left us.¡± As she spoke, an old man with a ricket y bicycle  ca me up beside us, then a 
spindly man whose breath smelled of liquor. They immediate ly pic ked up the wo man¡¯s refra in about the hardness of 
life in Alego, and the children who had left the m behind. They asked if we might give the m something to tid e the m 
over, and Auma dropped a few shillings into each of their hands before we e xcused ourselves and started back toward 
the house. 
 
¡°What¡¯s happened here, Sayid?¡± Auma said a fter we we re out of earshot. ¡°There never used to be such begging.¡± 
 
Sayid leaned down and cleared away a few fallen branches from between the rows of corn. ¡°You are right,¡± he said. ¡°I 
believe they have learned this thing from those in the city. People come back from Nairobi or Kisumu and tell them, 
 
¡®You are poor.¡¯ So now we  have this idea of poverty. We didn¡¯t have this idea before. You look at my mother. She 
will never ask for anything. She has always something that she is doing. None of it brings her much money, but it is 
something, you see. It gives her pride. Anyone could do th e same, but many people here, they prefer to give up.¡± 
¡°What about Yusuf?¡± Auma asked. ¡° Couldn¡¯t he do more?¡± 
 
Sayid shook his head. ¡°My brother, he talks like a  book, but I¡¯m afraid he does not like to lead by e xa mp le.¡±  
 
Auma turned to me. ¡° You know, Yusuf was doing rea lly we ll for a t ime. He  did we ll in  school, didn¡¯t he, Say id? He  
received several good  job offe rs. Then,  I don¡¯t know what happened. He   just dropped out. Now he  just stays here 
with Granny, doing sma ll chores for her. It¡¯s as if he ¡¯s afraid to try to succeed.¡± 
 
Sayid nodded. ¡°I think perhaps education doesn¡¯t do us much good unless it is mixed with sweat.¡±  
 
 
 
 
I thought about what Sayid had said as we continued to walk. Perhaps he was right; perhaps the idea of poverty had been 
imported to this place, a new standard of need and want that was carried like measles, by me, by Auma, by 
 
Yusuf¡¯s archaic radio. To say that poverty was just an idea wasn¡¯t to say that it wasn¡¯t real; the people we ¡¯d just met 
couldn¡¯t ignore the fact that some people had indoor toilets or ate meat every day, any more than the child ren of  
 
Altgeld could ignore the fast cars and lavish homes that flashed across their television sets. 
 
 
But perhaps they could fight off the notion of their o wn helplessness. Sayid was telling us about his own life now: 
his disappointment at having never gone to the university, like his older brothers, for lack of funds; his work in the 
National Youth Corps, assigned to development projects around the country, a three -year stint that was now coming to 
an end. He had spent his last two holidays knocking on the doors of various businesses in Nairobi, so far without any 
success. Still, he seemed undaunted by his circumstances, certain that persistence would eventually pay off.  
 
¡°To get a job these days, even as a clerk, requires that you know somebody,¡± Sayid said as we approached 
Granny¡¯s compound. ¡°Or you must grease the palm of so me person very heavily. That¡¯s why I would like to start my 
own business. Something sma ll only. But mine. That was your father¡¯s erro r, I think. For a ll his brilliance, he never 
had something of his own.¡± He thought for a mo ment. ¡° Of course, there¡¯s no point wasting time  worrying about the 
mistakes of the past, am I correct? Like  this dispute over your father¡¯s inheritance. Fro m the beginning, I have told 
my sisters to forget this thing. We must get on with our lives. They do not listen to me, though. And in the meantime, 
the money they fight over goes where? To the lawyers. The lawyers are eat ing very we ll off th is case, I believe. Ho w 
does the saying go? When two locusts fight, it is a lways  the crow who feasts.¡± 
 
¡°Is that a Luo e xpression?¡± I asked. Sayid¡¯s face bro ke into a bashful smile.  
 
¡°We have similar e xpressions in Luo,¡± he said, ¡°but actually I must admit that I read this particu lar e xpression 
in a book by Chinua Achebe. The Nigerian writer. I like  his books very much. He speaks the truth about Africa¡¯s 
predica ment. The Nigerian, the Kenyan-it is the same. We share more than divides us.¡± 
 
Granny and Roy we re sitting outside the house and talking to a man in a  heavy suit when we returned. The man turned 
out to be the principal o f the nearby school, and he had stopped to share news from town and enjoy the chicken stew 
left over fro m the night before. I noticed that Roy had his bag packed, and asked him where  he was going. 
 
¡°To Kendu Bay,¡± he said. ¡°The principa l here is going that way, so myself, Be rnard, and my mu m, we¡¯re going to 
go catch a ride with him and bring Abo back here. You should come , too, and pay your respects to the family there.¡±  
 
Auma decided to stay back with Granny, but Sayid and I went to gather a change of clothes and piled into the principal¡¯s 
old jalopy. The drive to Kendu turned out to be several hours long by th e main highway; to the west, Lake 
 
Victoria appeared intermittently, its still, silver waters tapering off into flat green marsh. By late afternoon we we re 
pulling down Kendu Bay¡¯s main street, a wide, dusty road lined with sand -colored shops. After thanking the principal, 
we caught a matatu down a ma ze o f side streets, until a ll signs of town had disappeared and the landscape was once 
again open pasture and cornfields. At a fork in the road, Ke zia  signaled for us to get off, and we  began walking a long a 
deep, chalk-colo red gully at the bottom of which flowed a wide, chocolate-brown river. A long the riverbank, we could 
see women slapping wet c lothes against exposed rock; on a terrace above, a herd of goats chewed on the patches of 
 
 
 
 
yellow grass, their black, white, and roan ma rkings like lichen against the earth. We turned down a narrower footpath 
and came to the entrance of a hedged-in compound. Ke zia stopped and pointed to what looked like  a rando m pile of 
rocks and sticks, saying something to Roy in Luo.  
 
¡°That¡¯s Obama¡¯s grave,¡± Roy e xp lained. ¡° Our great-grandfather. A ll the land around here is called K¡¯Oba ma- 
 
¡®Land of the Oba ma.¡¯ We are Jok¡¯Oba ma-¡®the people of Oba ma .¡¯ Our g reat-great-grandfather was ra ised in Alego, 
but he moved here when he was still a young man. This is where  Oba ma settled, and where  all h is children were 
born.¡± ¡°So why did our grandfather go back to Alego?¡± 
 
Roy turned to Kezia, who shook her head. ¡° You have to  ask Granny that question,¡± Roy said. ¡°My mu m thinks 
maybe he didn¡¯t get along with his brothers. In fact, one of h is brothers is still living here. He ¡¯s old now, but perhaps 
we can see him.¡± 
 
We came to a s ma ll wooden house where a tall, handsome wo man was sweeping the yard. Beh ind her, a young 
shirtless man sat on the porch. The wo man shaded her eyes with her forea rm and began to wave, and the young man 
slowly turned our way. Roy went up to shake hands with the wo man, whose name was Salina, and the young man 
stood up to greet us. 
 
¡°Eh, you people finally ca me for me ,¡± Abo said, hugging each of us in turn. He reached for h is shirt. ¡°I had heard 
you were co ming with Barry so long ago!¡± 
 
¡° Yah, you know how it is,¡± Roy said. ¡°It took us a while to get 
organized.¡± ¡° I¡¯m just glad you came. I¡¯m te lling you, I need to get back to 
Nairobi.¡± ¡° You don¡¯t like it here, eh?¡± 
 
 
 
If Billy hadn¡¯t shown up, I would have gone crazy for sure.¡± 
¡°Billy¡¯s here?¡± 
¡°It¡¯s so boring, man, you would not believe it. No TV. No c lubs. These people in the  country, I think they are slow. 
¡° Yah, he¡¯s around somewhere¡­.¡± Abo waved his hand vaguely, then turned to me and smiled. ¡°So, Ba rry. What have 
you brought me fro m A merica?¡±  
 
I reached into my bag and pulled out one of the portable cassette players that I had bought for him and Be rnard. 
He turned it over in his hands with a thinly disguised look of d isappointment. 
 
¡°This brand is not a Sony, is it?¡± he said. Then, looking up, h e quickly recovered himse lf and slapped me  on the 
back. ¡°That¡¯s okay, Barry. Thank you! Thank you.¡±  
 
I nodded at him, trying not to get angry. He was standing beside Bernard and their resemb lance was striking: the 
same height, the same slender fra me, the s ame s mooth, even features. Just shave off Abo¡¯s mustache, I thought to 
myself, and they could almost Pass as twins. Except for¡­what? The look in Abo¡¯s eyes. That was it. Not just the 
telltale  redness of some sort of high but something deeper, something tha t reminded me of young men bac k in 
Chicago. An ele ment of guardedness, perhaps, and calculation. The look o f someone who rea lizes early in life that he 
has been wronged. 
 
We follo wed Sa lina inside the house, and she brought in a tray of sodas and biscuits. As she set down the tray, a 
strapping, mustached young man, as good-looking as Salina and as tall as Roy, wa lked through the door and let 
out a yell. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
¡°Roy! What are you doing here?¡± 
Roy stood up and they embraced. ¡° You know me . Just looking for a meal. I should ask you the same thing.¡±  
¡°Me,  I  a m  only  visiting  my  mother.  If  I  don¡¯t  come  so  often, she begins  to  compla in.¡±  He  kissed  Salina  on  the 
cheek  and  took  my  hand  in  a  crushing handshake.  ¡°So  I  see  you¡¯ve  brought  my  American  cousin!  I¡¯ve  heard  so 
much about you, Barry, I cannot believe you are now he re.¡± He turned to Salina. ¡° Have you given Barry food?¡±  
 
¡°Soon, Billy. Soon.¡± Salina took Ke zia ¡¯s hand and turned to Roy. ¡° You see what mothers must put up with? Ho w is 
your granny, anyway?¡± 
 
 
¡°Sa me.¡± 
She nodded thoughtfully. ¡°That is not so bad,¡± she said. 
Together with Ke zia, she went out of the room, and Billy fe ll onto the couch beside Roy.  
¡°So, you still c ra zy, bwana? Look at you now! Well-fed, like a prize bull! You must be enjoying yourself 
in the States.¡± 
 
¡°It¡¯s okay,¡± Roy said. ¡° How¡¯s Mombasa? I hear you¡¯re working at the post office.¡±  
Billy shrugged. ¡°The pay is all right. Not too much thinking, you know, but steady.¡± He turned to me. ¡° Let 
me  tell you, Barry, this brother of yours, he was wild! Truthfully, we we re a ll wild back then. We spent most of 
our time chasing the bush meat, eh Roy!¡± He slapped Roy on the thigh and laughed. ¡°So te ll me, how are  these 
American wo men?¡± 
 
Roy laughed, but he seemed relieved when Sa lina and Kezia brought in dinner. ¡° You see, Barry,¡±  Billy said, setting 
down his plate on the low table in front of him, ¡°your father and my father were  age -mates. Very c lose. When Roy and 
I we re growing up, we  we re a lso age-mates, so naturally we beca me ve ry close. Let me te ll you, your father, he was a 
very great man. I was closer to him than to my own father. If I was in trouble, it was my Uncle  Barack that I went to 
first. And Roy, you would also go to my father, I believe.¡± 
 
¡°The men in our fa mily were  very good to other people¡¯s children,¡± Roy said quietly. ¡°With their own, they didn¡¯t 
want to look weak.¡± 
 
Billy nodded and lic ked his fingers. ¡° You know, Roy, I thin k there¡¯s truth in  what you say. Myself, I don¡¯t want to 
ma ke the sa me mistakes. I don¡¯t want to mistreat my fa mily.¡±  With his c lean hand, Billy  pulled  his wa llet out of his 
pocket and showed me a  picture of h is wife and their two young children. ¡° I swear, bwana, marriage takes you! You 
should see me now, Roy. I¡¯ve become so calm. A fa mily man. Of course, there are  limits to what a man should take. 
My wife, she knows not to cross me too often. What do you say, Sayid?¡± 
 
I rea lized that Sayid hadn¡¯t spoken much since we  arrived. He washed his hands now before turning to Billy.  
¡°I a m not yet married,¡± he said, ¡°so perhaps I should not speak. But I ad mit, I have been giving these matters some 
thought. I have concluded that the problem that is most serious for Africa is what?¡± He paused to look around the room. 
¡°This thing between men and wo men. Our men, we try to be strong, but our strength is often misplaced. Like this 
business with having more than one wo man. Ou r fathers had many wives, so we a lso must have many wo me n. But we 
do not stop and look at the consequences. What happens with all these women? They become  jea lous. The children, 
they are not close to their fathers. It is -¡± 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sayid caught himself suddenly and smiled. ¡° Of course, I have not even one wife, so I shouldn¡¯t carry on so. Where 
there is no e xperience, I believe the wise man is silent.¡± 
 
¡°Achebe?¡± I asked. 
Sayid laughed and clutched my hand. ¡°No, Ba rry. That one was o nly me.¡± 
It was dark by the time we finished dinner, and, after thanking Sa lina and Kezia for the food, we fo llo wed Billy 
outside onto a narrow footpath. Walking under a full moon, we soon came to a s ma lle r house where the shadows of 
moths fluttered against a yellow window. Billy knocked on the door, and a short man with a scar along his forehead 
answered, his lips smiling but his eyes darting around like those of a man about to be struck. Beh ind him sat another 
man, tall, very thin, dressed in white and w ith a wispy goatee and mustache that made him look like an Indian sadhu. 
Together, the two men began shaking our hands feverishly, speaking to me in broken English. 
 
¡° Your nephew!¡± the wh ite-haired man said, pointing to himself. 
The short one laughed and said, ¡°His hair is white, but he calls you uncle! Ha -ha. You like th is English? Co me.¡±  They 
led us to a wooden table set with an unlabeled bottle of c lear liquid and three glasses. The white -haired man held up the 
bottle, then carefully poured what looked  like  a couple of shots into each glass. ¡°This is better than whiskey, Barry,¡±  
Billy said as he lifted his glass. ¡°It makes a man very potent.¡± He thre w the drin k down his throat, and Roy and I 
followed suit. I fe lt my chest exp lode, ra ining down shrapnel into my stomach. The glasses were refilled, but Sayid 
took a pass, so the short man held the e xt ra drink in front of my eyes, his face d istorted through the glass. 
 
¡°More?¡± 
¡°Not right now,¡± I said, suppressing a cough. ¡°Thanks.¡± 
¡° You may perhaps have something for me?¡± the wh ite-haired man said. ¡°T -shirt maybe? Shoes?¡± 
¡°I¡¯m sorry¡­I left everything back in Alego.¡±  
The short man kept smiling as if he hadn¡¯t understood and again offered me a  drin k. This time Billy pushed 
the man¡¯s hand away. 
 
¡°Leave him be!¡± Billy shouted. ¡°We can drink more later. First we should see our grandfather.¡± 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The two men led us into a sma ll back roo m. There, in front of a kerosene la mp, sat what looked like the oldest man I 
had ever seen. His hair was snow-white, h is skin like parch ment. He was motionless, his eyes closed, his fleshless arms 
propped on the armrests of his chair. I thought perhaps he was asleep, but when Billy stepped forward the old man¡¯s 
head tilted in our direction, and I saw a mirror image of the face I¡¯d seen yesterday in Alego, in the faded photograph 
on Granny¡¯s wall. 
 
Billy e xp la ined who was there, and the old man nodded and began to speak in a lo w, quaking voice that seemed to rise 
out of a chamber beneath the floor. 
 
¡°He says that he is glad you have come,¡± Roy translated. ¡°He was your grandfather¡¯s brother. He wishes 
you well.¡± I said that I was happy to see him, and the old man nodded again. 
 
¡°He says that many young men have been lost to¡­the wh ite  man¡¯s country. He s ays his own son is in Ame rica  
and has not come home fo r  many years. Such men are  like ghosts, he says. When they die, no one will be there to 
mourn the m. No ancestors will be there to we lco me the m. So ¡­he says it is good that you have returned.¡± 
 
 
 
 
The old man ra ised his hand and I shook it gently. As we got up to leave, the old man said something else, 
and Roy nodded his head before closing the door behind us. 
 
¡°He says that if you hear of his son,¡± Roy e xp lained, ¡°you should tell him that he should come ho me.¡±  
 
Perhaps it was the effects of the moonshine, or the fact that the people around me we re speaking in a  language I 
didn¡¯t understand. But when I try to re me mber the rest of that evening, it¡¯s as if I¡¯m walking through a dream. The 
moon hangs low in the sky, while the figures of Roy and the others merge with the shadows of corn. We enter 
another small house and find more men, perhaps six, perhaps ten, the numb ers constantly changing as the night wears 
on. In the center of a rough wooden table sit three more  bottles, and the men begin pouring the moonshine into the 
glasses, ceremoniously at first, then faster, mo re sloppily; the dull, labelless bottle passed fro m hand to hand. I stop 
drinking after t wo more shots, but no one seems to notice. Old faces and young faces all glo w like jack -o¡¯-lanterns in 
the shifting la mp light, laughing and shouting, slumped in dark corners or gesticulating wildly for c igarettes or 
another drink, anger or joy pitching up to a crest, then just as quickly ebbing away, words of Luo and Swahili and 
English running together in unrecognizable  swirls, the voices wheedling fo r money or shirts or the bottle, the voices 
laughing and sobbing, the outstretched hands, the faltering angry voices of my own sodden youth, of Ha rle m and the 
South Side; the voices of my father. 
 
I¡¯m not sure how long we stayed. I know that at some point, Sayid ca me up and shook 
my a rm. ¡° Barry, we  are going,¡± he said. ¡° Be rnard is not feeling we ll.¡±  
I said I¡¯d go with them, but as I stood up, Abo leaned over to me and grabbed my shoulders. 
¡°Barry! Where are  you 
going?¡± ¡°To sleep, Abo.¡± 
¡° You must stay here with us! With me! And Roy!¡± 
 
 
 
 
I looked up to see Roy slumped on the couch. Our eyes met, and I nodded toward the door. It seemed then that the 
entire room beca me silent, as if I were  watching the scene on television and the sound had gone off. I saw the white -
haired man fill Roy¡¯s glas s, and I thought about pulling Roy out of the roo m. But Roy¡¯s eyes slid away  fro m mine; he 
laughed and poured the drink down h is throat to  much cheering and applause, cheering that  I still could  hear even 
after Sayid, Bernard, and I had started making our way bac k toward Salina¡¯s house. 
 
¡°Those people were too drunk,¡± Bernard said weakly as we wa lked ac ross the field.  
 
Sayid nodded and turned to me. ¡°I¡¯m afraid Roy is too much like my eldest brother. You know, your father was very 
popular in these parts. Also in Alego. Whenever he came home, he would buy everyone drinks and stay out very late. 
 
The people here appreciated this. They would tell him, ¡®You are  a big man, but you have not forgotten us.¡¯  Such words 
made h im happy, I thin k. I re me mber once, he took me to Kisumu town in h is Mercedes. On the way, he saw a matatu 
picking up passengers, and he said to me, ¡®Say id, we will be matatu drivers this evening!¡¯ At the ne xt matatu stop, he 
picked up the re ma ining people and told me to collect the regular fare fro m them. I think we squeezed eight people into 
his car. He  took them not only to Kisu mu but to their houses, or wherever they needed to go. And when each of them 
got out, he gave them all their money back. The people didn¡¯t understand why he did this thing, and I also didn¡¯t 
understand at the time . After we were done, we went to the bar, and he told the story of what we had done to all o f his 
friends. He laughed very well that night.¡± 
 
 
 
 
 
Sayid paused, choosing his words carefully. 
¡°This is what made my brother such a good man, these things. But I think also that once you are one thing, you cannot 
pretend that you are something else. How could he be a matatu driver, or stay out all night drin king, and a lso he is 
writing Kenya¡¯s economic plan? A man does service for h is people by doing what is right for h im, isn¡¯t this so? Not by 
doing what others think he should do. But my brother, although he prided himself on h is independence, I also think that 
he was afraid o f some things. Afra id of what people would say about him if he le ft the bar too early. That perhaps he 
would no longer belong with those he¡¯d grown up with.¡± 
 
¡°I don¡¯t want to be that way,¡± Be rnard said. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sayid  looked  at  his  nephew  with  something  like   regret.  ¡° I  d id  not  mean  to  speak  so  freely,  Bernard.  You  must 
respect your elders. They clear the way for you so that your path is easier.  But if yo u see them falling into a pit, then 
you must learn to what?¡± 
 
¡°Step around,¡± Bernard said. 
¡° You are right. Diverge fro m that path and ma ke your own.¡±  
Sayid put his arm over the younger man¡¯s shoulders. As we approached Salina¡¯s house, I looked back behind me . I 
could still see the dim light of the old man¡¯s window, and sense his blind eyes staring out into the darkness. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER NINETEEN 
 
 
R OY AND A BO BOTH woke up with bad headaches, and along with Ke zia stayed in Kendu for another day. In 
slightly better shape, I decided to make  the trip back to Ho me Squared with Sayid and Bernard by bus, a decision I 
soon regretted. We had to stand for most of the way, our heads forced down by the bus¡¯s low roof. To ma ke matters 
worse, I¡¯d co me  down with a case of the runs. My stomach lurched with every bu mp. My head throbbed with each 
wayward turn. And so it was in a  cautious trot that I first appeared to Granny and Auma upon our return, offering 
them a curt wave before racing across the backyard, around an errant cow, and into the outhouse. 
 
Twenty minutes later I e merged, blin king like a p risoner in the light of the early afternoon. The wo men were  
gathered on straw mats under the shade of a mango tree while Granny braided Au ma¡¯s hair and Zeituni bra ided the 
hair of a neighbor¡¯s girl. 
 
¡°Did you have a nice time?¡± Au ma said, trying not to smile.  
¡°Wonderful.¡± I sat down beside them and watched as a skinny old wo man ca me out of the house and took a spot next 
to Granny. The old wo man was in her early seventies, I guessed, but was dressed in a bright pin k sweater; she folded 
her legs to the side like  a bashful schoolgirl. She peered at me and spoke to Auma in Luo.  
 
¡°She says you don¡¯t look so well.¡±  
The old wo man s miled at me , revea ling two missing bottom front teeth. 
¡°This is our grandfather¡¯s sister, Dorsila,¡± Au ma continued. ¡°The last child of our great -grandfather Oba ma. She lives 
in another village, but when she heard-Ow! I tell you, Barack, you are lucky you don¡¯t have braids t o undo. What was I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
saying? Yah ¡­Dorsila says that when she heard that we had come she wa lked a ll the way to see us. She brings 
greetings from all the people of her village.¡±  
 
Dorsila  and I shook hands, and I mentioned that I¡¯d met her older brother in Kendu Bay. She nodded and spoke again.  
 
¡°She says her brother is very old,¡± Auma  translated. ¡°When he was younger, he looked just like our grandfather. 
Somet imes even she couldn¡¯t tell them apart.¡± 
 
 
I agreed and took out my lighter. As I pulled at the fla me , our great -aunt hooted and spoke rapidly to  
Auma. ¡° She wants to know where  the fire co mes fro m.¡±  
I handed Dorsila the lighter and showed her how it worked as she continued to speak. Auma  e xp lained, ¡° She says 
that things are changing so fast it ma kes her head spin. She says that the first time she saw television, she assumed the 
people inside the box could a lso see her. She thought they were very rude, because when she spoke to them they 
never answered back.¡± 
 
Dorsila  chuckled at herself good-humoredly, while Ze ituni went into the cooking hut. A few minutes later, 
Zeituni ca me out with a mug in her hand. I asked her what had happened to Sayid and Bernard.  
 
 
¡°They¡¯re asleep,¡± she said, handing me the cup. ¡°Here. Drin k this.¡±  
I took a sniff of the steaming green liquid. It sme lled like a swa mp.  
¡°What is it?¡± 
¡°It¡¯s made fro m a plant that grows here. Trust me¡­it will firm up your stomach in a jiffy.¡± 
I took a tentative first sip. The brew tasted as bad as it looked, but Zeituni stood over me until I had gulped down the 
last drop. ¡°That is your grandfather¡¯s recipe,¡± she said. ¡°I told you he was a herbalist.¡± 
 
I took another puff from my cigarette and turned to Auma. ¡°Ask Granny to tell me more about him,¡± I said. 
¡°Our grandfather, I mean. Roy says that he actually grew up in Kendu, then moved to Alego on his own.¡± 
 
Granny nodded to Auma¡¯s translation. ¡°Does she know why he left Kendu?¡± 
Granny shrugged. ¡°She says that originally his people ca me fro m this land,¡± Auma  said.  
I asked Granny to start fro m the beginning. Ho w did our great -grandfather Oba ma co me  to live in Kendu? Where 
did our grandfather work? Why did the Old Man¡¯s mother leave? As she started to answer, I fe lt the wind lift, then 
die. A ro w of h igh clouds crossed over the hills. And under the fanning shade of the mango tree, as hands wove 
black curls into even rows, I heard a ll our voices begin to ru n together, the sound of three generations tumbling over 
each other like the currents of a slow-mov ing stream, my questions like roc ks roiling the water, the breaks in 
me mo ry separating the currents, but always the voices returning to that single course, a  single story¡­. 
 
First there was Miwiru. It¡¯s not known who ca me be fore. M iwiru sired Sigo ma, Sigo ma sired Owiny, Owiny sired  
 
Kisodhi, Kisodhi sired Oge lo, Ogelo sired Otondi, Otondi sired Obongo, Obongo sired Okoth, and Okoth sired Opiyo. 
The wo men who bore the m, their na mes are forgotten, for that was the way of our people.  
 
Okoth lived in A lego. Before that, it is known only that fa milies traveled a great distance, fro m the direction of what is 
now Uganda, and that we were  like the Masai, migrating in search of water and grazing land for great herds of cattle. In 
Alego, the people settled and began to grow crops. Other Luo sett led by the lake and learned to fish. There were  other 
tribes, who spoke Bantu, already living in A lego when the Luo ca me, and great wars were fought. Our ancestor Owiny  
 
 
 
 
was known as a great warrior and leader of his people. He helped to defeat the Bantu armies, but the Bantu were 
allo wed to stay on and marry Luo, and taught us many things about farming and the new land.  
 
Once people began to settle and farm, the land in Alego became crowded. Opiyo, son of Okoth, was a younger brother, so 
perhaps that is why he decided to move to Kendu Bay. When he moved there, he was landless, but in the custom of our 
people, a man could use any unused land. What a man did not use reverted to the tribe. So there was no shame in Opiyo¡¯s 
situation. He worked in the compounds of other men and cleared the land for his own farm. But before he could prosper, he 
died very young, leaving behind two wives and several children. One wife was taken in by 
 
Opiyo¡¯s brother, as was the custom then-she became the brother¡¯s wife, her children his children. But the other 
wife a lso died, and her oldest son, Obama , was orphaned when still a boy. He , too, lived with his uncle, but the 
resources of the fa mily were strained, and so as Obama gre w o lder, he began to work for other men as his father 
had done before him. 
 
The fa mily he worked for was wea lthy, with many cattle. But they came to ad mire Oba ma, for he was enterprising 
and a very good farmer. When he sought to marry their oldest daughter, they agreed, and the uncles in this fa mily 
provided the necessary dowry. And when this eldest daughter died, they agreed that Obama could ma rry the 
younger daughter, whose name was Nyaoke. Eventually Oba ma had four wives, who bore hi m many children. He 
cleared his own land and became prosperous, with a la rge co mpound and many cattle and goats. And because of his 
politeness and responsible ways, he became an e lder in Kendu, and many ca me to seek h is advice. 
 
Your grandfather, Onyango, was Nyaoke¡¯s fifth son. Dorsila, who sits here, was the last child of Oba ma ¡¯s last wife.  
 
This is the time before the white man ca me . Each fa mily had their own co mpound, but they all lived under the laws 
of the elders. Men had their own huts, and were responsible for clea ring and cultivating their land, as well as 
protecting the cattle fro m wild anima ls and the raids of other tribes. Each wife had her o wn vegetable plot, wh ich 
only she and her daughters would cultivate. She cooked the man¡¯s food, drew water, and maintained the huts. The 
elders regulated all plantings and the harvests. They organized fa milies to rotate their work, so that each family 
helped the other, in doing these things. The elders distributed food to widows or those who had fallen on hard  times, 
provided cattle as dowry for those men who had no cattle themselves, and settled all conflicts. The words of the 
elders were la w and strictly fo llowed-those who disobeyed would have to leave and start anew in another village.  
 
The children d id not go to school, but learned alongside their parents. The girls would acco mpany their mothers and 
learn how to grind the millet into porridge, how to grow vegetables and pack clay for the huts. The boys learned fro m 
their fathers how to herd and work pangas and throw spears. When a mother died, another would  take the child in and 
suckle him as her own. At night, the daughters would eat with their mothers, wh ile  the sons would join their father in 
his hut, listening to stories and learning the ways of our people. So metimes a harpist would co me, and the entire 
village would co me  to listen to his songs. The harpists sang of great deeds of the past, the great warriors and wise 
elders. They would pra ise men who we re good farme rs, or wo men who we re beautiful, and reb uke those who were 
la zy or crue l. A ll we re recognized in these songs for their contributions to the village, good and bad, and in this way 
the traditions of the ancestors stayed alive in all who heard. When the children and wo men were gone, the men in the 
village would gather together and decide on the village affairs. 
 
 
 
 
Even fro m the time  that he was a boy, your grandfather Onyango was strange. It is said of him that he had ants up his 
anus, because he could not sit still. He would wander off on his own for many days, and when he returned he would not 
say where he had been. He was very serious always -he never laughed or played games with the other children, and 
never made jokes. He was always curious about other people¡¯s business, which is how he lea rned to be a herbalist. You 
should know that a herbalist is diffe rent fro m a shaman-what the white man ca lls a witch doctor. A shaman casts spells 
and speaks to the spirit world. The herbalist knows various plants that will cure ce rtain illnesses or wounds, how to 
pack a special mud so that a cut will heal. As a boy, your grandfather sat in the hut of the herbalist in his village, 
watching and listening carefully wh ile the other boys played, and in this way he gained knowledge. 
 
When your grandfather was still a boy, we began to hear that the white man had come to Kisu mu town. It  was said 
that these white men had skin as soft as a child¡¯s, but that they rode on a ship that roared like  thunder and had sticks 
that burst with fire. Be fore this time, no one in our v illage had seen white men -only Arab traders who somet imes ca me 
to sell us sugar and cloth. But even that was rare, for our people did not use much sugar, and we did not wear cloth, 
only a goatskin that covered our genitals. When the elders heard these stories, they discussed it among themselves and 
advised the men to stay away fro m Kisumu until this white man was better understood. 
 
Despite this warning, Onyango became curious and decided that he must see these white men for h imself. One day he 
disappeared, and no one knew where he had gone. Then, many months later, wh ile  Oba ma ¡¯s other sons were working 
the land, Onyango returned to the village. He  was wea ring the trousers of a white man, and a shirt like  a white man, and 
shoes that covered his feet. The sma ll children we re frightened, and his brothers didn¡¯t know what to make  o f this 
change. They called Oba ma, who ca me out of h is hut, and the family gathered ¡¯round to stare at Onyango¡¯s strange 
¡°What has happened to you?¡± Obama asked. ¡°Why do you wear these strange skins?¡± Onyango said nothing, and 
appearance. 
 
 
Oba ma decided that Onyango must be wearing trousers to hide the fact that he was circu mcised, wh ich was against  
 
Luo custom. He thought that Onyango¡¯s shirt must be covering a rash, or sores. Obama turned to his other sons and 
said, ¡°Don¡¯t go near this brother of yours. He is unclean.¡± Then he returned to his hut, and the others laughed and 
shunned Onyango. Because of this, Onyango returned to Kisumu, and would re ma in estranged from his father for 
the rest of his life . 
 
Nobody realized then that the white man intended to stay in the land. We thought that they had come only to trade 
their goods. Some of the ir customs we soon developed a taste for, like  the drinking of tea. W ith tea, we  found that we 
needed sugar, and teakettles, and cups. All these things we bought with skins and meat and vegetables. Later we 
learned to accept the white man¡¯s coin. But these things did not affect us deeply. Like the Arabs, the white men 
re mained s mall in nu mber, and we assumed they would eventually return to their own land. In  Kisu mu, some  wh ite 
men stayed on and built a mission. These men spoke of their god, who they said was all-powe rfu l. But most people 
ignored them and thought their talk silly. Even when wh ite men appeared with rifles, no one resisted because our 
lives we re not yet touched by the death such weapons could bring. Many of us thought the guns were just fancy ugali 
stirrers. 
 
Things began to change with the first of the white man¡¯s wars. More guns arrived, along with a white man who called 
himself district commis sioner. We called this man Bwana Ogalo, which meant ¡°the Oppressor.¡± He imposed a hut tax 
 
 
 
 
that had to be paid in the white man¡¯s money. This forced many men to work for wages. He conscripted outright many 
of our men into his army to carry provisions and build a road that would allow automobiles to pass. He surrounded 
himself with Luos who wore clothes like the wh ite man to serve as his agents and tax co llectors. We lea rned that we 
now had chiefs, men who were not even in the council of elders. All these things were resisted, and many men began to 
fight. But those who did so were beaten or shot. Those who failed to pay taxes saw the ir huts burned to the ground. 
Some  fa milies fled farther into the countryside to start new villages. But most people stayed and learned to live with 
this new situation, although we now a ll rea lized that it had been foolish to ignore the white man¡¯s arrival . 
 
During this time , your grandfather worked for the wh ite man. Few people could speak English or Swahili in those 
days-men d idn¡¯t like  to send their sons to the white man¡¯s school, prefe rring that they work with the m on the land. But 
Onyango had learned to read and write, and understood the white man¡¯s system of paper records and land titles. This 
made h im useful to the wh ite man, and during the wa r he was put in charge of road crews. Eventually he was sent to 
Tanganyika, where  he stayed for several years. When he finally returned, he c leared land for himse lf in Kendu, but it 
was away fro m his father¡¯s co mpound and he rarely spoke to his brothers. He didn¡¯t build a proper hut for h imself, but 
instead lived in a tent. People had never seen such a thing and t hey thought he was crazy. Afte r he had staked his claim, 
he traveled to Nairobi, where a  wh ite man had offered h im a  job.  
 
In those days, few Africans could ride the train, so Onyango walked all the way to Na irobi. The trip took him more  
than two weeks. Later he would tell us of the adventures he had during this journey. Many times he chased away 
leopards with his panga. Once he was chased into a tree by an angry buffalo and had to sleep in the tree for t wo days. 
Once he found a drum ly ing in the middle of the forest path and when he opened it, a snake appeared and slid 
between his feet into the bush. But no harm ca me to him, and he eventually arrived in Na irobi to begin his work in the 
white man¡¯s house. 
 
He was not the only one who moved to town. After the wa r, many Africans began working for wages, 
especially those who had been conscripted or lived near the cit ies or had joined the wh ite missions. Many people 
had been displaced during and immediate ly following the war. The war had brought famine and diseas e in its 
wake, and it brought large nu mbers of wh ite settlers, who were  allowed to confiscate the best land. 
 
The Kikuyu felt these changes the most, for they lived in the highlands around Nairobi, where white settlement was 
heaviest. But the Luo also felt the white man¡¯s rule. All persons had to register with the colonial administration and hut ta xes 
steadily increased. This pressured more and more men to work as laborers on the big white farms. In our village, more 
families now wore the white man¡¯s clothes, and more fathers agreed to send their children to mission school. Of course, even 
those who went to school could not do the things the white man did. Only whites were allowed to buy certain land or run 
certain businesses. Other enterprises were reserved by law for the Hindus and the Arabs. 
 
Some men began to try to organize against these policies, to petition and hold demonstrations. But their numbers were few, 
and most people just struggled to live. Those Africans who did not work as laborers stayed in their villages, trying to 
maintain the old ways. But even in the villages, attitudes changed. The land was cro wded, for with new systems of land 
ownership, there was no longer room for sons to start their own plots -everything was owned by someone. Respect for 
tradition weakened, for young people saw that the elders had no real power. Beer, which once had been made  of 
 
 
 
 
honey and which men drank on ly sparingly, now ca me  in bottles, and many men became  drunks. Many of us 
began to taste the white man¡¯s life, and we decided that compared to him, our lives were poor. 
 
By these standards, your grandfather prospered. In his job in Nairobi, he learned how to prepare the white man¡¯s food 
and organize the wh ite man¡¯s house. Because of this, he was popular with e mployers and worked in the estates of 
some of the most important white men, even Lord De la mere . He saved his wages and bought land and cattle in Kendu. 
On these lands, he eventually built himself a hut. But the way he kept his hut was different fro m other people. His hut 
was so spotless, he would insist that people rinse their feet or ta ke off their shoes before entering. Inside, he would eat 
all his mea ls at a table and chair, under mosquito netting, with a knife and a fork. He  would not touch food that had not 
been washed properly and covered as soon as it had been cooked. He bathed constantly, and washed his clothes every 
night. To the end of his life he would be like this, very neat and hygienic, and he would become  angry if you put 
something in the wrong place or cleaned something badly.  
 
And he was very strict about his property. If you asked him, he wou ld always give you something of his -his food, his 
money, his c lothes even. But if you touched his things without asking, he would become  very angry. Even later, when 
his children were born, he would tell the m a lways that you do not touch other people¡¯s property. 
 
The people of Kendu thought his manners strange. They would come  to his house because he was generous with 
his food and always had something to eat. But a mong themselves, they would  laugh because he had neither wives 
nor children. Perhaps Onyango heard this talk, for he soon decided that he needed a wife. His proble m was, no 
wo man could ma intain his household the way he expected. He paid dowry on several g irls, but whenever they were  
la zy or broke  a dish, your grandfather would beat them severely. It was normal a mong the Luo for men to beat their 
wives if they misbehaved, but even among Luos Onyango¡¯s attitude was considered harsh, and eventually the 
wo men he took for h imself wou ld flee to their fathers¡¯ compounds. Your grandfather lost many cattle this way, for 
he would be too proud to ask for the return of h is dowry.  
 
Finally, he found a wife who could live with him. Her na me was Helima . It isn¡¯t known how she fe lt toward your 
grandfather, but she was quiet and polite-and most important, she could ma intain your grandfather¡¯s high housekeeping 
standards. He built a hut for her in Kendu, where  she spent most of her time. So metimes he would bring her to Na irobi 
to stay in the house where he worked. After a  fe w years had passed, it was discovered that Helima could not bear any 
children. A mong the Luo, this was norma lly proper grounds for divorce -a man could send a barren wife  back to his in -
laws and ask that his dowry be returned. But your grandfather chose to keep Helima, and in that sense, he treated her 
well. 
 
Still, it must have been lonely for He lima, for your grandfather worked a ll the time  and had no time  for friends or 
entertainment. He did not drin k with other men, and he did not smoke tobacco. His only pleasure was going to the 
dance halls in Na irobi once a month, for he liked to dance. But he also was not such a good dancer-he was rough, and 
would bump into people and step on their feet. Most people did not say anything about this because they knew 
Onyango and his temper. One night, though, a drunken man began to complain about Onyango¡¯s clumsiness. The man 
became rude, and told your grandfather, ¡°Onyango, you are already an older man. You have many cattle, and you have 
a wife, and yet you have no children. Te ll me, is something the matter between your leg s?¡± 
 
 
 
 
People who overheard the conversation began to laugh, and Onyango beat this man severely. But the drunk man ¡¯ s 
words must have stayed with your grandfather, for that month he set out to find another wife. He returned to Kendu 
and inquired about all the wo men in the village. Finally he made up his mind on a young girl na med Aku mu, who 
was well regarded for her beauty. She was already pro mised to another man, who had paid her father six cattle  in 
dowry, pro mising to deliver six mo re in the future. But Onyango knew the girl¡¯s father and he convinced him to send 
back these six cattle. In return, Onyango gave him fifteen cattle on the spot. The next  day, your grandfather¡¯s friends 
captured Akumu wh ile  she was walking in the forest and dragged her back to Onyango¡¯s hut. 
 
The young boy, Godfrey, appeared with the washbasin, and we all washed our hands for lunch. Auma. sto od up to 
stretch her back, her ha ir still half undone, a troubled look on her face. She said something to Do rsila and Granny, and 
drew a lengthy response fro m both wo men. 
 
¡°I was asking the m if our grandfather took Aku mu by force,¡± Au ma told me, spooning s ome meat onto 
her plate. ¡°What did they say?¡± 
¡°They say that this thing about grabbing the woman was part of Luo custom. Traditionally, once the man pays the dowry, 
the woman must not seem too eager to be with him. She pretends to refuse him, and so the man¡¯s friends must capture her 
and take her back to his hut. Only after this ritual do they perform a proper marriage ceremony.¡± Auma took a small bite of 
her food. ¡°I told them that in such a custom some women might not have been pretending.¡± 
 
Zeituni dipped her ugali into the stew. ¡° Yah, Auma , it was not as bad as you say. If her husband behaved badly, the 
girl could always leave.¡±  
 
¡°But what good was that if her father would only end up choosing someone else for her? Te ll me , what 
would happen if a wo man re fused her father¡¯s choice of a suitor?¡± 
 
Zeituni shrugged. ¡°She shamed herself and her fa mily.¡± 
¡° You see?¡± Auma turned to ask Granny something, and whatever it was that Granny said in response made Auma h it  
 
Granny-only half playfully-on the arm. 
 
¡°I asked her if the man would force  the girl to sleep with him the night of her capture,¡± Auma  e xp lained, ¡°and she 
told me  that no one knew what went on in a  man¡¯s hut. But s he also asked me how a man would know if he wanted 
the whole bowl of soup unless he first had a taste.¡± 
 
I asked Granny how old she had been when she married our grandfather. The question amused her so much that she 
repeated it to Dorsila , who giggled and slapped Granny on the leg. 
 
¡°She told Dorsila that you wanted to know when Onyango seduced her,¡± Auma said. 
Granny winked at me , then told us she had been just sixteen when she ma rried; our grandfather was a friend 
of her father¡¯s, she said. I asked if that had bothered her, and she shook her head. 
 
¡°She says that it was common  to marry an older man,¡± Au ma said. ¡°She says in those days, marriage involved more 
than  just  two  people.  It  brought  together  families  and  affected  the  whole  village.  You  didn¡¯t  co mp la in,  or  worry 
about love. If you didn¡¯t learn to love your husband, you learned to obey him.¡±  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
At this point, Auma and Granny began to speak at length, and Granny said something that again made 
the others laugh. Everyone e xcept Auma, who stood up and began to stack the dishes. 
 
¡°I give up,¡± Auma said, exasperated. 
¡°What did Granny say?¡± 
 
 
¡°I asked her why our wo men put up with the arranged marriages. The way men ma ke a ll the decisions. The wife -
beating. You know what she said? She said that often the women needed to be beaten, because otherwise they would 
not do everything that was required of the m.  You see how we a re? We co mpla in, but still we  encourage men to treat us 
like shit. Look at Godfrey over there. You thin k, when he hears these things Granny and Dorsila have said, that this 
won¡¯t affect h is own attitudes?¡± 
 
Granny couldn¡¯t understand the precise meaning of Au ma ¡¯s words, but she must have caught the tone, for 
her voice suddenly became serious. 
 
¡°Much of what you say is true, Auma,¡± she said in Luo. ¡° Our wo men have carried a heavy load. If one is a fish, one 
does not try to fly-one swims with other fish. One only knows what one knows. Pe rhaps if I we re young today, I 
would not have accepted these things. Perhaps I would only care about my fee lings, and falling in love. But that¡¯s not 
the world I was raised in. I only know what I have seen. What I have not seen doesn¡¯t make  my heart heavy.¡± 
 
I leaned back on the mat and thought about what Granny had said. There was a certa in wisdom there, I supposed; 
she was speaking of a different time, another place. But I also understood Auma¡¯s frustration. I knew that, as I had 
been listening to the story of our grandfather¡¯s youth, I, too, had felt betrayed. My image of Onyango, faint as it was, 
had always been of an autocratic man-a c ruel man, perhaps. But I had also imagined him an independent man, a  man 
of his people, opposed to white rule. There was no real basis for this image, I now rea lized -only the letter he had 
written to Gra mps saying that he didn¡¯t want his son marry ing white. That, and his Muslim faith, which in my mind 
had become linked with the Nat ion of Isla m back in the States. What Granny had told us scrambled that image 
complete ly, causing ugly words to flash across my mind. Uncle To m. Collaborator. House nigger. 
 
I tried to e xpla in some of this to Granny, asking her if our grandfather had ev er e xpressed his feelings about the 
white man. Just then, Sayid and Bernard e me rged, groggy -eyed, fro m the house, and Zeituni directed them to 
the plates of food that had been set aside for them. It wasn¡¯t until they had settled down to eat, and Auma and 
the neighbor¡¯s girl resumed their positions in front of the older wo men, that Granny returned to her story. 
 
I also did not always understand what your grandfather thought. It was difficu lt, because he did not like  people to 
know him so we ll. Even when he s poke to you, he would look a way for fear that you would know his thoughts. So it 
was with h is attitude towards the white man. One day he would say one thing, and the next day it was as if he was 
saying something else. I know that he respected the white man  for his power, for his machines and weapons and the 
way he organized h is life. He  would say that the white man was always improving himse lf, whereas the African was 
suspicious of anything new. ¡°The African is thick,¡± he would so metimes say to me. ¡°For h im to do anything, he needs 
to be beaten.¡± 
 
But despite these words, I don¡¯t think he ever believed that the white man was born superior to the African. In fact, he did 
not respect many of the white man¡¯s ways or their customs. He thought many things that they did were foolish or 
 
 
 
 
unjust. He himself, he would never a llow h imself to be beaten by a white man. Th is is how he lost many jobs. I f 
the white man he wo rked for was abusive, he would tell the man to go to hell and leave to find other work. Once, 
an emp loyer tried to cane him, and your grandfather grabbed the man¡¯s cane and thrashed him with it. For th is 
he was arrested, but when he expla ined what had happened, the authorities let him off with a fine and a warn ing.  
 
What your grandfather respected was strength. Discipline. This is why, even though he learned many of the white 
man¡¯s ways, he always re ma ined strict about Luo traditions. Respect for elders. Respect for authority. Order and 
custom in all h is affa irs. This is also why he rejected the Christian re lig ion, I think. For a brief t ime, he converted, and 
even changed his name to Johnson. But he could not understand such ideas as mercy towards your enemies, or that this 
man Jesus could wash away a man¡¯s sins. To your grandfather, this was foolish sentiment, so mething to comfo rt 
wo men. And so he converted to Islam-he thought its practices conformed more  closely to his belie fs. 
 
In fact, it was this hardness that caused so many proble ms between him and Aku mu. By the time I ca me  to live with 
him, she had already borne Onyango two children. The first was Sarah. Three years later ca me your father, Ba rack. I 
did not know Aku mu well, for she and her children lived with He lima on your grandfather¡¯s compound in Kendu, 
while I stayed with him in Nairobi, to help h im with his work there. But whenever I acco mpanied your grandfather to 
Kendu, I could see that Akumu was unhappy. Her spirit was rebe ll ious, and she found Onyango too demanding. He 
would always compla in that she kept a bad house. Even in child rea ring, he was strict with her. He told her to keep the 
babies in cribs and dress them in fancy clothes that he brought fro m Nairobi. Whatever the  babies touched had to be 
even cleaner than before. He lima tried to help Aku mu, and cared for the children as if they were her own, but it  didn¡¯t 
help. Aku mu was only a few years older than me, and the pressure on her was great. And perhaps Auma is 
right ¡­perhaps she still loved the man she was to have wed before Onyango took her away.  
 
Whatever it was, more than once she tried to leave Onyango. Once after Sa rah was born, and again after 
Barac k. Despite his pride, Onyango follo wed her both times, for he be lieved that the children needed their 
mother. Both times, A ku mu¡¯s fa mily took his side, so she had no choice but to return. Eventually she learned to 
do what was e xpected of her. But she quietly clung to her bitterness. 
 
Life  became  easier for her when the Second World War ca me. Your grandfather went overseas as the cook to the 
British captain, and I ca me  to live with Aku mu and He lima, helping both with the children and their c rops. We did not 
see Onyango for some time. He trave led widely with the British regiments -to Burma and Cey lon, to Arabia, and a lso 
somewhere in Europe. When he returned three years later, he ca me with a g ra mophone and that picture of the wo man 
he claimed to have married in Burma. The p ictures you see on my wa ll-they are taken fro m th is time. 
 
Onyango was now almost fifty. More and more , he thought of quitting his work fo r the wh ite man and returning to 
farm the land. He  saw, though, that the land surrounding Kendu was crowded and overgrazed. So his mind went back 
to Alego, the land that his grandfather had abandoned. One day he came  to his wives and told us that we should prepare 
ourselves to leave for Alego. I was young and adaptable, but the news came as a shock to Helima  and Aku mu. Both of 
their fa milies lived in Kendu, and they had become accustomed to living there. Helima  especially feared that she would 
be lonely in this new p lace, for she was almost as old as Onyango and had no children of her own. So she refused to go. 
Akumu a lso refused to go at first, but again her fa mily convinced her that she must follo w her husband and care for her 
children. 
 
 
 
 
When we arrived in Alego, most of this land that you now see was bush, and life was hard fo r all of us. But your 
grandfather had studied modern farming techniques while in Nairobi and he put his ideas to work. He could make  
anything grow, and in less than a year he had grown enough crops to sell at ma rket. He  smoothed out the earth to 
ma ke this wide lawn, and cleared the fie lds where his crops grew high and plentifu l. He p lanted the mango and banana 
and pawpaw trees that you see today. 
 
He even sold most of his cattle because he said that their grazing made the soil poor and caused it to wash away. With 
this money, he built large huts for Aku mu and myself and a hut of his own. He had brought back a crystal set fro m 
England that he displayed on a shelf, and on his gra mophone he played strange music late into the night. When my first 
children, Oma r and Zeituni, were born, he bought them cribs and gowns and separate mosquito nets, just as he had for 
Barac k and Sarah. In the cooking hut, he built an oven in wh ich  he baked bread and cakes like you buy in a store. 
 
His neighbors in Alego had never seen such things. At first they were suspicious of him and thought he was foolish -
especially when he sold his cattle. But soon they came to respect his generosity, as well  as what he taught them about 
farming and herbal med icines. They even came to appreciate h is temper, for they discovered that he could protect 
them fro m witchcraft. In those days, shamans were consulted often and were widely feared. It was said that they c ould 
give you a love potion for the one you desired and other potions that would cause your enemies to fa ll dead. But your 
grandfather, because he had traveled widely and read books, didn¡¯t believe in such things. He thought they were 
tricksters who stole people¡¯s money. 
 
Even now, many in Alego can tell you about the day that a shaman fro m another province came  to kill one of our 
neighbors. This neighbor had courted a girl fro m nearby, and the fa milies had agreed that they should be wed. 
However, another man hungered for this girl, and so the jealous suitor hired a shaman to kill his rival. When our 
neighbor heard of this plan, he became very a fra id, and ca me to Onyango asking for advice. Your grandfather listened 
to the man¡¯s story, then picked up his panga and a hippo-hide whip, and went to wa it for the shaman at the foot of the 
road. 
 
Before  long, Onyango saw the shaman approaching, carrying a sma ll suitcase of potions in one hand. When the 
shaman was within shouting distance, your grandfather stood in th e center of the road and said, ¡° Go back to where 
you come fro m.¡± The shaman d idn¡¯t know who Onyango was, and made like  he was going to pass, but Onyango 
blocked his way and said, ¡°If you are as powerful as you claim, you must strike  me now with lightning. If not, you 
should run, for unless you leave this village now, I will have to beat you.¡± Again, the shaman made as if he was going 
to pass, but before he could take another step, Onyango had beaten him to the ground, taken his suitcase, and returned 
with it to his compound. 
 
Well, this was a very serious matter, especially when your grandfather refused to return the shaman¡¯s potions. The 
next day, the council o f e lders gathered beneath a tree to resolve the dispute, and Onyango and the shaman were  both 
told to appear and state their case. First the shaman stood and told the elders that if Onyango did not return the suitcase 
at once, a curse would be brought on the entire village. Then Onyango stood, and he repeated what he had said earlier.  
 
¡°If this man has strong magic, let him curse me now and strike me dead.¡± The elders leaned away from Onyango, fearful 
that the spirits might miss their target. But they soon saw that no spirits came. So Onyango turned to the man who had 
hired the shaman and said, ¡°Go and find yourself a new woman, and let this other woman be with the one to 
 
 
 
 
whom she is promised.¡± And to the shaman Onyango said, ¡° Go back to where you ca me fro m, becaus e there will 
be no killings in this place.¡±  
 
To these things, all the e lders agreed. But they insisted that Onyango must also return the shaman¡¯s suitcase, for they 
did not want to take any chances. Onyango also agreed, and when the meeting was fin ished, h e brought the shaman to 
his hut. He told me  to slaughter a chicken so the shaman could eat, and even gave the shaman money so that his trip to 
Alego would not have been wasted. But be fore your grandfather let the shaman  leave, he made  the man show him the 
contents of his suitcase and expla in the properties of every potion, so that he would know all the tricks that the shaman 
performed. 
 
Even if Onyango had used one of these potions on Akumu, I don¡¯t think he could have made her happy. No matter 
how much he beat her, she would argue with him. She was also proud and scornful of me, and often re fused to help 
in the household chores. She had a third child-na med Auma , like this one sitting here-and as she nursed this new 
baby, she secretly planned her escape. One night, when Sarah was twelve and Barac k was nine, she made her move. 
She woke  up Sarah and said that she was running away to Kendu. She told Sarah that it was too difficult a journey for 
children to ma ke at night, but said that they should follo w her as s oon as they were older. Then she disappeared with 
her baby into the darkness. 
 
When Onyango found out what had happened, he was furious. At first he thought he should finally let Aku mu go, but 
when he saw that Barack and Sarah were still young, and that even I, with two children of my o wn, was little more  
than a girl, he again went to Akumu¡¯s fa mily in Kendu and asked that she be returned. But this time  the fa mily refused. 
In fact, they had already accepted dowry for Aku mu¡¯s re marriage to another man, and together Akumu and her new 
husband had left for Tanganyika. There was nothing On yango could do, so he returned to Alego. He said to himself, 
¡°It does not matter,¡± and he told me  that I was now the mother of a ll his children.  
 
Neither he nor I knew o f Aku mu¡¯s last visit to Sarah. But Sarah had re me mbe red her mother¡¯s instructions, and  only a 
few weeks passed before she woke up Ba rack in the middle of the night, just as her mother had done to her. She told 
Barac k to be quiet, helped him get dressed, and together they began to walk down the road to Kendu. I still wonder that 
they both survived. They were gone for a lmost two wee ks, wa lking many miles each day, hiding fro m those who 
passed them on the road, sleeping in fie lds and begging for food. Not far fro m Kendu, they became lost, and a wo man 
finally saw the m and took pity on them, fo r they were filthy and almost starved. The woman took the m in and fed 
them, and asked them their na mes; and when she realized who they were she sent for your grandfather. And when 
Onyango came to get them, and saw how badly they looked, this is the only time that anyone ever saw him cry. 
 
The children never tried to run away again. But I don¡¯t think they ever fo rgot this journey they made. Sarah kept a 
careful d istance from Onyango, and in her heart re mained loyal to Aku mu, for she was older, and perhaps had s een 
how the old man had treated her mother. I be lieve she also resented me for taking her mother¡¯s place. Barac k reacted 
diffe rently. He could not forgive his abandonment, and acted as if Aku mu didn¡¯t e xist. He told everyone that I was his 
mother, and a lthough he would send Akumu money when he became  a man, to the end of his life he would always act 
coldly towards her. 
 
The strange thing was that in many ways Sarah was most like her father in personality. Strict, hardworking, easy to 
anger. Whereas Barack was wild and stubborn like Akumu. But of course such things one does not see in one¡¯s self. 
 
 
 
 
As you might e xpect, Onyango was very strict with his children. He worked the m hard, and would not allow the m to 
play outside the compound, because he said other children were filthy and ill -mannered. Whenever Onyango went 
away, I would ignore these instructions, because children must play with other children, just as they must eat and sleep. 
But I would never tell your grandfather what I did, and I would have to scrub the children clean before your grandfather 
came ho me. 
 
This was not easy, especially with Barack. That boy was so mischievous! In Onyango¡¯s presence, he appeared well-
mannered and obedient, and never answered back when his father told him to do something. But behind the old man¡¯s 
back, Barac k did as he pleased. When Onyango was away on business, Barac k would take off h is proper clothes and go 
off with other boys to wrestle or swim in the river, to steal the fruit fro m the neighbors¡¯ trees or ride their cows. The 
neighbors were afra id to go directly to Onyango, so they would come to me and co mpla in about these things. But I 
could not get mad at Ba rack, and would a lways cover up his foolishness from Onyango, for I loved him as my own son. 
Although he did not like to show it, your grandfather was also very fond of Barac k, because the boy was so cle ver. 
When Barack was only a baby, Onyango would teach him the alphabet and numbers, and it was not long before the son 
could outdo the father in these things. This pleased Onyango, for to him knowledge was the source of all the wh ite 
man¡¯s power, and he wanted to ma ke sure that his son was as educated as any white man. He  was less concerned with 
Sarah¡¯s education, although she was also quick like Ba rack. Most men thought educating their daughters was a waste of 
money. When Sarah was finished with prima ry school, she came to Onyango begging for school fees to go on to 
secondary school. He said to her, ¡°Why should I spend school fees on you when you will co me to live in another man¡¯s 
house? Go help your mother and learn how to be a proper wife.¡±  
 
This created more  frict ion between Sarah and her younger brother, especially because she knew that Barac k was not 
always serious about his studies. Everything ca me too easily to him. At first he went to the mission school nearby, 
but he came back a fter the first day and told his father that he could not study there because his class was taught by a 
wo man and he knew everything she had to teach him. Th is attitude he had learned fro m his father, so Onyango could 
say nothing. The next c losest school was six miles away, and  I began to walk h im to this school every morn ing. His 
teacher there was a man, but Barac k d iscovered this didn¡¯t solve his problems. He always knew the answers, and 
sometimes would even correct the teacher¡¯s mistakes before the whole c lass. The teacher wo uld scold Barac k for his 
insolence, but Barack would refuse to back down. This caused Barack many canings at the hand of the headmaster. 
But it a lso might have taught him something, because the next year, when he switched to a class with a wo man 
teacher, I noticed that he didn¡¯t compla in. 
 
Still, he was bored with school, and when he became older, he would stop going to school altogether for wee ks at a 
time. A few days before exa ms, he would find a c lassmate and read through the lessons. He could sit down a nd teach 
himself everything in just a few days, and when the marks came  in, he would a lways be first. The fe w t imes he did 
not come in first, he ca me to me in tears, for he was so used to being the best. But this happened only once or twice -
usually he would co me  home  laughing and boasting of his cleverness. 
 
Barac k did not mean his boasts cruelly-he was always good-natured towards his classmates, and would help them 
whenever they asked. His boasts were like  those of a child who discovers that he can run fast or hunt well. So he d id 
not understand that others might resent his ease. Even as a man, he did not understand such things. In a bar or a  
 
 
 
 
restaurant, he would see classmates of his who were  now ministers or businessmen, and in front of everybody he 
would tell the m their ideas were silly. He would say to them, ¡° Oy, I re me mber that I had to teach you arithmet ic, so 
how can you be such a big man now?¡± Then he would laugh and buy these men beers, for he was also fond of them. 
But these fellows would re me mbe r their school days, and know what Barac k had said was true, and although they 
might not show it, h is words made them angry. 
 
By the time  your father was a teenager, things were changing rapid ly in Kenya. Many Africans had fought in the 
Second World War. They had carried a rms and distinguished themselves as great warriors in Burma and Pa lestine. 
They had seen the white man fight his own people, and had died beside white men, and had killed many wh ite men 
themselves. They had learned that an African could work the wh ite man¡¯s machines and had met blac ks fro m A me rica 
who fle w a irp lanes and performed surgery. When they returned to Kenya, they were e ager to share this new knowledge 
and were no longer satisfied with the white man¡¯s rule.  
 
People began to talk about independence. Meetings and demonstrations were held, and petitions were presented to 
the admin istration compla ining about land confiscation  and the power of ch iefs to commission free labor for 
government projects. Even Africans who had been educated in mission schools now rebelled against their home  
churches and accused whites of distorting Christianity to demean everything African. As before , most of this activity 
centered in Kikuyuland, for that tribe bore the wh ite man¡¯s yoke most heavily. But the Luo, too, were oppressed, a 
ma in source of forced labor. Men in our area began to join the Kikuyu in de monstrations. And later, when the 
British declared their Eme rgency, many men we re detained, some never to be seen again. 
 
Like other boys, your father would be influenced by the early talk of independence, and he would come ho me fro m 
school talking about the meetings he had seen. Your grandfather agreed with many of the de mands of the early parties 
like KANU, but he re mained skeptical that the independence movement would lead to anything, because he thought 
 
Africans could never win against the white man¡¯s army. ¡° How can the African defeat the wh ite man,¡± he would tell 
Barac k, ¡° when he cannot even make h is own bicycle?¡± And he would say that the African could never win aga inst the 
white man because the black man only wanted to work with his own fa mily or c lan, while a ll wh ite men worked to 
increase their power. ¡°The wh ite man a lone is like an ant,¡± Onyango would say. ¡°He can be easily c rushed. But like 
an ant, the white man wo rks together. His nation, his business -these things are more  impo rtant to him than himself.  He  
will follow h is leaders and not question orders. Blac k men are not like this. Even the most foolish black man th inks he 
knows better than the wise man. That is why the black man will always lose.¡± 
 
Despite his attitude, your grandfather would once find himself detained. An African who worked for the district 
commissioner was jealous of your grandfather¡¯s lands. This man had once been rebuked by your grandfather because he 
would collect excessive taxes and pocket the money for himself. During the Emergen cy, this man placed Onyango¡¯s name 
on a list of KANU supporters and told the white man that Onyango was a subversive. One day, the white man¡¯s askaris 
came to take Onyango away, and he was placed in a detention camp. Eventually he received a hearing, and he was found 
innocent. But he had been in the camp for over six months, and when he returned to Alego he was very thin and dirty. He 
had difficulty walking, and his head was full of lice. He was so ashamed, he refused to enter his house or tell us what had 
happened. Instead, he called me to boil him water and bring him one of his razors. He shaved off his 
 
 
 
 
hair, and I had to help him bathe for a very long time, just where you are now sitting. And fro m that day on, I saw 
that he was now an old man. 
 
Barack was away at the time and only learned about this detention later. He had taken the district examination, and had 
been admitted to Maseno Mission School, some fifty miles south, near the equator. This should have been a great honor for 
Barack, because few Africans were allowed to get secondary education, and only the best students got into 
 
Maseno, but your father¡¯s rebellious nature caused the school much grief. He would sneak girls into his dormitory, for 
he could always talk very sweetly to girls and promise them a ll that they dreamed. He and his friends would ra id nearby 
farms for chickens and yams, because they did not like the dormitory food. The teachers at the school overlooked many 
of these infractions, for they saw how smart he was. But event ually Ba rack went too far with his mischief and was 
finally e xpe lled. 
 
Onyango was so furious when he found out, he beat Barack with a stick until Barac k¡¯s back was bleeding. But Barac k 
refused to run or cry out, or even e xpla in himself to his father. Fina lly, Onyango told Barac k, ¡°If you cannot behave 
properly in my  co mpound, I have no use for you here!¡± The follo wing week, Onyango told Barac k that he had arranged 
for him to travel to the coast, where he would work as a cle rk. ¡° You will learn the value of education now,¡± the old 
man said. ¡° I will see how you enjoy yourself, earning your own mea ls.¡± 
 
Barac k had no choice but to obey his father. He went to Mombasa and took the job, in the office of an Arab merchant. 
But after a  short time , he had an argu ment with the Arab and left without collecting his pay. He found another clerk¡¯s 
job, but it paid much less. He was too proud to ask his father for help or ad mit that he had been wrong. Nevertheless, 
word got back to Onyango, and when Barac k ca me ho me for a v is it, h is father shouted to him that he would a mount to 
nothing. Barack tried to tell Onyango that the new job paid much better than the one Onyango had arranged. He said 
that he was earning one hundred and fifty shillings every month. So Onyango said, ¡°Let  me see your wage book, if you 
are such a wealthy man.¡± And when Ba rack said nothing, Onyango knew that his son had lied. He went into his hut 
and told Barack to go away because he had brought shame on his father.  
 
Barac k moved to Na irobi and found a job working as a cle rk for the railway. But he was bored, and he became 
distracted by the politics of the country. The Kikuyu had begun their warfare in the forests. Every where there we re 
rallies calling for Kenyatta¡¯s release fro m prison. Ba rack began to attend  political meetings after work and ca me to 
know some o f the KANU leadership. At one of these meetings, the police ca me, and Barac k was arrested for vio lating 
the meeting law. He was jailed, and sent word to his father that he needed money for ba il. But Ony ango refused to give 
 
Barac k the money he¡¯d asked for, and told me  that his son needed to learn his lesson well.  
 
Because he was not a leader in KANU, Barack was released after a few days. But there was no happiness in his release, 
for he had begun to think that perhaps what his father had said was true-that he would amount to nothing. He was a man of 
twenty and what did he have? He had been fired from his railway job. He was estranged from his father, without money or 
prospects. And he now had a wife and a child. He had met Kezia when he was only eighteen. She lived in Kendu with her 
family then. He was struck by her beauty, and after a brief courtship he decided that he would marry her. To do so, he knew 
that his father would have to help him with the dowry payment, and so he asked me to intercede on his behalf. At first 
Onyango resisted, and Sarah, who had moved back to Alego after her first husband died, also disapproved. She told your 
grandfather that Kezia only wanted to live off the family¡¯s wealth. But I told 
 
 
 
 
Onyango that it would be improper for Barac k to have to beg fro m other re latives for a dowry when everyone knew 
he was the son of a well-off man. Onyango saw that I spoke the truth, and he relented. One year after Ba rack and 
Kezia were  married, Roy was born. Two years later ca me Au ma.  
 
To support this family, Barack had to take any work he could find, and he finally convinced another Arab, na med 
Suleiman, to take h im on as an office boy. But Barac k re ma ined deeply depressed, almost desperate. Many of his age -
mates fro m Maseno, the ones  who were not as gifted as him, we re a lready leav ing for Ma karere  Un iversity in 
Uganda. So me had even gone to London to study. They could expect big jobs when they returned to a liberated 
Kenya. Ba rack saw that he might end up working as the clerk of these men for the rest of his life . 
 
Then, good fortune struck, in the form of t wo A merican wo men. They were  teaching in Na irob i, connected to some 
religious organization, I thin k, and one day they came into the office where Barac k was working. Your father struck up 
a conversation with them, and soon these women became  his friends. They loaned him books to read and invited him to 
their house, and when they saw how smart he was, they told him that he should go to a university. He e xp lained that he 
had no money and no secondary school certificate, but these women said they could arrange for him to take a 
correspondence course that would give him the certificate he needed. If he was successful, they said, they would try to 
help him get into a university in A merica. 
 
Barac k beca me very e xcited and immediate ly wrote away for this correspondence course. For the first time in his 
life he worked d iligently. Every n ight, and during his lunch hours, he would study his books and do the lessons in his 
notebooks. A few months later, he sat for the e xa m at th e Ame rican e mbassy. The exa m took several months to score, 
and during this wait he was so nervous he could barely eat. He beca me so thin that we thought he would die. One day, 
the letter ca me. I was not there to see him open it. I know that when he told me  the news, he was still shouting out 
with happiness. And I laughed along with him, for it was just as things had been so many years before, when he used 
to come ho me after school to boast about his marks. 
 
He still had no money, though, and no university h ad yet accepted him. Onyango had softened towards his son 
when he saw that he was becoming more responsible, but even he could not raise the money to pay university fees 
and transport abroad. Some in the village were willing to help, but many were a fra id t hat if Barack went off with 
their money they would never see him again. So Barac k wrote to universities in A merica. He wrote and he wrote. 
Finally, a  university in Hawa ii wrote back and told him they would give h im a  scholarship. No one knew where th is 
place was, but Ba rack d idn¡¯t care. He gathered up his pregnant wife and son and dropped them off with me, and in 
less than a month he was gone. 
 
What happened in Ame rica , I cannot say. I know that after less than two years we received a letter fro m Barac k say ing 
that he had met this American girl, Ann, and that he would like to marry her. Now, Barry, you have heard that your 
grandfather disapproved of this marriage. This is true, but it is not for the reasons you say. You see, Onyango did not 
believe your father was behaving responsibly. He wrote back to Ba rack, saying, ¡°How can you marry this wh ite wo man 
when you have responsibilit ies at home? Will this wo man return with you and live as a Luo wo man? Will she accept 
that you already have a wife and children? I have not heard of wh ite people understanding such things. Their wo men 
are jea lous and used to being pampered. But if I a m wrong in this matter, let the girl¡¯s father co me  to my hut and 
 
 
 
 
discuss the situation properly. For this is the affairs of elde rs, not children.¡± He a lso wrote to your grandfather 
 
Stanley and said many of these same things. 
 
As you know, your father went ahead with the marriage. He only told Onyango what had happened after you were born. 
We are all happy that this marriage took place, because without it we would not have you here with us now. But your 
grandfather was very angry at the time, and threatened to have Barack¡¯s visa revoked. And because he had lived with white 
people, perhaps Onyango did understand the white people¡¯s customs better than Barack did. For when 
 
Barac k fina lly returned to Kenya, we d iscovered that you and your mother had stayed behind, just as Onyango 
had warned. 
 
Soon after Ba rack ca me, a  wh ite wo man a rrived in Kisu mu looking for him. At first we  thought this must be your 
mother, Ann. Barac k had to e xpla in that this was a different wo man, Ruth. He said t hat he had met her at Ha rvard and 
that she had followed him to Kenya without his knowledge. Your grandfather didn¡¯t believe this story and thought that 
again Barac k had disobeyed him. But I wasn¡¯t so sure, for, in fact, Barac k did see m re luctant to marry Ruth at first. I¡¯m 
not sure what fina lly swayed him. Maybe he fe lt Ruth wou ld be better suited to his new life . Or maybe he heard gossip 
that Kezia had enjoyed herself too much during his absence, even though I told him that this gossip was not true. Or 
maybe he just cared for Ruth more  than he liked to ad mit.  
 
Whatever the reason, I know that once Barack agreed to marry Ruth, she could not accept the idea of his having Kezia as 
a second wife. That is how the children went to live with their father and his n ew wife in Nairobi. When Barack brought 
Auma and Roy back to visit, Ruth would refuse to accompany him and would not let Barack bring David or Mark. 
Onyango did not discuss this directly with Barack. But he would say to his friends, in such a way that 
 
Barac k could hear h im, ¡°My son is a big man, but when he comes ho me his mother must cook for h im instead of his 
wife.¡± The others have told you what happened to your father in Na irobi. We saw him rare ly, and he would usually 
stay only a short time. Whenever he came, he would bring us expensive gifts and money and imp ress all the people 
with his big ca r and fine clothes. But your grandfather continued to speak harshly to him, as if he were  a boy. 
Onyango was now very old. He wa lked with a cane and was a lmost  blind. He could not even bathe without my help, 
which I think caused him shame . But age did not soften his temper. 
 
Later, when Barac k fell fro m power, he would try to hide h is proble ms fro m the o ld man. He continued to bring 
gifts that he could no longer afford, although we noticed that he arrived in a  ta xi instead of in his own car. Only to me  
would he confide his unhappiness and disappointments. I would te ll him he was too stubborn in his dealings with the 
government. He would talk to me  about principles, and I would tell h im that his principles we ighed heavily on his 
children. He would say I didn¡¯t understand, just as his father had said to me. So I stopped giving advice and just 
listened. 
 
That is what Barack needed most, I think-someone to listen to him. Even after things had improved again for him, and he 
had built this house for us, he remained heavy-hearted. With his children, he behaved just as Onyango had behaved towards 
him. He saw that he was pushing them away, but there was nothing he could do. He still liked to boast and laugh and drink 
with the men. But his laughter was empty. I remember the last time he visited Onyango before the old man died. The two 
of them sat in their chairs, facing each other and eating their food, but no words passed between them. A few months later, 
when Onyango finally went to join his ancestors, Barack came home to make all the 
 
 
 
 
arrangements. He said very little, and it is only when he sorted through a few of the old man¡¯s belongings that I saw 
him begin to weep. 
 
Granny stood up and brushed the grass off her skirt. The yard was hushed, the silence broken only by a bird¡¯s an xious 
trill. ¡°It¡¯s going to rain,¡±  she said, and we all gathered up the mats and cups and carried them into the house. 
 
Once inside, I asked Granny if she had anything left of the Old Man¡¯s or our grandfather¡¯s. She went into her 
bedroom, sorting through the contents of an old leather trunk. A fe w minutes later, she e merged with a rust -colored 
book the size of a passport, along with a fe w papers of different colors, stapled together and chewed at an angle along 
one side. 
 
¡°I¡¯m afra id this is all I could find,¡± she said to Auma. ¡°The rats got to the papers before I had a chance to 
put them away.¡± 
 
Auma and I sat down and set the book and papers on the low table in front of us. The binding on the red book had 
crumb led away, but the cover was still legible : Do mestic Se rvant¡¯s Pocket Register, it read, and in s maller letters, 
Issued under the Authority of the Registration of Do mestic Servant¡¯s Ord inance, 1928 , Colony and Protectorate of 
Kenya. On the book¡¯s inside cover, we found a two -shilling stamp above Onyango¡¯s left and right thumbprints. The 
swirls were still clea r, like  an imp rint of coral. The bo x was e mpty where the photograph once had been. 
 
The preamb le e xp la ined: The object of th is Ordinance is to provide every person employed in a  domestic 
capacity with a record of such employ ment, and to safeguard his or her interests as well as to protect 
emp loyers against the employ ment of persons who have rendered themselves unsuitable for such work. 
 
The term servant was defined: cook, house servant, waiter, butler, nurse, valet, bar boy, footmen, or chauffeur, o r 
washermen. The rules governing the carrying of such passbooks: servants found to be workin g without such 
books, or in any way injuring such books, are liable to a fine not e xceed ing one hundred shillings or to 
imprisonment not exceed ing six months or to both. And then, the particulars of said Registered Servant, filled out 
in the elegant, unhurried script of a na me less clerk: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Na me : Hussein II Onyango. 
Native Registration Ordinance No.: Rwl A NBI 0976717.  
Race or Tribe: Ja¡¯Luo. 
Usual Place of Residence When Not Emp loyed: Kisumu.  
Se x: M. 
Age: 35. 
Height and Bu ild : 6'0" Mediu m. 
Co mple xion : Dark. 
Nose: Flat. 
Mouth: Large. 
Hair: Curly. 
 
 
Teeth: Six Missing. 
Scars, Tribal Ma rks, or Other Peculiarities: None. 
 
 
 
 
 
Toward the back of the book, we found the particulars of e mploy ment, signed and testified to by various emp loyers. 
 
Capt. C. Harford of Na irobi¡¯s Govern ment House said that Onyango performed his duties as personal boy with 
admirable  diligence. M r. A. G. Dic kson found his cooking e xcellent-he can read and write Eng lish and follows any 
recipes¡­apart fro m other things his pastries are e xce llent. He no longer needed Onyango¡¯s services since I a m no 
longer on Safari. Dr. H. H. Sherry suggested that Onyango is a capable cook but the job is not big enough for him. 
On the other hand, Mr. Arthur W. H. Cole  of the East Africa Survey Group says that after a wee k on the job, 
Onyango was found to be unsuitable and certainly not worth 60 shillings per month. 
 
We moved to the stack of letters. They were fro m our father, addressed to various universities in the States. There 
were mo re than thirty of the m, to the presidents of Morgan State, Santa Barbara Junior College, San Francisco State. 
Dear President Ca lhoun, one letter began. I have heard of your college fro m Mrs. He len Roberts of Palo A lto, 
Ca lifornia, who is now in Na irobi here . Mrs. Roberts, knowing how much desirous I a m to further my  studies in the 
United States of Ame rica , has asked me to apply to your esteemed col lege for ad mission. I shall therefo re be very 
much pleased if you will kindly forward me your applicat ion form and informat ion regarding the possibility of such 
scholarships as you may be aware o f. Attached to several letters we re reco mmendations fro m M iss  Elizabeth Mooney, 
a literacy specialist fro m Maryland. It is not possible to obtain Mr. O¡¯Ba ma ¡¯s school transcripts, she wrote, since he 
has been out of school for some years. Ho wever, she e xpressed confidence in our father¡¯s talents, noting that she had 
observed him ma king use of algebra and geometry. She added that there was a great need in Kenya for capable and 
dedicated teachers and that, given Mr. O¡¯Ba ma¡¯s desire to be of service to his country, he should be given a chance, 
perhaps on a one-year basis. 
 
This was it, I thought to myself. My inheritance. I rea rranged the letters in a  neat stack and set them under the registry 
book. Then I went out into the backyard. Standing before the two graves, I fe lt everything around me -the cornfie lds, the 
mango tree, the sky-c losing in, until I was le ft with only a series of mental images, Granny¡¯s stories come to life.  
 
I see my grandfather, standing before his father¡¯s hut, a wiry, grim-faced boy, almost ridiculous in his oversized 
trousers and his buttonless shirt. I watch his father turn away from him and hear his brothers laugh. I feel the heat pour 
down his brow, the knots forming in his limbs, the sudden jump in his heart. And as his figure turns and starts back 
down the road of red earth, I know that for him the path of his life is now altered irreversibly, completely. 
 
He will have to reinvent himself in this arid, solitary place. Through force of will, he will c reate a life out of the 
scraps of an unknown world, and the me mo ries of a world rendered obsolete. And yet, as he sits alone in a freshly 
scrubbed hut, an old man now with milky eyes, I know that he still hears his father and brothers laughing behind him. 
He still hears the clipped voice of a British captain, e xp lain ing for the third and last time the correct proportion of tonic  
to gin. The nerves in the old man¡¯s  neck tighten, the rage builds -he grabs his stick to hit at something, anything. Until 
finally h is grip weakens with the rea lizat ion that for all the power in h is hands and the force of his will, the laughter, 
the rebukes, will outlast him. His body goes s lack in the chair. He knows that he will not outlive a mocking fate. He 
waits to die, a lone. 
 
 
 
 
The picture fades, replaced by the image of a  nine-year-old boy-my father. He ¡¯s hungry, tired, clinging to his 
sister¡¯s hand, searching for the mother he¡¯s lost. The hunger is too much for h im, the e xhaustion too great; until 
finally the slender line that holds him to his mother snaps, sending her image to float down, down into the e mptiness . 
 
The boy starts to cry; he shakes off his sister¡¯s hand. He wants to go home, he shouts, back to his father¡¯s house. 
He will find a new mother. He will lose himself in ga mes and learn the power of his mind. 
 
But he won¡¯t fo rget the desperation of that day. Twelve years later, at his narrow desk, he will glance up fro m a 
stack of forms toward the restless sky and feel that same panic return. He, too, will have to invent himself. His boss 
is out of the office; he sets the forms aside and from an old file cabinet pulls out a list of addresses. He yanks the 
typewriter towa rd him and begins to type, letter after letter after letter, typing the envelopes, sealing the letters like 
messages in bottles that will drop through a post office slot into a vast ocean and perhaps allow h im to escape the 
island of his father¡¯s shame. 
 
How lucky he must have felt when his ship came sailing in! He must have known, when that letter ca me fro m 
Hawa ii, that he had been chosen after all; that he possessed the grace of his name, the baraka , the blessings of God. 
With the degree, the ascot, the American wife, the car, the wo rds, the figures, the wallet, the proper proportion of 
tonic to gin, the polish, the panache, the entire thing seamless and natural, without the co bbled-together, haphazard 
quality of an earlie r t ime-what could stand in his way? 
 
He had almost succeeded, in a way his own father could never have hoped for. And then, after seeming to travel so 
far, to discover that he had not escaped after all! To d iscover that he remained trapped on his father¡¯s island, with its 
fissures of anger and doubt and defeat, the emotions still visib le beneath the surface, hot and molten and alive, like  a 
wic ked, yawn ing mouth, and his mother gone, gone, away ¡­.  
 
I dropped to the ground and swept my hand across the smooth yellow tile. Oh, Father, I cried. There  was no shame in 
your confusion. Just as there had been no shame in your father¡¯s before you. No shame  in the fea r, or in the fear of his 
father before him. There  was only shame in the silence fea r had produced. It was the silence that betrayed us. If it 
weren¡¯t for that silence, your grandfather might have told your father that he could never escape himself, or re -create 
himself a lone. Your father might have taught those s ame lessons to you. And you, the son, might have taught your 
father that this new world that was beckoning all o f you involved more than just railroads and indoor toilets and 
irrigation ditches and gramophones, life less instruments that could be absorbed into the old ways. You might have 
told him that these instruments carried with them a  dangerous power, that they demanded a different way of seeing the 
world. That this power could be absorbed only alongside a faith born out of hardship, a faith that wasn¡¯t  new, that 
wasn¡¯t black or wh ite or Christian or Muslim but that pulsed in the heart of the first African village and the first 
Kansas homestead-a faith in other people. 
 
The silence killed your faith. And for lack of faith you clung to both too much and t oo little of your past. Too much of its 
rigidness, its suspicions, its male cruelties. Too little of the laughter in Granny¡¯s voice, the pleasures of company while 
herding the goats, the murmur of the market, the stories around the fire. The loyalty that could make up for a lack of 
airplanes or rifles. Words of encouragement. An embrace. A strong, true love. For all your gifts -the quick mind, the powers 
of concentration, the charm-you could never forge yourself into a whole man by leaving those things behin d¡­. 
 
 
 
 
For a long time I sat between the two graves and wept. When my tears were  finally spent, I felt  a calmness wash over 
me . I fe lt the circle finally close. I realized that who I was, what I cared about, was no longer just a matter of intellect  or 
obligation, no longer a construct of words. I saw that my life in A me rica-the black life, the wh ite life, the sense of 
abandonment I¡¯d felt as a boy, the frustration and hope I¡¯d witnessed in Chicago -all of it was connected with this sma ll 
plot of earth an ocean away, connected by more  than the accident of a name or the color of my skin. The pain I fe lt was 
my father¡¯s pain. My questions were my brothers¡¯ questions. Their struggle, my b irthright.  
 
A light ra in began to fall, the drops tapping on the leaves above. I was about to light a cigarette when I fe lt a hand 
on my arm. I turned to find Berna rd squatting beside me, try ing to fit the two of us under a bent -up old umbrella. 
 
¡°They wanted me to see if you were o kay,¡± he said. 
I smiled. ¡° Yeah. I¡¯m o kay.¡±  
 
He nodded, his eyes squinting at the clouds. He turned back to me, and said ¡°Why don¡¯t you let me have a 
cigarette, and I will sit and smo ke with you.¡± 
 
I looked at h is smooth, dark face, and put the cigarette back in the bo x. ¡°I need to quit,¡± I said. ¡° Co me on, let¡¯s take 
a wa lk instead.¡± 
 
We stood up and started toward the entrance to the compound. The young boy, Godfrey, was standing beside the cooking 
hut, one leg propped like a crane¡¯s against the mud wall. He looked at us and offered a tentative smile. ¡°Come on,¡± Bernard 
said, waving to the boy. ¡°You can walk with us.¡± And so the three of us made our way over the widening dirt road, picking 
at leaves that grew along the way, watching the rain blow down across the several valleys. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EPILOGUE 
I REMAINED IN KENYA FOR two more weeks. We all returned to Nairobi and there were more dinners, more 
arguments, more stories. Granny stayed in Auma¡¯s apartment, and each night I fell asleep to their whispering voices. 
 
One day we gathered at a photography studio for a fa mily portrait, and all the wo men wore flowing African 
gowns of bright greens and yellows and blues, and the men were  all ta ll and shaven and neatly pressed, and the 
photographer, a slight Indian man with bushy eyebrows, re marked on what a handsome picture we made.  
 
Roy flew back to Washington, D.C., shortly after that; Granny returned to Ho me Squared. The days suddenly 
became very quiet, and a ce rtain me lancholy settled over Auma and me, as if we were co ming out of a drea m. 
And maybe it was the sense that we, too, would soon be returning to our other lives, once again separate and 
apart, that made us decide one day to go to see George, our father¡¯s last child.  
 
It turned out to be a painful affa ir, arranged hastily and without the mother¡¯s knowledge: we simp ly drove with 
Zeituni to a neat, single-story schoolhouse, where a group of schoolchildren we re play ing in a wide, grassy field. 
After a brief conversation with the teacher supervising the recess, Zeituni led one of the children over to us. He was a 
handsome, roundheaded boy with a wa ry gaze. Ze ituni leaned down and pointed at Auma and me.  
 
 
 
 
¡°This is your sister,¡± she said to the boy, ¡°who used to play with you on her knee. Th is is your brother, who has 
come a ll the way fro m A me rica  to see you.¡± 
 
The boy shook our hands bravely but kept glancing back at games he¡¯d just left. I realized then that we¡¯d made a 
mistake. Soon the principal of the school emerged fro m her o ffice to say that unless we had the mother¡¯s permission, 
we would have to leave. Zeituni began to argue with the wo man, but Auma said, ¡° No, Auntie, she¡¯s right. We should 
go.¡± Fro m the car, we  watched George return to his friends, quickly indistinguishable fro m the others with round heads 
and knobby knees who were chasing a scuffed football through the grass. I found myself suddenly re me mbering then 
my first meeting with the Old Man, the fear and disco mfo rt that his presence had caused me, forc ing me fo r the first 
time to consider the mystery of my own life. And I took co mfort  in the fact that perhaps one day, when he was older, 
George, too, might want to know who his father had been, and who his brothers and sisters were, and that if he ever 
came to me  I would be there for him, to tell him the story I knew.  
 
That evening, I asked Auma if she knew of any good books on the Luo, and she suggested we go visit a forme r history 
teacher of hers, a tall, willowy wo man na med Dr. Ru kia  Odero, who had been a friend of the Old Man¡¯s. When we 
arrived at her house, Dr. Odero was about to sit down for dinner, and she insisted that we join her. Over a mea l of 
tilapia  and ugali, the professor insisted I call her Rukia, then  asked me about my imp ressions of the country. Had I been 
disappointed? she wondered. I told her that I hadn¡¯t, a lthough I was leaving with as many questions as answers. ¡°That¡¯s 
good,¡± Rukia said, pushing her glasses up the bridge of her nose. ¡°That¡¯s how we historians make a  living, you know. 
 
All day long we sit, try ing to find new questions. It can be very tiresome, actually. It requires a tempera ment for 
mischief. You know, young black A me ricans tend to romanticize  Africa so. When your father and I were  young, it was 
just the opposite-we e xpected to find a ll the answers in Ame rica . Harle m. Chicago. Langston Hughes and James 
Ba ldwin. That¡¯s where we dre w our inspiration. And the Kennedys -they were very popular. The chance to study in 
America was very important. A hopeful time. Of course, when we returned we rea lized that our education did not 
always serve us so well. Or the people who had sent us. There was all this messy history to deal with.¡±  
 
I asked her why she thought black A mericans were prone to dis appointment when they visited Africa. She shook her 
head and smiled. ¡° Because they come here looking fo r the authentic,¡± she said. ¡°That is bound to disappoint a person. 
 
Look at th is mea l we a re eating. Many people will tell you that the Luo are a fish -eating people. But that was not true 
for a ll Luo. On ly those who lived by the lake. And even for those Luo, it was not always true. Befo re they settled 
around the lake, they were pas toralists, like  the Masai. Now, if you and your sister behave yourself and eat a proper 
share of this food, I will offer you tea. Kenyans are very boastful about the quality of their tea, you notice. But of 
course we got this habit fro m the English. Our ancestors did not drink such a thing. Then there¡¯s the spices we used 
to cook this fish. They origina lly ca me  fro m India , or Indonesia. So even in this simple meal, you will find it very 
difficult to be authentic-although the meal is certainly A frican.¡± 
 
Rukia rolled a ball of ugali in her hand and dipped it into her stew. ¡°You can hardly blame black Americans, of course, for 
wanting an unblemished past. After the cruelties they¡¯ve suffered-still suffer, from what I read in the newspapers. They¡¯re 
not unique in this desire. The European wants the same thing. The Germans, the English¡­they all claim Athens and Rome as 
their own, when, in fact, their ancestors helped destroy classical culture. But that happened so long ago, so their task is e asier. 
In their schools, you rarely hear about the misery of European peasants throughout 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
most of recorded history. The corruption and e xploitation of the Industrial Revolution, the senseless tribal wa rs-it¡¯s 
shameful how the Europeans treated their own, much less colored peoples. So this idea about a golden age in 
Africa, before the wh ite man ca me , seems only natural.¡±  
 
¡°A corrective,¡± Auma  said. 
¡°Truth is usually the best corrective,¡± Ru kia  said with a smile. ¡° You know, sometimes I think the worst thing that 
colonialism did was cloud our view o f our past. Without the white man, we might be able to ma ke better use of our 
history. We might look at some  of our former practices and decide they are worth preserving. Others, we  might grow 
out of. Unfortunately, the white man has made us very defensive. We end up clinging to all sorts of things that have 
outlived their usefulness. Polyga my. Collective land ownership. These things worked well in their time, but now they 
most often become tools for abuse. By men. By governments. And yet, if you say these things, you have been 
infected by Western ideology.¡± 
 
¡°So how should we adapt?¡± Auma said. 
Rukia shrugged. ¡°I leave such answers up to policy ma kers. I¡¯m only a h istorian. But I suspect that we can¡¯t pretend 
that the contradictions of our situation don¡¯t exist. All we can do is choose. For e xa mp le, fe ma le c ircu mc ision is an 
important Kikuyu custom. With the Masai also. To a modern sensibility, it  is barbaric . Pe rhaps we could arrange to 
have all these operations performed in hospitals and cut down on the death rate. Keep the bleeding to a minimu m. 
But you cannot really have half a c ircu mc ision. Th is leaves no one satisfied. So we must choose. The same is true of 
the rule of law, the notion of independent inquiry -these things may conflict with tribal loyalt ies. You cannot have rule 
of la w and then e xe mpt certain me mbers of your clan. What to do? Again you choose. If you ma ke the wrong choice, 
then you learn fro m your mistakes. You see what works.¡±  
 
I lic ked my fingers and washed my hands. ¡°But isn¡¯t there anything left that is truly African?¡±  
¡°Ah, that¡¯s the thing, isn¡¯t it?¡± Rukia said. ¡°There does seem to be something diffe rent about this place. I don¡¯t 
know what it is. Perhaps the African, having traveled so far so fast, has a unique perspective on time. Or maybe it is 
that we have known more suffering than most. Maybe it¡¯s just the land. I don¡¯t know. Maybe I a m also the ro mantic. I 
know that I cannot stay away fro m here too long. People still talk to each other here. When I visit the States, it seems 
a very lonely place -¡± 
 
Suddenly, all the lights in the house went out. Rukia sighed -blac kouts were becoming more co mmon, she said-and I 
handed her my lighter to light the candles she kept on the mantelpiece. Sitting in the darkness, I re me mbe red the 
stories Zeituni had told us, and remarked that the night runners must be out. Rukia lit the candles, their g low shaping 
her face into a mask of laughter. 
 
¡° You know about the night runners, then! Yes, they are very powerfu l in the darkness. There used to be many 
in our area, back ho me. It was said they walked with the hippos at night. I re me mbe r once -¡± 
 
As suddenly as they had died, the light bulbs popped back on. Rukia blew out the candles and shook her head. ¡°Alas, in the 
city the lights do come on eventually. My daughter, she has no use for night runners. You know, her first language is not 
Luo. Not even Swahili. It is English. When I listen to her talk with her friends, it sounds like gibberish to me. They take bits 
and pieces of everything-English, Swahili, German, Luo. Sometimes, I get fed up with this. Learn to speak one language 
properly, I tell them.¡± Rukia laughed to herself. ¡°But I am beginning to resign myself-there¡¯s 
 
 
 
 
nothing really to do. They live in a  mixed-up world. It¡¯s just as well, I suppose. In the end, I¡¯m less interested in a 
daughter who¡¯s authentically African than one who is authentically herself.¡±  
 
It was getting late; we thanked Rukia for her hospitality and went on our way. But her words would stay with me, bringing 
into focus my own memories, my own lingering questions. On the last weekend of my stay, Auma and I took the train to the 
coast and stayed at an old beachfront hotel in Mombasa that had once been a favorite of the Old Man¡¯s. 
 
It was a modest, clean place, in August filled mostly with German tourists and American sailors on shore leave. We 
didn¡¯t do much, just read and swam and wa lked alon g the beach, watching pale crabs scurry like ghosts into their sandy 
holes. The follo wing day we  visited Mombasa¡¯s Old Town and climbed the worn stairs of Fort Jesus, first built by the 
Portuguese to consolidate control of trade routes along the Indian Oce an, later overrun by the swift Omani fleets, later 
still a  beachhead for the British as they moved inland in search of ivory and gold, now an e mpty casing of stone, its 
massive wa lls peeling like papier-m&# 226;ch&#233; in strips of pale orange and green an d rose, its dormant cannons 
pointing out to a tranquil sea where a  lone fisherman cast out his net. 
 
On the way back to Na irobi, Au ma  and I decided to splurge, buying tic kets on a bus line that actually assigned seats. 
The feeling of lu xury was short-lived; my  knees we re pinched by a  passenger who wanted his money¡¯s worth fro m the 
reclining seats, and a sudden rainstorm sent water streaming through leaks in the roof, which we tried -unsuccessfully-
to plug up with tissue. 
 
Eventually, the rain stopped, and we found ourselves looking on a barren landscape of gravel and shrub and the 
occasional baobab tree, its naked, searching branches decorated with the weaver bird¡¯s spherical nests. I re me mbe red 
reading somewhere that the baobab could go for years without flo wering, surviving on the sparsest of rainfa ll; and 
seeing the trees there in the hazy afternoon light, I understood why men believed they possessed a special power-that 
they housed ancestral spirits and demons, that humankind first appeared under such a tree. It wasn¡¯t mere ly the 
oddness of their shape, their almost prehistoric outline against the stripped -down sky. ¡°They look as if each one could 
tell a  story,¡± Auma said, and it was true, each tree seemed to possess a character, a character neither benevolent nor 
cruel but simply enduring, with secrets whose depths I would never plu mb, a wisdom I would never pie rce. They both 
disturbed and comforted me, those trees that looked as if they might uproot themselves and simply wa lk away, we re it 
not for the knowledge that on this earth one place is not so different fro m another-the knowledge that one mo ment 
carries within it a ll that¡¯s gone on before. 
 
 
It¡¯s been six years since that first trip to Kenya, and much in the world has changed. 
For me, it¡¯s been a relative ly quiet period, less a time of discovery than of consolidation, of doing the things that we 
tell ourselves we finally must do to grow up. I went to Harvard La w School, spending most of three years in poorly lit 
lib raries, poring through cases and statutes. The study of law can be disappointing at times, a matter o f applying 
narrow rules and arcane procedure to an uncooperative reality; a sort of glorified accounting that serves to regulate the 
affairs of those who have power-and that all too often seeks to exp lain, to those who do not, the ultimate wisdom and 
justness of their condition. 
 
But that¡¯s not all the la w is. The la w is also me mory; the la w a lso records a long -running conversation, a 
nation arguing with its conscience. 
 
 
 
 
We hold these truths to be self-evident. In those words, I hear the spirit of Douglass and Delany, as well as Jefferson 
and Lincoln; the struggles of Martin and Malcolm and unheralded marchers to bring these words to life . I hear the 
voices of Japanese families interned behind barbed wire; young Russ ian Jews cutting patterns in Lo wer East Side 
sweatshops; dust-bowl farmers loading up their t rucks with the re mains of shattered lives. I hear the voices of the 
people in Altgeld Gardens, and the voices of those who stand outside this country¡¯s borders, th e weary, hungry bands 
crossing the Rio Grande. I hear a ll of these voices clamoring for recognition, a ll of the m asking the very same questions 
that have come to shape my life, the same  questions that I sometimes, late at night, find myself asking the Old  Man. 
What is our community, and how might that community be reconciled with our freedom?  How fa r do our obligations 
reach? How do we transform me re powe r into justice, mere sentiment into love? The answers I find in la w books don¡¯t 
always satisfy me-for every Bro wn v. Board of Education I find a score of cases where conscience is sacrificed to 
e xpedience or greed. And yet, in the conversation itself, in the joining of vo ices, I find myself modestly encouraged, 
believing that so long as the questions are still be ing asked, what binds us together might somehow, u ltimately, preva il. 
That faith, so diffe rent fro m innocence, can sometimes be hard to sustain. Upon my return to Ch icago, I would find the 
signs of decay accelerated throughout the South Side-the neighborhoods shabbier, the children edgier and less 
restrained, more middle -class fa milies heading out to the suburbs, the jails bursting with glo wering youth, my brothers 
without prospects. All too rarely do I hear people asking just what it is that we¡¯ve don e to make  so many children¡¯s 
hearts so hard, or what collect ively we might do to right their mo ral co mpass -what values we must live by. Instead I see 
us doing what we¡¯ve always done-pretending that these children are somehow not our own.  
 
I try to do my small part in reversing this tide. In my legal practice, I work mostly with churches and community groups, 
men and women who quietly build grocery stores and health clinics in the inner city, and housing for the poor. 
 
Every so often I¡¯ll find myself working on a discrimination case, representing clients who show up at my la w firm¡¯s 
office with stories that we like to tell ourselves should no longer e xist. Most of these clients are slightly embarrassed 
by what¡¯s happened to them, as are the wh ite co-wo rke rs who agree to testify on their behalf; no one wants to be 
known as a trouble maker. And yet at some point both plaintiff and witness decide that a principle is at stake, that 
despite everything that has happened, those words put to paper over two hundred yea rs ago must mean so mething 
after all. Blac k and wh ite, they make  their c la im on this co mmunity we  call A me rica . They choose our better history. 
 
I think I¡¯ve learned to be more patient these past few years, with others as well as myself. If so, it¡¯s one of several 
improvements in my character that I attribute to my wife, Michelle. She¡¯s a daughter of the South Side, raised in one of those 
bungalow-style houses that I spent so many hours visiting during my first year in Chicago. She doesn¡¯t always know what to 
make of me; she worries that, like Gramps and the Old Man, I am something of a dreamer. Indeed, in her eminent practicality 
and midwestern attitudes, she reminds me not a little of Toot. I remember how, the first time I took her back to Hawaii, 
Gra mps nudged my ribs and said Michelle was quite ¡°a looker.¡± Toot, on the other hand, described my bride -to-be as ¡°a very 
sensible girl¡±-which Michelle understood to be my grandmother¡¯s highest form of praise. 
 
After our engagement, I took Michelle to Kenya to meet the other half of my fa mily. She was an immediate success 
there as well, in part because the number of Luo words in her vocabulary very soon surpassed mine. We had a fine time 
in Alego, help ing Auma on a film project of hers, listening to more of Granny ¡¯s stories, meeting re latives I¡¯d missed 
 
 
 
 
the first time  around. Away fro m the countryside, though, life in Kenya seemed to have gotten harder. The economy 
had worsened, with a corresponding rise in corruption and street crime. The case of the Old Man¡¯s inheritance 
re mained unresolved, and Sarah and Ke zia  we re still not on speaking terms. Ne ither Be rnard, nor Abo, nor Sayid 
had yet found steady work, a lthough they rema ined hopeful-they were ta lking about learning how to drive, perhaps 
purchasing a used matatu together. We tried again to see George, our youngest brother, and were again unsuccessful. 
 
And Billy, the robust, gregarious cousin I¡¯d first met in Kendu Bay, had been stricken with AIDS. He was emaciated when 
I saw him, prone to nodding off in the middle of conversations. He seemed calm, though, and happy to see me, and asked 
that I send him a photograph of the two of us during better days. He died in his sleep before I could send it. 
 
There were  other deaths that year. Michelle ¡¯s father, as good and decent a man as I¡¯ve ever known, d ied befo re he 
could give his daughter away. Gra mps died a few months later, after a p rolonged bout with prostate cancer. As a World 
War II veteran, he was entitled to be interred at Punchbowl Nat ional Ce metery, on a h ill overlooking Honolulu. It was 
a small ce re mony with a fe w of his bridge and golf partners in attendance, a three-gun salute, and a bugle playing taps. 
Despite these heartaches, Michelle  and I decided to go ahead with our wedding plans. Reverend Jere miah A. Wright, 
Jr., performed the service in the s anctuary of Trinity United Church of Christ, on Ninety -fifth and Parnell. Everyone 
looked very fine at the reception, my new aunts admiring the cake, my  new uncles ad miring themselves in their rented 
tuxedos. Johnnie was there, sharing a laugh with Jeff an d Scott, my old friends from Ha wa ii and Hasan, my roo mmate 
fro m co llege. So were Angela, Shirley, and Mona, who told my mother what a fine job she¡¯d done raising me . (¡° You 
don¡¯t know the half of it,¡±  my mother replied with a laugh.) I watched Maya politely  fending off the advances of some 
brothers who thought they were slick but who were, in fact, much too old fo r her and should have known better, but 
when I started to grumble, Miche lle  told me to re la x, my  little sister could handle herself. She was right, of course; I 
looked at my baby sister and saw a fu ll-grown wo man, beautiful and wise and looking like a Latin countess with her 
olive skin and long black ha ir and black bridesma id¡¯s gown. Au ma was standing beside her, looking just as lovely, 
although her eyes were a little  puffy-to my surprise she was the only one who cried during the cere mony. When the 
band started to play, the two of them sought out the protection of Michelle ¡¯s five - and six-year-old cousins, who 
impressively served as our offic ia l ring-bearers. Watching the boys somberly lead my sisters out onto the dance floor, I 
thought they looked like young African princes in their little kente-cloth caps and matching cumberbunds and wilted 
bow ties. 
 
The person who made me proudest of all, though, was Roy. Actually, now we ca ll him Abongo, his Luo name , fo r 
two years ago he decided to reassert his African heritage. He converted to Isla m, and has sworn off pork and tobacco 
and alcohol. He still wo rks at his accounting firm, but talks about moving back  to Kenya once he has enough money. In 
fact, when we saw each other in Ho me Squared, he was busy building a hut for h imself and his mother, away fro m our 
grandfather¡¯s compound, in accordance with Luo tradition. He told me then that he had moved forward with his import 
business and hoped it would soon pay enough to employ Be rnard and Abo full-t ime . And when we went together to 
stand by the Old Man¡¯s grave, I noticed there was fina lly a  plaque where  the bare ce ment had been. 
 
Abongo¡¯s new lifestyle has left him lean and clear-eyed, and at the wedding, he looked so dignified in h is black 
African gown with white trim and matching cap that some of our guests mistook him for my father. He  was certain ly 
the older brother that day, talking me  through prenuptial jit ters, patiently telling me fo r the fifth and sixth time  that yes, 
 
 
 
 
he still had the ring, nudging me out the door with the observation that if I spent any more time in front of the 
mirror it wouldn¡¯t matter how I looked because we were  sure to be late. 
 
Not that the changes in him a re without tension. He¡¯s prone to make  lengthy pronouncements on the need for the 
black man to liberate himself fro m the poisoning influences of European culture, and scolds Auma for what he calls 
her European ways. The words he speaks are not fully h is own, and in h is transition he can sometime s sound stilted 
and dogmatic. But the magic of his laughter re ma ins, and we can disagree without rancor. His conversion has given 
him solid ground to stand on, a pride in h is place in the world. Fro m that base I see his confidence building; he begins 
to venture out and ask harder questions; he starts to slough off the formu las and slogans and decides what works best 
for him. He can¡¯t he lp himself in this process, for his heart is too generous and full of good humor, h is attitude toward 
people too gentle and forgiving, to find simple  solutions to the puzzle  of being a b lack man.  
 
Toward the end of the wedding, I watched him g rinning wide ly for the video ca me ra, h is long arms draped over the 
shoulders of my mother and Toot, whose heads barely reached the height of his chest. ¡°Eh, brother,¡± he said to me 
as I walked up to the three of them. ¡°It looks like I have two new mothers now.¡± Toot patted him on the back. ¡°And 
we have a new son,¡± she said, although when she tried to say ¡°Abongo¡± her Kansas tongue mangled  it hopelessly. 
My mother¡¯s chin started to tremble  again, and Abongo lifted up his glass of fruit punch for a toast. 
 
¡°To those who are not here with us,¡± he 
said. ¡°And to a happy ending,¡± I said. 
We dribbled our drinks onto the checkered-tile floor. And for that mo ment, at least, I fe lt like the luckiest man alive.  
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BARA CK OBAMA is the junior U.S. senator fro m Illinois. He  began his career as a commun ity organize r in some o f 
 
Chicago¡¯s poorest communit ies and then attended Harvard Law School, where he was elected the first African -
American president of the Harvard La w Rev iew. In 1992, he directed Illinois Project VOTE, which registered 150,000 
new voters. Fro m 1997 to 2004, he served as a three-term state senator from Chicago¡¯s South Side. In addit ion to his 
legislative duties, he has been a senior lecturer in constitutional law at the University of Ch icago La w School, 
practiced civil rights law, and served on the board of directors of various charitable organizations. 
 
Oba ma lives in Chicago¡¯s Hyde Pa rk neighborhood with his wife, M ichelle, and daughters, Malia and Sasha. 
