 
 
 
 
 
 
HOW THE STEEL WAS TEMPERED by NIKOLAI OSTROVSKY 
 
Translated from the Russian by R. Prokofieva  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The  balcony  door stood  open,  and  the  curtain  stirred  in  the  wind,  filling  out,  rising  reluctantly,  and 
shrinking  like  a  dipped sail. A crumpled towel  left  by someone  on  the  radio made  a  white  blur  in 
the dusk. It looked like a white rabbit who had laid down its long ears preparing to jump. 
 
I remembered that bright September morning in Sochi two years ago, the small house in 
Orekhovaya  Street,  the  ripe,  orange  persimmons  in  the  sunlit  garden,  the  pleasant 
whitewashed room, and the dear face on the piled-up pillows. 
The  white  rabbit  nestled  happily  in the folds of  the  blanket as  Nikolai's  nervous fingers 
caressed its long, silky ears. Nikolai was laughing softly, and his gleaming teeth were as 
white  as  sugar.  On  the  bedside  table  lay  several  big  red  apples,  and  their  lovely  smell 
filled the whole house. The white rabbit, comically twitching its soft ears, licked the gentle 
human hand with its small pink tongue. 
I  wanted  to  shut my  eyes tight  and see  that  hot September morning  again,  and  the  house  filled 
with sunlight and apple fragrance. My thoughts refused to take a melancholy course, and my mind 
was still unable to grasp what had happened and tell itself that this was the irrevocable. . . . 
 
But  reality  asserted  itself,  and  my  eyes saw  with  ruthless clarity t he  face that  had  forever  grown 
still. The last struggle for survival had sapped all his life juices, and dried him as a leaf is dried in a 
hot  wind.  It  only  spared  his  tall,  handsome  forehead,  and  his  soft  dark  chestnut  hair.  This clear, 
dome-like  brow  rose  above  a  small,  wizened  face. And  one  fancied  that  his  creative  imagination, 
infused  with  revolutionary  ardour  and  an  irrepressible  interest in  and love  of  life,  was  still  working 
busily.  .  . .  I  placed  my  hand  on  his  forehead.  It  was still  warm  and  even  moist,  as though  Nikolai 
was simply resting after his exciting exertion. The Order of Lenin twinkled uncannily on his 
 
第 1 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
sunken chest as if life were stirring in it, and one would see it rise in a soft sigh. 
 
For three days, from morning till night, an endless stream of people of all ages filed past 
the bier which was literally submerged in flowers and wreaths. 
Nikolai  Ostrovsky  continues  to  live  not  only  in  his  books:  he  himself  is a  heroic  image, 
and one of the strongest and most striking personalities of his epoch. 
Fate treated him cruelly, depriving him of the power of sight and the use of his legs and arms. But 
he  overpowered  his  physical  infirmities,  his  incurable  disease,  weakness,  grief  and  torpor,  and 
victoriously  asserted  life, creative  endeavour,  and  struggle. As  an  ardent singer  of  the  Bolshevik 
youth,  he sang  his militant,  joyous song  of  struggle  and  victory  of socialism,  and  his  voice,  ringing 
with a beautiful, lyrical strength, resounded throughout the Soviet land and the whole world. 
 
Away with melancholy recollections! Let us part with them, for death is the tax we must pay for the 
frailty of our physical being, and let us turn to the inexhaustible, powerful fount of life. . . . 
 
I went to see him on a cold, windy day in 1932, a typical day for early Moscow spring. He 
lived in Mertvy Pereulok (since renamed Nikolai Ostrovsky Pereulok― Ed.). 
The large flat was packed with tenants. It was noisy and crowded. People jostled you in 
the  corridor,  babies  were  howling,  and  someone  was  typing  inexpertly  in  a  far  room, 
pecking at the keys with a woodpecker's persistence. 
What a setup for a writer! Imagine  working in that din! I knocked, and opened the door 
into Nikolai Ostrovsky's room. 
A man, muffled up to his chin in blankets and shawls, was lying on the bed. The pillows 
were piled high, and I saw a mop of dark chestnut hair, a large, prominent forehead, and 
a thin, wan face that did not have a drop of colour in it. 
The thin eyelids trembled slightly. The thick eyelashes cast bluish shadows on the hollow 
cheeks. Hands of a waxen transparency lay on top of the blankets. 
I knew that Nikolai Ostrovsky was an invalid, but still I did not picture him quite like this. 
 
He looked so terribly weak and helpless that I decided not to bother him and come back 
another time. 
Just then a slight old lady walked briskly into the room. She  had lively dark brown eyes, 
and her face was wreathed in smiles. 
"Mother, who's there?" Nikolai suddenly asked in a voice that was somewhat hollow, but 
very young and not weak at all. 
His mother told him my name. 
 
"Oh! How nice," he said. "Come nearer, come here." 
 
A  beautiful  white-toothed  smile  lighted  up his  face.  Its  every  line  seemed  to  glow  with 
youthful eagerness and  the  joy  of  living.  At  first  I  fancied that  his  big,  brown  eyes  also 
sparkled with animation. But in the next moment I realised that th e sparkle came from the 
deep and rich colouring of the irises. Still, during our conversation I kept forgetting that he 
was blind, for there was so much concentration, attention and joviality in his radiant face. 
We were talking about the first part of his novel How the Steel Was Tempered which had 
just  been  signed  for  publication  in  the  magazine  Molodaya  Gvardia  where  I  worked  as 
editor at the time. Nikolai was curious to hear how his characters had impressed us. 
 
"Pavel, I think, is not a bad kid at all," he said with sly humour, and flashed me a smile. "I'm not 
 
 
 
第 2 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
making a secret of it, of course, that Nikolai Ostrovsky and Pavel K orchagin  are the closest of 
friends.  He's  made  from  my  brain  and  my  blood  too,  this  Pavel  person.  .  .  .  What  I  want  to 
know is this: does my novel  read simply as an autobiography, the story of just one life?"  
 
His smile suddenly waned, and with his lips compressed, his face looked cold and stern. 
 
"I've purposely put the  question so bluntly because  I want to know whether the thing I'm doing 
is good,  right, and useful  for  people  or  not?  There  are lots of single c ases that are int eresting 
in  themselves,  but  a  reader  will  pause  before  one  for  a  moment,  as  before  a  shopwindow, 
even in admiration perhaps, and then  walk on  his way, never  again remembering what he had 
seen there.  That is what every writ er should fear most, and myself, a beginner, the more so." 
 
I told him that he had nothing to fear on this score. He interrupted me gently and said: 
"Only please, let's agree on one thing: don't comfort me from the kindness of your heart. 
You don't have to sugar the pill for me. I'm a soldier, after all, I could sit a horse when I 
was a mere kid, and I won't be thrown off now." 
Although  his  lips  twitched  and  his  smile  was  shy  and  gentle,  the  strength  of  his 
unbreakable will was suddenly revealed to me with the utmost clarit y. At the same time I 
felt terribly happy that what I had to say to him would, in fact, comfort him. 
I  told  him  that  as  I  read  his  book  I  involuntarily  recalled  the  heroes  from  the  Russian  and 
western classics. Many of t hese  heroes, created  by writers of  genius, shaped the  will and the 
mentality of whole  generations. For background they had the history of social  relations, social 
and personal tragedies, and the glory of the peaks attained by human culture.  
 
Pavel  Korchagin  could  take  a  proud  and  confident  stand  among  the  great  and  the 
gloried. This young newcomer, emerging from the fires of the Civil War, should not feel 
self-conscious finding himself in such illustrious company. Nor did he have to go cap in 
hand  begging  for  a  place,  even  if  only  the  smallest,  in  the  literati  gardens.  He  had 
something which the others had not: his young heart was possessed of an inexhaustible 
strength and throbbed with an unquenchable passion of struggle, and his mind was fired 
by the most progressive and noble thoughts of people's freedom and happiness. 
 
Needless  to  say,  Pavel  Korchagin  was  irreconcilably  hostile  to  someone  like  Balzac's 
Rastignac,  but  all  the  freedom-loving  characters  in  literature,  whether  in  the  works  of 
Pushkin, Byron or Stendhal, were close to him in spirit. But, of course, he would find the 
greatest number of kindred souls among Gorky's heroes. We were already talking like old 
friends, we touched upon different themes but invariably came back to the novel. Nikolai 
wanted to hear how the editing went and what changes were made by Mark Kolosov, the 
assistant editor of Molodaya Gvardia, and myself. When I told him how we threw out all 
sorts  of  ornamental  clichés,  he  gave  a  roar  of  laughter  and  then  chuckled  with  good 
humour as I cited his unfortunate turns of speech and some words he had used. 
 
"D'you  know  the  reason  for  all  these slips?"  he  asked,  abruptly changing to  a serious, thoughtful 
tone. "I suppose you'll say it's my lack of culture? That too, but there's another thing you must take 
into  account―my  creative  isolation,  if you know  what  I  mean.  I  began  writing  as  a  lone  beginner, 
on my own responsibility. It's wonderful that I'll have literary friends now!" 
 
He  asked me  what  I thought  of  the composition  of the  novel  as  a  whole,  his  handling  of  separate 
scenes,  dialogues,  descriptions  of  scenery,  how  well  he  had  succeeded  in  bringing  out the typical 
traits of his characters, and where he had made blunders in language, comparisons, metaphors, 
 
第 3 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
descriptive names, and so on. 
 
Each  one  of  his  questions  showed that  he  had  done  a  lot  of  reading  and  thinking  on the subject, 
and his approach to many of the problems involved in literary work testified to his maturity. 
 
Time simply flew. I was afraid I was tiring Nikolai, but every time I rose to leave a word or 
a  remark  would  start  us  off again,  and  I'd  stay  "for  another  minute".  Our  conversation 
skipped  from  one  topic  to  another,  the  way  it  does  with  two  people  who  have only  just 
met and want to know each other better. Still, we went back to the novel all the time, and 
spoke of the second part on which Nikolai was working. I had completely forgotten that I 
was in a sickroom, visiting a hopelessly handicapped person. 
 
He told  me about his writing plans and worries, set himself the dead line for the coming 
chapters,  and  his  words  were  charged  with  such  truly  exuberant  energy  that  it  never 
occurred to me to offer any uncalled-for sympathy or encouragement. 
I  was  terribly  glad  that  Molodaya  Gvardia  had  acquired  this  new  author ―a  fresh  and 
powerful talent, a Bolshevik, veteran of the Civil War, a man with such remarkably clear -
cut ideological and moral values. 
This  was  a  strong  character,  tempered  in  battle,  and  so,  rather  than  restrain  him,  I 
wanted to help him to develop his plans. 
I can still hear his deep voice, mellow with happiness and pride, as he said: 
 
"And  so  I'm  back  in  the ranks.  That's the  main thing,  you  know.  I'm  back  in  the  ranks! 
Isn't life wonderful! What a life is starting for me!" 
All  the  way  home  I  kept  hearing  these  words:  "What  a  life  is  starting  for  me!"  and  they 
sounded like a song. 
I visited him a few  more times before he was taken to Sochi, and gained a still deeper 
insight into the mentality and character of this amazingly courageous man. 
Living in that overcrowded Moscow flat was a trial. Apart from the suffering which he did 
not immediately learn to hide so skilfully, there were troubles and cares which he was not 
spared. The family budget was more than modest. Olga Osipovna pinched and scraped 
as best she could, trying hard to hide their constant want from her son, always keeping 
her  chin  up and  fussing  round  him  with  a  smile  and  a  ready  joke  on her  lips,  but  still 
Nikolai with his sharpened sensitivity guessed the truth. 
 
"You  can't  fool  me,  Mother  darling:  the  wolf  is  at  the  door  again,"  he  would  say  to  her, 
and  his  mother  would  reply:  "Mind  your  own  business  and  leave  the  wolf  to  me."  She 
always tried to turn their cares into a joke and Nikolai readily played the game, but there 
were some things that simply could not be laughed off. 
Their  room  in  that  communal  flat  was  cold  and  damp,  and  it  was  impossible  for  a 
bedridden person to remain there any longer. 
The editors of Molodaya Gvardia approached the Central Committee of the YCL  with a 
request to send Nikolai Ostrovsky to Sochi, and in the summer of 1932 his mother took 
him south. The day before they left, he sent me the following note: 
 
"Dear Comrade Anna, 
 
We're starting south  at 10 a.m. tomorrow. E verything has been  done to let me build up a bit of 
strength to develop my offensive further. I  want-to stay in Sochi till late autumn. I'll hang on  as 
 
 
第 4 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
long as I can take it." 
 
By "my offensive" he meant his work on the second part of the novel How the Steel Was 
Tempered.  The  difficult  and  at  moments  agonising  process  which  Nikolai  called  "my 
work" was in truth an offensive. .. . 
I often remember his thin, yellowish hands which always lay on top of the blanket. They 
were  the  nervous,  acutely  sensitive  hands  of  a  blind  man.  He  had  the  power  of 
movement left only in his hands, as arthritis, that dread disease of the joints whic h was to 
be one of the causes of his death, had already seized the whole of his poor body. 
Once, shortly before he left for Sochi, Nikolai said to me in the mocking tone he usually 
adopted when speaking of his condition: 
"My  shoulders  and  elbows  don't  feel  as  if  they  belonged  to  me  at  all.  It's  the  craziest 
feeling!  This  is  all  I  have  left  to  me,  all  I  possess!"  Smiling  with  puckish  sadness,  he 
raised his hands a little and moved his fingers. "Try and manage with these!" 
Although he disliked discussing his  illness, he told me on one of my earlier visits that for 
a time he had been able to write with the help of a cardboard stencil. 
"It wasn't too convenient, but still it had its uses," he said. 
 
At the beginning of August 1932 I received a letter from him fr om Sochi. He had written it 
in  pencil  with  the  help  of  his  stencil.  The  too-straight  lines  and  the  unnaturally  curved 
letters compelled the imagination to picture the physical strain and the effort of will that 
went into the writing of that short letter. 
 
18 Primorskaya, 
Sochi, 
 
August 5 
 
"Dear Comrade Anna, 
 
"I am living with my  mother very close to the seashore. I spend the whole day out in the 
garden, lying under an oak-tree and writing, making the best of the lovely weather (the 
next words were undecipherable) . . . my head is clear. I am in a hurry to live, Comrade 
Anna,  I  do  not  want  to  be  sorry  afterwards  that  I  wasted  these  days.  The  offensive, 
brought to a deadlock by my stupid illness, is developing again, and so wish me victory."  
The force and tension of this "offensive" could be felt just from the words "I am in a hurry 
to live". 
He had a relapse soon after his arrival in Sochi, and this illness was to him a "stupid" waste of time 
and a really intolerable hindrance. And though his general health was so badly undermined, it was 
mainly with his unquailing willpower that he was able to overcome his new illness. 
 
As soon  as  he  was  a  little  better  he  wrote me  that letter "in  his  own  hand" to test  his  endurance.  I 
could picture him lying there, in the shade of the oak-tree, dictating to his volunteer secretaries for 
hours at a stretch, refusing to take a rest. . . . His forehead is studded with drops of sweat, his thick 
eyebrows twitch up and down nervously, his eyelids tremble, and his thin fingers pluck  at the edge 
of  the  blanket.  He  often clears  his  throat,  dictating  has  already tired  him,  but  his  imagination  has 
been starved in those "wasted days of illness", and he wants to make up for lost time. His forehead 
is hot and his heart literally misses a beat: he pictures the field of battle, he feels the earth quaking 
under the wrathful thudding of the cavalry, he sees the fearless horsemen coming on at a 
 
第 5 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
breakneck  pace  and  cutting  down  the  enemies  of  the  working  people.  And  now  he 
pictures  Moscow  in  those  first  years  of  peacetime  construction,  he  recalls  the  YCL 
congress in the Bolshoi Theatre, and meeting his comrades-in-arms. 
"Hurry . . . hurry . . . I must hurry to live . . . " 
 
Molodaya Gvardia began publication of the second part of Nikolai Ostrovsky's novel How 
the Steel Was Tempered in its January 1933 issue. 
The letters I received from Nikolai in that period told me how great a price he was paying 
in lifeblood and nerves for his "offensive". 
Running  ahead  of  my  story  I  want  to  say  that  he  stayed  in  Sochi  for  three  and  a  half 
years, and not the few months as originally planned. 
In one of his letters he said: 
 
"I have start ed studying in earnest. It's pretty hard when you're  on your own.  I've  no literature, 
and  no  qualified  teachers,  but  all  the same  I  can  feel  the  narrow  horizons  of  my  tiny  personal 
experience  widening,  and  my  cultural  baggage  growing  heavier.  .  .  .  You  asked  me  what  I'd 
been doing these last three months. I  devoted a lot of the time intended for my literary studies 
to  the  local  young  people.  From  a  lone  wolf  I've  turned  into  a  'cheer  leader'.  The  committee 
bureau  now  holds  its  meetings  in  my  house.  I'm  in  charge  of  the  P arty  activist  c ircle,  and 
chairman  of  the  district  culture-promoting  council.  In  short,  I've  shifted  closer  to  the  Party's 
practical  activity,  and  have  become  quite  a  useful  fellow.  True,  I  use  up  a  lot  of  strength,  but 
then living's become more fun. I'm in the Komsomol midst. 
 
"I've  set  up  a  literary  circle,  and  I  run  it  as  best  I  can.  The  Party  and  Komsomol 
committees take a lively interest in my work. The Party activists often meet in my house. I 
can feel the pulse of life. I wanted this local practice, consciously sac rificing three whole 
months, so as to get the feel of what is most vital and topical today." 
And then he wrote: 
 
"Still, I do a lot of reading. I've read Balzac's La peau de chagrin, Figner's Recollections, 
The  Last  of  the  Udeghei,  Anna  Karenina,  Literary  Heritage,  all  the  back  numbers  of 
Literaturnaya Kritika, Turgenev's A Nest of the Gentry and many more books." 
I gave this letter to one of my office friends to read, and he was quite shaken. 
 
"I say, what a heroic character!" he exclaimed. "If I didn't know who had written this letter 
I'd picture the writer as a big, strong chap in the pink of health reporting on his activities." 
We did not learn till after the danger had blown over how terribly ill Nikolai had been. He 
wrote me in the beginning of 1934: 
"I nearly died. The desperate struggle went on for a whole month. The worst is over, and 
I feel stronger with every day. . . ." 
The popularity of his novel was growing rapidly, and Ostrovsky was receiving more and 
0iore  letters  from  people  complaining  that  the  book  was  unobtainable  in  their  local 
libraries or bookstores. 
He  told  me  about  a  great  variety  of  people  and  t heir  work ―miners,  metalworkers,  steel 
smelters,  electricians,  locomotive  drivers,  stokers,  accountants,  teachers,  actors,  artists.  He 
had  met  some  remarkable  collective  farm  chairmen  and  team  leaders.  "What characters !"  he 
exclaimed enthusiastically. "Their experience and knowledge of life are truly wonderful!"  
 
Ostrovsky prided and delighted in his count rymen's integrity, noting each excellent trait, while  
 
 
 
第 6 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
shabbiness, stupidity and smugness outraged him so painfully as though he himself had 
been personally insulted. In this respect his vision was keener than that of many whose 
eyesight was unimpaired. In 1934 he wrote to me: 
"To tell you the truth, even now  I live a far happier life than do many of my callers, most 
of them calling from plain curiosity. I wouldn't wonder. They have healthy bodies, but they 
lead  a  dull,  colourless  existence. They  can  see  with  both  eyes,  but  I  imagine  that  they 
have  a  bored,  indifferent  look.  They probably  pity  me  and think:  'Heaven  preserve  me 
from  ever  finding  myself  in  his  shoes!'  To  me  they  seem  such  sorry  creatures,  that  I 
swear I'd never agree to change places with them." 
 
Can anything more be added to these lines which speak for themselves so clearly? 
 
Ostrovsky was always full of plans, irrepressible  energy and good cheer, and this was the 
frame of mind in which  he began each  new day, his only complaint being that the day was 
over too soon. Nothing could weaken, let alone shatter, the strength of his spirit. If he had 
troubles his friends would only hear about them in passing, and then always in the past tense.  
 
No  matter  how  his  friends  remonstrated  with  him,  Nikolai  refused  to  listen  to  reason  and 
work ed  for  fifteen  hours  a  day,  he  received  multitudes  of  callers,  slept  little,  and  squandered 
the  little  physical  strength  he  had.  The  last  time  I came  to see  him  in  Sochi,  I  scolded  him  for 
this. He listened  with a comically meek and cont rite expression on his  face, then  he  be gan t o 
sigh  and  mumble  some  extraordinary  excuses.  I  kept  a  straight  face  as  long  as  I  could,  and 
then I  burst out laughing. My lecture had been  a complete  waste of breath!  
 
"I'm a hopeless case, can't you see?" Nikolai said, laughing with me. 
 
What we all feared did happen. In August 1935, his condition took a sudden and sharp 
turn for the worse. 
"For  my  stubbornness  life  restored  to  me  this  boundless,  wonderful,  beautiful  happiness,  and 
I  forgot  the  warnings  and  threats  of  my  doctors.  I  forgot  that  I  had  so  little  physical  strength. 
The  fast-moving stream  of  people ―Koms omol youth, esteemed  factory workers and miners, 
all  those  heroic  builders  of  our  happiness―attracted  to  me  by  my  novel  fanned  in  me  what 
seemed  to  be  a  dying  fire.  I  was  once  again  a  passionate  agitat or  and  propagandist.  I  often 
forgot my place in the ranks where my orders were to use my pen rather and not my tongue.  
 
"This traitorous health of mine played me false once again. All at once I rolled down to 
the dread boundary line. 
"But,  for  all  the  danger  there  is,  I  won't  die  this  time  either,  of  course.  I  simply  must  write  my 
Born  of  the  Storm.  What  is  more,  I  must  infuse  it  with  all  the  ardour  of  my  heart.  I've  got  to 
make  a  screenplay  of  How  the  Steel  Was  Tempered.  I've  got  to  write  a  book  for  children 
about  Pavel  Korchagin's  childhood,  and―this  is  a  must―  a  book  about  Pavel's  happiness. 
This  will  take  me  five  years  of  strenuous  work.  Five  years  of  life  is  the  minimum  I  must  figure 
on.  Are  you  smiling?  But  it  can't  be  different.  My  doctors  also  smile  in  embarrassment  and 
dismay.  Duty  comes  first  with  me,  and  so  I  take  this  five-year  plan  as  a  minimum.  Tell  me, 
Anna, is there a madman who'd depart this life at a time as wonderful as ours?"  
 
It never occurred to me to "smile". His vitality and resistance were so fantastic, and his 
optimism  was  always  so  infectious,  that  I  instantly  believed  in  his  "minimum"  without  a 
shadow of doubt. He should have his minimum. It could not be otherwise.  
He was anxious to return to Moscow so as to be closer to his writer friends, and to avail himself of 
 
 
 
第 7 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
the material and counsel he needed for getting down to work on his new novel Bo rn of 
the  Storm.  Towards  the  end  of  the  year,  1935,  we  succeeded  in  getting  a  flat  for 
Ostrovsky in 40, Gorky Street. 
In November I received a letter from him in which he said: 
 
"A  member  of the  Government  is coming  here  in  a  day  or two  to  present  me  with  a  decoration.  I 
can't leave until then. I must also get my doctor's permission for the journey, as I am unwell again. 
When all these things have been cleared up, I'll write and tell you the day of departure." 
 
We were busy fixing up the flat in 40, Gorky Street, anxious to have everything just the 
way he'd like it. . . . I was called to the phone in the middle of the haste and bustle of our 
editorial day.  It  was  a  long-distance  call from  Sochi.  There  was  a  snowstorm  outside.  I 
picked  up  the  phone  and  heard  the  blizzardly  howling  of  the  wind,  snatches of  music, 
whistling, crackling―a cacophony of indistinct sounds and voices. 
And  suddenly,  Nikolai's  deep,  hollowish  voice  rang  in  my  ear  as  clearly as  if  he  were 
speaking from Arbat Street and not all the way from Sochi. 
"I'll be in Moscow on the eleventh! We'll hold a meeting of the 'general staff' in my train 
compartment, the minute we steam in! You'll tell me all your news, and I'll  tell you mine. I 
work like mad!" 
On  December  llth,  a  cold  wintry  day,  a  small  group  of  us  went  to  Serpukhov  to  meet 
Nikolai  Ostrovsky.  There  was  a  heavy  snowfall.  The  tall,  loud-mouthed  locomotive  tore 
into the haze of fluffy snow with startling suddenness. When the train came to a stop, we 
ran to the green service car. A young, round-faced woman emerged from the door. 
"Is Nikolai Ostrovsky in this car?" we asked her. "That's 
right, that's right," she replied with a nice smile. 
 
Nikolai's compartment was dark and hot.  The faint light from the passage cast bluish shadows 
on  his  face.  He  had  lost  weight,  but  his  laugh  was  as  infectious  as  ever,  his  white-toothed 
smile was so radiant and his thin face so animated that, as usual, I  forgot how ill he  was.  
 
"The old warrior's back in the ranks," he said jocularly, but his voice rang with pride and 
jubilance. 
He  told  us  about  the  meetings  which  his  young  readers  had  arranged  for  him  at  the 
stops. And when we were left alone in the compartment for a minute, he said t o me: 
"You know .  .  .  how  I  wanted .  . .  how terribly  I  wanted  to see their  faces.  I  felt  all those  wonderful 
boys  and  girls so strongly, they  were so  dear to me that  at moments  I  fancied  I  was  really  seeing 
them. . .  .  Of course,  I  was  the  happiest  person  in the  world  just then,  but  if  I  could  see them,  I 
would be able to tell my dear YCL'ers how much I love them more eloquently still." 
 
I tried to change the topic, but Nikolai's eyebrows twitched stubbornly, and he continued 
with a shadow of a patiently ironic smile on his lips: 
"There's  no  understanding  the  mentality  of  doctors  at  times.  Apparently,  surgery  can  restore  a 
person's eyesight for five or six days, and then he'll go blind again. I believe this operation is called 
resection  of  the  pupil.  However,  that's  not  the  point.  Naturally,  I  refused  to  have  such  kindness 
done  to  me.  People  don't  seem  to  understand  that  by  giving  me  sight  for  five  days  they'd  be 
thrusting  me  backward  and  not  helping  me  forward.  I  have  succeeded  in  mastering  all  my 
desperate  emotions  connected  with  my  blindness,  and  now  from sheer  humaneness the  doctors 
are prepared to grant me even worse torments! All right, I'll see you all, my dear friends, and then 
 
第 8 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
what ?  No,  I  have  c onquered  darkness,  I  have  t rained  myself  to  live  in  spite  of  this  physical 
handicap, despising it, and I  don't want to have a new burden  placed upon my soul."  
 
In order not to tire him, we often left him alone in his compartment, during t he journey. As 
we talked quietly in the passage, however, he'd hear what we were saying with his acute 
hearing, and call out something gay, witty and very much to the point. 
. . .I called on Nikolai at his flat a few days later. 
 
It  was  very  warm  in  his  large,  high-ceilinged  room.  Two  impressive  electric  heaters 
maintained the temperature at 25 or 26 degrees Centigrade. 
Nikolai  was  wearing  an  embroidered  Ukrainian shirt,  which  was  very  becoming.  I  had  never  seen 
him  look  so  well  before.  There  was  a  bit  of  colour  in  his  hollow  cheeks,  and  he  had  a  new, 
earnestly-happy smile.  He  was  lying  back  on  his  piled-up  pillows,  and  his  dark  hair  made  a  soft 
frame  round  his  tall,  white  forehead.  All  of  us  who  loved  this  man  dearly  exchanged  happy 
glances, delighting in the wonderful, inexhaustible vitality with which his face vibrated. 
 
The talk was gay and noisy. It suddenly occurred to one of the guests that we were tiring 
our host, and he asked anxiously: 
"Aren't we making too much of a noise?" 
 
"Heavens no," Nikolai replied with a happy laugh. "Let's have a real housewarming!" 
 
I once dropped in on him in the evening when his working day was over. Nikolai was in 
his everyday tunic made from army cloth. He looked tired. I asked him how many hours 
of dictation he'd had that day. 
"Oh,  not many,  not  many  at  all,"  he  began,  and suddenly  admitted  the  truth:  "About ten.  I see  you 
don't  approve.  But  I  was so  starved,  so  hungry  for  work!  Honestly,  even  lovers  don't  long  for  each 
other  as  passionately  as  I  longed  for  work.  And  you  know  the  mood  that  comes  upon  you  after 
work. When my secretary left, I began thinking over the next scene, and I pictured it so vividly that 
I  could  have  dictated  it  right  there  and then.  In  such  moments "there's  no  happier  person  than  me 
in the whole world. I am a lucky fellow anyway, aren't I? Lucky, and how!" 
 
He recalled the interview he once gave in Sochi to an American lady journalist. 
 
"I  was  virtually  in  her  clutches:  she  wanted  to  know  this,  and  she  wanted  to  know  that ―a 
terribly noisy lady she  was. And then she had to  be told how my heart was  working, how  I  felt 
in  general,  and  so  on  and  so  forth.  I  listened  and  listened,  and  finally  I  asked  her  what  she 
want ed  all that information  for about poor  me. She began to  hem and h aw, saying something 
about  compassion,  humaneness,  pity,  and  other  such  considerations.  It  dawned  on  me  then 
that  she  was  trying  to  make  a  martyr  of  me,  a  stoic,  and  a  saint.  .  .  .  My,  how  I  wanted  to  tell 
her  where to  get off! Instead,  I simply pointed out to her the correct approach to my life story, 
and explained why I considered myself a useful member of society."  
 
Nikolai  could  not  stand  pity,  or  condescending,  gushy  kindness.  He  would  ridicule  anyone 
who  so  much  as  attempted  to  moan  or  lament  over  him.  His  sensibilities  were  extremely 
acute, and he could instantly discern the slightest change of mood in the  people about him.  
 
He himself was very good at cheering up others. The words he said were of the simplest, but they 
had  a  more  powerful  effect  than  many  a  passionate  eruption  of  sympathy.  He  tried to  get  at  the 
root  of  the trouble,  and then  offered  his  advice  in  a  businesslike  manner,  very  gently  and tactfully 
showing  which  of the  aspects involved  were,  in  his  opinion,  not  worth  a  tear.  This  ability  to  get  to 
the bottom of everything, doing it with objective and passionate earnestness, was one of his 
 
第 9 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
strongest points. 
 
E very one  who  was  acquainted  with  Nikolai  Ostrovsky  knows  how  hard  he  worked.  To  my 
great sorrow  I  was not in Moscow during the last week of his life. His secret aries told me  how 
strenuously  he  worked  in  those  last  days.  The  secretaries  took  turns,  working  in  two  or  three 
shifts,  while  he  dictated  without  a  break,  pushing  on  with  the  doggedness  of  a  real  fighter  to 
finish the  first part of  his novel B orn of the Storm.  He  had promised the Central Committee  of 
the YCL to have the book finished by mid -December, and he  held his word. 
 
His day was strictly scheduled: in the morning, he dictated to his secretary and then had it all read 
back to  him  two  or three  times.  After  a short  break  for  lunch,  he  went  back  to  work  again.  Then 
came the reading hour―newspapers, new books or the classics. He liked expressive reading, and 
listened with rapt, childlike attention. The evening ended with music on the radio and the news. 
 
Once,  we  gathered  in  his  room  to  hear a  programme  composed  of  his  favourite  songs 
and  music;  broadcast  was  a  tribute  to  Nikolai  Ostrovsky  from  the  Radio  Committee. 
When the concert was over, Nikolai said in a low, reflective tone: 
"Happiness  .  .  .  this  is  it.  Could  I  have  ever  thought  that  one  day  I'd  be  listening  to a 
concert dedicated to me?" 
We  talked  about  music.  He  recalled that  as  a  boy  he  would  often  stop  under  people's 
windows if he heard someone playing the piano. 
"The  piano  always  attracted  me,  and  amazed  me  extremely.  Of  course,  I  could  not  even 
dream  of  ever  owning  an  instrument  as  expensive  as  a  piano.  .  .  .  Later,  I  learnt  to  play  the 
accordion, and  I  felt so  proud t hat my fingers could produce music. I loved my accordion. We 
had an accordion at the  front too . . . it's wonderful  going into battle singing a song!"  
 
He then recalled those wretched years when he worked as a kitchen boy at the railway station. 
 
"It was  a hard job, to put it mildly―fetch this and carry that, get a move on, look sharp, boy.  I 
saw  too  much  of  the  bottom  of  life,  if  you  know  what  I  mean,  it  was  as  though  I  w ere 
constantly watching the dirty feet of passersby  from  a basement window. I  witnessed so much 
degradation,  so  many  people  go  to  pot  through  drink.  But  I  was  sorriest  for  the  women,  I 
feared most for those  very young girls who  were led  astray right before my eyes." 
 
The conversation turned to the female characters in Born of the Storm and, speaking with 
even greater heat, Nikolai said that what he wanted to show was true love and friendship, 
a truly moral and human attitude to a woman friend. 
"There  can  be  friendship  without  love,  but  it's  a  shallow  love  if  it  has  no  friendship  in  it,  no 
comradeship,  no common  interests.  It's  not  real  love,  it's  just  a selfish  pleasure,  a  pretty  bauble. 
I'm not bragging and it's all past anyway, but in the old days the girls used to give me the glad eye, 
and I was ridiculously shy and awkward. . . . A Marusya or an Olessya would glance at me with her 
blue or brown eyes . . . it was a wonderful feeling, there's no gainsaying it." 
 
He laughed softly in reminiscence. 
 
"Do  you  know,"  he  said,  "I  got  a  letter  the  other  day  from  Tonya  Tumanova,  not  Tonya  really 
but the girl  who  was the prototype  of  Tonya. Can you imagine it, she hasn't forgotten me."  
 
Nikolai fell abruptly silent, and for several minutes he lay still with a concentrated frown on his face. Not 
a muscle stirred, and only his thick black eyelashes trembled slightly. Then, he sort of gave himself a 
shake, and started telling me about Tonya Tumanova. The man she fell in love with and married, an 
engineer he was, turned out to be a weak, bad character. Tonya divorced him, and 
 
 
第 10 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
now lived apart with her two children, teaching for a living. 
 
"She  was  a  good, kind  girl,  but  she  was  not  made  for struggle.  It  was  often  the case―people  who 
could  not  fight  for the  common cause,  could  not  put  up  a  fight  for  their  personal  happiness  either." 
On  one  of  my  visits,  I  was  shocked  by  Nikolai's  pallor  and  his strangely  haggard  look.  He  refused 
to tell me what was wrong at first, but finally he yielded to my insistence and said: 
 
"My  eyeballs  are  sore.  I  suppose  there's an  inflammation. The right eye  especially,  it's 
simply killing  me. Did you ever get coal  dust in your eyes? Well, I sometimes have the 
feeling that my right eye is stuffed full with this blasted coal dust, and it twists and turns 
inside like mad, ripping the eyeball apart. I had the specialist in the other day. . . ." 
He was silent for a minute, then he cleared his throat, and said in a somewhat constrained voice: 
"He suggests removing the eyeballs, to spar*e me further suffering. I asked him whether he 
proposed sewing up my eyelids or sticking in a pair of artificial, glass eyes? Disgusting!" 
 
A painful grimace contorted his face. He bit his lip hard, closed his eyes tight, and tensed 
himself, stubbornly determined to endure and master the pain. 
"I  said  to  him  that  it  was  not  only  myself  I  had  to  consider  but  also  the  people  who 
associated  with  me,"  he  spoke  at  last,  breaking  the  distressing  silence.  "  'Think  how 
pleasant it will be for my friends/ I said to him, 'to look at this effigy with glass  eyes. I can't 
do it to them.' 'No,' I said. 'No matter how bad it is at times, I'll keep my own eyes, they 
may be blind but at least they're brown.' Don't you agree?" 
He gripped my hand with his thin, nervous fingers that seemed to speak a language all 
their own. What I feared most in such minutes was "going all maudlin" which he hated. I 
cradled  his  cool,  frozen-feeling  fingers  in  my  hands  and,  speaking  in  an  affectionately 
humorous tone, assured him that even if he had carroty hair or a hooked nose, like  the 
boy in Perrault's fairy tale, we'd love him just as tenderly. 
He  smiled,  and then said  in  a  matter-of-fact  voice:  "I  need  another  five  years  because the second 
and  third  parts  of  the  book  will  mean  a terrific  amount  of  work, you know." Sighing  softly,   he  said 
dreamily: "Yes, another five years would be nice. And then, oh well . . . if I did fall out of the ranks, 
at  least  I'd  know  that the  offensive  had  been  won."  He  loved  such  words  as  "ranks",  "offensive", 
"victory", "battle",  and  pronounced them  with  a special sort  of  elation.  I  mentioned  it to  him  once. 
He smiled, and slowly drew his long eyebrows together to the bridge of his nose ―a thing he was 
wont to do in moments of profound and pleasant reflection. 
 
"How could I  help loving these  words when  for me they contain the main expression  of life?"  
 
I remember how happy he looked when he received his service card from the People's 
Commissariat for Defence. 
"You see, I'm still in the rank of fighters!" he exclaimed. One day we were talking about friends hip, 
and  suddenly  Nikolai  asked  why Mark Kolosov  and  I  did  not  come  to see  him more  often.  Other 
friends visited him practically every day. I replied that I saw no need in daily calls. In the first place, 
we  did  not  want  to  tire  him,  knowing  what  a  strain  visitors  were  on  him  both  physically  and 
spiritually. In the second, we did not want to take up his time which might otherwise be given to our 
young people, for whom it was very good to associate with a person like Nikolai Ostrovsky. And is 
it  the  number  of  visits  that  actually  counts?  After  all,  a  writer  needed  privacy,  he  had  to  be  left 
alone  to  think  in  peace,  to  talk  tete-a-tete  with  his  heroes.  In  Ostrovsky's  case,  these  hours  of 
solitude were particularly important, seeing that his secretaries were 
 
第 11 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
necessarily  present  at  the  creative  process  itself.  All  things  considered,  we  were  not 
going to make a nuisance of ourselves, and would continue visiting him as before. As for 
any outward manifestations of affection, surely, he had sufficient proof that we  loved him 
and were his truest friends. "Oh, yes, yes, I do," he said, deeply moved. Our conversation 
drifted  to  other  topics,  and  apropos  of  something  or  other  I  mentioned  his  copious 
correspondence. Nikolai responded eagerly, recalling many extremely int eresting letters 
which "made his heart sing", and suddenly changing to a sombre key said: 
 
"I  want  you  to  know,  in  case  you  ever  have  to  sort  out  my  papers,  that  you'll  find  everything 
quite easily―every scrap of paper is in its right place. I'm a soldier,  I like order. . . ." 
 
Everyone  who  knew  him  well  will,  at  the  memory  of  him,  always  feel  the  bitterness  of 
irreparable loss, the wrench of parting with a bit of his heart. Time will blunt the pain, of 
course, but the grief will remain as profound. 
Nikolai Ostrovsky  is  impossible to  forget.  He  will  never  be  forgotten  by  his  friends  or  his  readers. 
His  image,  personifying  fortitude  and  dedication  to  the  cause  of  socialism,  will  never  be  erased 
from our memories. He was a singularly charming, touchingly clean and nice person. 
 
ANNA KARAVAYEVA 
 
(From Recollections about Nikolai Ostrovsky) 
 
 
 
PART ONE 
 
 
 
Chapter One 
 
"Those of you who came to my house to be examined before the Easter holidays, stand up!"  
 
The speaker, a corpulent man in the garb of a priest, with a heavy cross dangling from 
his neck, fixed the class with a baleful glare. 
His small hard eyes seemed to bore through the six children―four boys and two girls―
who rose from their seats and looked at the man in the robe with apprehension. 
"You sit down," the priest said, motioning to the 
girls. The girls hastily complied, with sighs of  relief. 
Father Vasili's slits of eyes focussed on the other 
four. "Now then, my fine lads, come over here!"  
 
Father Vasili rose, pushed back his chair and walked up to the group of boys who stood 
huddled close together. 
"Which of you young ruffians smokes?" 
 
"We don't smoke, father," the four answered 
timidly. The blood rushed to the priest's face. 
"You don't smoke, eh, you scoundrels? Then who put the tobacco in the dough? Tell me 
that!  We'll  see  whether  you  smoke or not.  Now  then,  turn  out  your  pockets!  Come  on, 
turn them out, I say!" 
 
 
 
第 12 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
Three of the boys proceeded to empty the contents of their pockets onto the table. 
 
The  priest  inspected  the  seams  carefully  for  grains  of  tobacco,  but  found  nothing, 
whereupon  he  turned  to  the  fourth  lad,  a dark-eyed  youngster  in  a  grey  shirt  and  blue 
trousers patched at the knees. 
"What are you standing there for like a dummy?" The 
lad threw a look of silent hatred at his questioner. 
 
"I haven't any pockets," he replied sullenly, running  his hands over the sides of his trousers.  
 
"No pockets, eh? You think I don't know who could have played such a scoundrelly trick 
as to spoil my dough? 
You think I'm going to let you off again? Oh no, my boy, you shall suffer for this. Last time 
I  allowed  you  to  stay  in  this  school  because  your  mother  begged  me  to  keep  you,  but 
now I'm finished with you. Out with you!" He seized the boy painfully by the ear and threw 
him out into the corridor, slamming the door after him. 
The class sat silent, cowed. None of the children could understand why Pavel Korchagin had been 
ejected,  none  but Sergei  Bruzzhak,  who  was  Pavel's  closest  friend.  He  had  seen  him sprinkle a 
fistful  of  home-grown  tobacco  into  the  Easter  cake  dough  in  the  priest's  kitchen  where  six 
backward pupils had waited for the priest to come and hear them repeat their lesson. 
 
Now Pavel sat down on the bottom step of the school-house and wondered dismally what 
his  mother  would  say  when  he  told  her  what  had  happened,  his  poor  hard-working 
mother who toiled from morning till night as cook at the excise inspector's. 
Tears choked him. 
 
"What shall I do? It's all because of that damned priest. What on earth made me go and 
put  that  tobacco  in  his  dough?  It  was  Seryozhka's  idea.  'Let's  play  a  trick  on  the  old 
beast,' he says. So we did. And now Seryozhka's got off and I'll likely be kicked out." 
His  feud  with  Father  Vasili  was  of  long  standing.  It  dated  back  to  the  day  he  had  a  scrap  with 
Mishka  Levchenkov  and  in  punishment  was kept  in  after  lessons.  To  keep  the  lad  out  of  mischief 
in the empty classroom, the teacher took him to the second grade to sit in at a lesson. 
 
Pavel  took  a seat  at  the  back.  The  teacher,  a  wizened  little man  in  a  black  jacket,  was  telli ng  the 
class  about  the  earth  and  the  heavenly  bodies,  and  Pavel  gaped  with  amazement  when  he 
learned  that  the  earth  had  been  in  existence  for  millions  of  years  and  that  the  stars  too  were 
worlds.  So  startled  was  he  by  what  he  had  heard  that  he  barely  refrained  from  getting  up  and 
blurting out: "That isn't what the Bible says!" But he was afraid of getting into more hot water. 
 
The  priest  had  always  given  Pavel  full  marks  for  Scripture.  He  knew  almost  the  whole  prayer 
book practically by heart, and the Old  and  New  Testament as well. He knew  exactly what God 
had  created  on  each  day  of  the  week.  Now  he  resolved  to  take  the  matter  up  with  Father 
Vasili. At the  very next lesson, before the priest had time to settle himself properly in his chair, 
Pavel  raised  his hand and, having obtained permission to speak, he got up. 
 
"Father,  why  does  the  teacher  in  the  second  grade  say  the  earth  is  millions  of  years  old, 
instead of what the Bible says, five thou. . . ." A hoarse cry from Father Vasili cut him short.  
 
"What did you say, you scoundrel? So that's how you learn your Scripture!" 
 
And  before  Pavel  knew  what  had happened  the  priest  had  seized  him  by  the ears  and 
was banging his head against the wall. A few minutes later, shaken with fright and pain, 
he found himself outside in the corridor. 
 
第 13 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
His mother too had given him a good scolding that time. And the following day she had gone to the 
school and begged Father Vasili to take him back. From that day Pavel hated the priest with all his 
soul.  Hated  and  feared  him.  His childish  heart  rebelled  against  any  injustice,  however  slight.  He 
could not forgive the priest for the undeserved beating, and he grew sullen and bitter. 
 
Pavel  suffered  many  a  slight  at  the  hands  of  Father  Vasili  after  that.  The  priest  was  forever 
sending him out of the classroom; day after day for weeks on end he made him stand in the corner 
for trifling misdemeanours and never called on him to answer ques tions, with the result that on the 
eve  of  the  Easter  holidays Pavel  had  to  go  with  the  backward  boys to  the  priest's  house to  be  re-
examined. It was there in the kitchen that he had dropped the tobacco into the dough. 
 
No one had seen him do it, but the priest had guessed at once who was to blame. 
 
The lesson ended at last and the children poured out into the yard and crowded round 
Pavel,  who  maintained  a  gloomy  silence.  Sergei  Bruzzhak  lingered  behind  in  the 
classroom. He felt that he too was guilty, but he could do nothing to help his friend. 
Yefrem  Vasilievich,  the  headmaster,  poked  his  head  out  of  the  open  window  of  the 
common room and shouted: "Send Korchagin to me at once!" Pavel jumped at the sound 
of the headmaster's deep bass voice, and with pounding heart obeyed his summons. 
The  proprietor  of  the  railway  station  restaurant,  a  pale  middle -aged  man  with  faded, 
colourless eyes, glanced briefly at Pavel. "How old is he?" "Twelve." 
"All right, he can stay. He'll get eight rubles a month and his food on t he days he works. 
He'll work twenty-four hours at a stretch every other day. But mind, no pilfering." 
"Oh no, sir. He won't steal, I'll ans wer for that," the mother hastened  fearfully to assure  him.  
 
"Let him start in today," ordered the proprietor and, turning to the woman behind the 
counter, said: "Zina, take the boy to the kitchen and tell Frosya to put him to work instead 
of Grishka." The barmaid laid down the knife with which she had been slicing ham, 
nodded to Pavel and led the way across the hall to a side door opening into the scullery. 
Pavel followed her. His mother hurried after him and whispered quickly into his ear: "Now 
Pavlushka, dear, do your best, and don't disgrace yourself." 
 
With  sad  eyes  she  watched  him  go,  and  left.  Work  in  the  scullery  was  in  full  swing; 
plates,  forks and  knives  were  piled  high  on  the  table  and  several  women  were  wiping 
them with towels flung over their shoulders. A boy slightly older than Pavel, with a shaggy 
mop of ginger hair, was tending two huge samovars. 
The scullery was full of steam that rose from the large vat of boiling water in which the 
dishes were washed, and Pavel could not see the faces of the women at first. He stood 
waiting uncertainly for someone to tell him what to do. 
Zina., the barmaid, went over to one of the dishwashers and touched her shoulder. 
 
"Here, Frosya, I've brought you a new boy to take Grishka's place. You tell him what he's to do." 
"She's in charge here," Zina said to Pavel, nodding toward the woman she had called Frosya. 
"She'll tell you what you have to do." And with that she turned and went back to the buffet. 
 
"All right," Pavel replied softly and  looked questioningly at Frosya. Wiping her perspiring 
brow she examined him critically from head to foot, then, rolling up her sleeve which had 
slipped over her elbow, she said in a deep and remarkably pleasant voice: 
 
"It's not much of a job, dearie, but it will keep you busy enough. That copper over there has to be 
 
 
 
第 14 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
heated in the morning and kept hot so there's boiling water all the time; then there's the 
wood to chop and the samovars to take care of besides. You'll have to clean the knives 
and  forks  sometimes  and  carry  out  the  slops.  There'll  be  plenty  to  do,  lad,"  she  said, 
speaking with a  marked Kostroma accent laying the stress on the "a's". Her manner of 
speaking and her flushed face with the small turned-up nose made Pavel feel better. 
"She seems quite decent," he concluded, and overcoming his shyness, said: "What am I 
to do now, Auntie?" 
A loud guffaw from the dishwashers met his words. 
"Ha! Ha! Frosya's gone and got herself a nephew. . . ." 
 
Frosya herself laughed even more heartily than the others. 
 
Through the cloud of steam Pavel had not noticed that Frosya was a young girl; she was 
no more than eighteen. 
Much embarrassed, he turned to the boy and 
asked: "What do I do now?" 
But the boy merely chuckled. "You ask Auntie, she'll tell you all about it. I'm off." 
Whereupon he darted through the door leading to the kitchen. 
"Come over here and help dry the forks," said one of the dishwashers, a middle-aged woman. 
"Stop your cackling," she admonished the others. "The lad didn't say anything funny. Here, take 
this." She handed Pavel a dish towel. "Hold one end between your teeth and pull the other end 
tight. Here's a fork, run it up and down the towel, and see you don't leave any dirt between the 
prongs. They're very strict about that here. The customers always inspect the forks and if they find 
a speck of dirt, they make a terrible fuss, and the mistress will send y ou flying out in a jiffy." "The 
mistress?" Pavel echoed. "I thought the master who hired me was in charge." 
 
The dishwasher laughed. 
 
"The master, my lad, is just a stick of furniture around here. The mistress is the boss. 
She isn't here today. But if you work here a while you'll see for yourself." 
The scullery door opened and three waiters entered carrying trays piled high wit h dirty dishes. 
One of them, a broad-shouldered cross-eyed man wit h a heavy, square jaw, said: "You'd 
better look lively. The 12 o'clock is due any minute, and here you are dawdling about." 
 
He looked at Pavel. "Who's this?" he 
asked. "That's the new boy," said Frosya. 
 
"Ah,  the  new  boy,"  he  said.  "Well,  listen,  my  lad."  He  laid  his  heavy  hands  on  Pavel's 
shoulders and pushed him over to the samovars. "You're supposed to keep them boiling 
all the time, and look, one of them's out, and the other is barely going. Don't let  it happen 
again or I'll beat the stuffings out of you!" 
Pavel busied himself with the samovars without a word. 
 
Thus  began  his  life  of  toil.  Never  had  Pavka  worked  so  hard  as  on  that  first  day.  He  realised 
that  this  was  not  home  where  he  could  afford  to  disobey  his  mother.  The  cross -eyed  waiter 
had made it quite plain that if he did not do  as he was told, he would s uffer  for it. 
 
Placing  one  of  his  top-boots  over  the  chimney  and  using  it  as  a  bellows,  Pave!  soon  had  the 
sparks flying from the large pot-bellied samovars. He picked up the slop pail and rushed out to the 
garbage  dump,  added  firewood  to  the  water  boiler,  dried the  wet  dish towels  on  the  hot samovars 
―in a word, did everything he was told to do. Late that night when he went off wearily to the 
 
第 15 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
kitchen,  Anisia,  the  middle-aged  dishwasher,  with  a  glance at  the  door  that  had  closed 
behind  him,  remarked:  "Something  queer  about  that  boy,  look  at  the  way  he  dashes 
about like mad. Must have been a good reason for putting him to work." 
"He's a good worker," said Frosya. "Needs no speeding up." 
 
"He'll soon cool off," was Lusha's opinion. "They all try hard in the beginning. . . ." 
 
At seven o'clock the next morning, Pavel, utterly exhausted after a whole night spent on 
his feet, turned the boiling samovars over to the boy who was to relieve him. The latter, a 
puffy-faced youngster with a mean look in his eyes, examined the boiling samovars, and 
having assured himself that all was in order, thrust his hands into his pockets and spat 
through his teeth with an air of scornful superiority. 
"Now  listen,  snotnose!"  he  said  in  an  aggressive  tone,  fixing  Pavel  with  his  colourless 
eyes. "See you're on the job here tomorrow at six sharp." 
"Why at six?" Pavka wanted to know. "The shift changes at seven, doesn't it?" 
 
"Never mind when the shift changes. You get here at six. And you'd better not blab too 
much or I'll smash your silly mug for you. Some cheek, only started in today and already 
putting on airs." The dishwashers who had just finished their shift listened with interest to 
the exchange between the two boys. The blustering tone and bullying manner of the 
other enraged Pavel. He took a step toward his tormentor and was about to lash out at 
him with his fists when the fear of losing his newly acquired job stopped  him. 
 
"Stop your noise," he said, his face dark with rage, "and keep off or you'll get more than 
you bargained for. I'll be here at seven tomorrow, and I can use my fists as good as you 
can. Maybe you'd like to try? I'm game." 
His adversary cowered back against the boiler, gaping with surprise at the bristling Pavel. 
He had not expected such a determined rebuff. 
"All right, all right, we'll see," he muttered. 
 
Pavel, his first day at work having passed without mishap, hurried home with a sense of 
having honestly earned his rest. Now he too was a worker and no one could accuse him 
of being a parasite. 
The morning sun was already climbing above the sprawling buildings of the sawmill. 
Before long the tiny house where Pavel lived would come into view, just behi nd the 
Leszczinski garden. "Mother must have just got up, and here I am coming home from 
work," Pavel thought, and he quickened his pace, whistling as he went. "It turned out not 
so bad being kicked out of school. That damned priest wouldn't have given me  any 
peace anyway, and he can go to hell now for all I care. As for that gingerhead," he said to 
himself as he opened the gate, "I'll punch his face for certain." 
 
His mother, who was lighting the samovar in the yard, looked up at her son's approach 
and asked anxiously: 
"Well, how was it?" 
"Fine," Pavel replied. 
 
His mother was about to say something when through the open window Pavel caught a 
glimpse of his brother Artem's broad back. 
"Artem's come home?" he asked, worried. 
 
"Yes, he came last night. He's going to stay here and work at the railway yards." 
 
第 16 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
With some hesitation Pavel opened the front door. 
 
The  man  seated  at  the  table  with  his  back  to the  door  turned  his  huge  frame  as  Pavel 
entered and the eyes under the thick black brows looked stern. 
"Ah, here comes the tobacco lad. Well, how goes 
it?" Pavel dreaded the forthcoming interview. 
 
"Artem knows all about it already," he thought. "I'm in for a good row and hiding to boot." 
Pavel stood somewhat in awe of his elder brother. 
But  Artem  evidently  had  no  intention  of  beating  him.  He  sat  on  a  stool,  leaning  his  elbows  on 
the table, and studied Pavel's face with a mingled expression of amus ement and scorn.  
 
"So  you've  graduated  from  university,  eh? Learned all  there  is  to  learn  and now  you're 
busying yourself with slops, eh?" 
Pavel stared down at a nail sticking out of a floor board. Artem got up from the  table and 
went into the kitchen. 
"Looks as if I won't get a thrashing after all," Pavel thought with a sigh of relief. 
 
Later  on  at  tea  Artem  questioned  Pavel  about  the  incident  at  school.  Pavel  told him  all 
that had happened. 
"What  will  become  of  you  if  you grow  up  to  be  such  a  scamp,"  the  mother  said  sadly. 
"What shall we do with him? Who does he take after, I wonder? Dear God, to think of all 
I've had to suffer from that boy," she complained. 
Artem pushed his empty cup away and turned to Pavel. 
 
"Now listen to me, mate," he said. "What's done can't be undone. Only now take care and do your 
work properly and no monkey business, because if you get yourself kicked out of this place I'll give 
you  a  proper  thrashing.  Remember  that.  You've  given  mother  enough  trouble  as  it  is.  You're 
always  getting  into some  sort  of mess.  Now  that's  got to stop. When  you've  worked  for  a  year  or 
thereabouts  I'll  try  and  get  you  taken  on  at  the  railway  yards  as  an  apprentice,  because  you'll 
never  amount  to  anything  if  you mess  about  with  slops  all  your  life. You've  got  to  learn  a  trade. 
You're  a  bit  too young  just  now,  but  in  a year's  time  I'll  see  what  I can  do,  maybe  they'll  take you. 
I'll  be  working  here  now.  Ma  won't  need  to  go  out  to  work  any more. She's  slaved  enough  for  all 
sorts of swine. Only see here, Pavel, you've got to be a man." 
 
He  stood  up,  his huge  frame  dwarfing  everything  about  him,  and putting  on  the  jacket 
that  hung  over  the  chair,  said  to  his  mother:  "I've  got  to  go  out  for  an  hour  or  so,"  and 
went out, stooping in the doorway. 
Passing by the window on his way to the gate, he looked in and called out to Pavel: "I've 
brought you a pair of boots and a knife. Mother will give them to you." 
 
 
The station restaurant was open day and night. 
 
Six different railway lines met at this junction, and the station was always packed  with p eople; 
only  for  two  or  three  hours  at  night  during  a  gap  between  trains  was  the  place  comparatively 
quiet. Hundreds of trains passed through this station  bringing maimed  and crippled men  from 
the front and taking back a constant stream of new men in monotonous grey overcoats. 
 
Pavel  worked  there  for  two  years ―two  years  in  which  he  saw  nothing  more  than  the  scullery  and 
kitchen. The twenty odd people employed in the huge basement kitchen worked at a feverish pace. 
 
第 17 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Ten waiters scurried constantly back and forth between the restaurant and the kitchen. 
 
By now Pavel was receiving ten rubles instead of eight. He had grown taller and broader 
in  these  two  years,  and  many  were the  trials that  fell  to  his  lot. For  half  a  year  he  had 
worked as a kitchen boy but had been sent back to the scullery again by the all -powerful 
chef who had taken a dislike to him―you never knew but what the unruly cub might stick 
a knife into you if you beat him too often. Indeed Pavel's fiery temper would have lost him 
the job long since had it not been for his tremendous capacity for hard work. For he could 
work harder than anyone else and he never seemed to get tired. 
 
During rush hours he would dash with loaded trays up and down the kitchen stairs like a 
whirlwind, taking several steps at a time. 
At  night,  when  the  hubbub  in  both  halls  of  the  restaurant  subsided,  the  waiters  would 
gather downstairs in the kitchen storerooms and wild, reckless card games woul d begin. 
Pavel often saw large sums of money lying on the tables. He  was not surprised, for he 
knew  that  each  waiter  received between  thirty  and  forty rubles  a  shift  in  ruble  and  half 
ruble tips, which they spent later in drinking and gambling. Pavel hated them. 
"The damned swine!" he thought. "There's Artem, a first-class mechanic, and all he gets 
is forty-eight rubles a month, and I get ten. And they rake in all that money in one day, 
just for carrying trays back and forth. And then they spend it all on d rink and cards." 
To  Pavel  the  waiters  were  as  alien and  hostile  as his  employers.  "They  crawl  on  their 
bellies here, the pigs, but their wives and sons strut about town like rich folk." 
Sometimes  their  sons  came,  wearing  smart  Gymnasium  uniforms,  and  somet imes  their  wives, 
plump  and soft  with  good  living.  "I  bet they  have  more  money  than the  gentry they  serve," Pavel 
thought.  Nor  was  the  lad shocked  any longer  by  what  went  on  at  night  in the  dark corners  of  the 
kitchen or in the storerooms. He knew very well that no dishwasher or barmaid would hold her job 
long if she did not sell herself for a few rubles to those who held the whip hand here. 
 
Pavel, avid of life, had a glimpse of its bottom-most depths, the very sump of its ugly pit, 
and a musty, mouldy stench, the smell of swamp rot, rose up to him. 
Artem was unable to get him hired as an apprentice at the railway yards; they would not 
take  anyone  under  fifteen.  But  Pavel  was  drawn  to  the  huge  soot -blackened  brick 
building, and he looked forward to the day when he could get away from the restaurant. 
He  went  to  see  Artem  at  the  yards  frequently,  and  would  go  with  him  to  look  over  the 
carriages, helping him whenever he could. 
He  felt  particularly  lonely  after  Frosya  left.  With  the  gay,  laughing  girl gone,  Pavel  felt 
more keenly than ever how much her friendship had meant to him. Now when he came in 
the morning to the scullery and listened to the shrill quarrelling of the refugee women he 
felt a gnawing sense of emptiness and solitude. 
 
 
During  a  slack  period  at  night,  as  he  squatted  beside  his  boiler,  adding  firewood  and 
staring at the flames, he fell to think of Frosya, and a scene he had recently witnessed 
rose before his mind's eye. 
During  the  night  interval  on  Saturday  Pavel  was  on  his  way  downstairs  to  the  kitchen,  when 
curiosity prompt ed him to climb ont o a pile of firewood to look into the storeroom on the lower 
 
 
第 18 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
landing where the gamblers usually assembled. 
 
The game was in full swing. Zalivanov, flushed with excitement, was keeping the bank. 
 
Just  then  footsteps  sounded  on  the  stairs.  Looking  around,  Pavel  saw  Prokhoshka 
coming down, and he slipped under the staircase to let the man pass into the kitchen. It 
was dark there under the stairs and Prokhoshka could not see him. 
As Prokhoshka passed the turning in the stairs, Pavel caught a glimpse of his broad back 
and huge head. Just then someone else came hurrying lightly down the steps after the 
waiter and Pavel heard a familiar voice call out: 
"Prokhoshka, wait!" 
 
Prokhoshka stopped and turned around to look up the 
stairway. "What d'you want?" he growled. 
The footsteps pattered down and soon Frosya came into sight. 
 
She seized the  waiter by the arm and spok e in a broken, choking 
voice. "Where's the money the Lieutenant gave you, Prokhoshka?"  
 
The man wrenched his arm away from her. 
 
"What money? I gave it to you, didn't I?" His tone was sharp and vicious. 
 
"But he gave you three hundred rubles," Frosya's voice broke into muffled sobs. 
 
"Did he now? Three hundred!" Prokhoshka sneered. "Want to get it all, eh? Flying high 
for a dishwasher, aren't you, my fine young lady? The fifty I gave you is plenty. Girls a 
damn sight better than you, educated too, don't take that much. You ought to be thankful 
for what you got― fifty rubles clear for a night is damn good. All right, I'll give you another 
ten,  maybe twenty,  that's  all―  and  if  you're not  a  fool  you  can earn  some  more.  I  can 
help you." With this Prokhoshka turned and disappeared into the kitchen. 
 
"Scoundrel!  Swine!"  Frosya  screamed  after  him  and,  leaning  against  the  woodpile, 
sobbed bitterly. 
It  is  hard  to  describe  what  Pavel  felt  as  he  stood  in  the  darkness  under  the  staircase 
watching  Frosya  beat her  head  against  the  logs of  wood.  But  he  did  not  show  hims elf; 
only his fingers spasmodically gripped the cast-iron supports of the staircase. 
"So they've sold her too, damn them! Oh Frosya, Frosya. . . ." 
 
His  hatred  for  Prokhoshka  seared  deeper  than  ever  and  everything  around  him  was 
revolting and hateful to him. "If I had the strength I'd beat the scoundrel to death! Why am 
I not big and strong like Artem?" 
The  flames  under  the  boiler  flared  up  and  died  do wn,  their  trembling  red  tongues 
intertwining into a long bluish spiral; it seemed to Pavel that some jeering, mocking imp 
was showing its tongue at him. 
It was quiet in the room; only the fire crackled and the tap dripped at measured intervals. 
 
Klimka  put  the  last  pot, scrubbed  until  it  shone,  on the shelf  and  wiped  his  hands.  There  was  no 
one else in the kitchen. The cook on duty and the kitchen help were asleep in the cloakroom. Quiet 
settled  over  the  kitchen  for  the  three  night  hours,  and  these  hours Klimka  always spent  upstairs 
with Pavel,  for  a  firm  friendship  had  sprung  up  between  the young kitchen  boy  and the  dark -eyed 
boiler attendant. Upstairs, Klimka found Pavel squatting in front of the open firebox. Pavel saw the 
shadow of the familiar shaggy figure cast against the wall and said without turning around: 
 
"Sit down, Klimka." 
 
 
 
第 19 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
The boy climbed onto the woodpile, stretched out on it and looked at the 
silent Pavel. "Trying to tell your fortune in the fire?" he asked, smiling. 
Pavel tore his gaze  away from the licking tongues of flame and turned on Klimka two large 
shining eyes brimming over  with sadness. Klimka had never seen his friend look so unhappy. 
"What's wrong wit h you today, Pavel?" After a pause he asked: "Anything happened?" Pavel 
got up and sat next to Klimka. "Nothing's happened," he  replied in a low  voice. "Only I can't  
stand it here, Klimka." And his hands resting on his knees clenched into  fists. 
 
"What's come over you today?" Klimka insisted, propping himself up on his elbows.  
 
"Today? It's been like this ever since I got this job. Just look at this place! We work lik e 
horses and instead of thanks we get blows―anyone can beat you and there's nobody to 
stick up for you. The masters hire us to serve them, but anyone who's strong enough has 
the  right  to  beat  us.  After  all,  you  can  run  yourself  ragged  but  you'll  never  plea se 
everybody and those you can't please always have it in for you. No matter how you try to 
do everything right so that nobody could find fault, there's always bound to be somebody 
you haven't served fast enough, and then you get it in the neck just the sa me. . . ." 
 
"Don't shout like that," Klimka interrupted him, frightened. "Somebody might walk in and 
hear you." Pavel leapt to his feet. 
"Let them hear, I'm going to quit anyway. I'd rather shovel snow than hang around this . . . this hole 
full  of  crooks.  Look  at  all the  money they've  got!  They  treat  us  like  dirt,  and  do  what they  like  with 
the  girls.  The  decent  girls  who  won't  do  what  they  want  are  kicked  out,  and starving  refugees  who 
have  no  place  to  go  are  taken  on  instead. And  that sort  hang  on  because  here  at  least  they  get 
something to eat, and they're so down and out they'll do anything for a piece of bread." 
 
He spoke with such passion that Klimka, fearing that someone might overhear, sprang up 
to close the door leading to the kitchen, while Pavel continued to pour out the bitterness 
that burned inside him. 
"And you, Klimka, take the beatings lying down. Why don't you ever speak up?" 
 
Pavel dropped onto a stool at the table and rested his head wearily  on the palm of his 
hand. Klimka threw some wood into the fire and also sat down at the table. 
"Aren't we going to read today?" he asked Pavel. 
 
"There's nothing to read," Pavel replied. "The bookstall's 
closed." "Why should it be closed today?" Klimka wondered.  
 
"The gendarmes picked up the bookseller. Found something on him," Pavel 
replied. "Picked him up? What for?" 
"For .politics, they say." 
 
Klimka stared at Pavel, unable to grasp his 
meaning. "Politics. What's that?" 
Pavel shrugged his shoulders. 
 
"The devil knows! They say it's politics when you go against the 
tsar." Klimka looked startled. 
"Do people do that sort of 
thing?" "I dunno," replied Pavel.  
 
The door  opened and Glasha, her eyelids puffed  from sleepiness, walked int o the scullery.  
 
"Why aren't you two sleeping? There's time for an hour's nap before the train pulls in. You'd better 
 
 
 
第 20 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
take a rest, Pavel, I'll see to the boiler for you." 
 
 
 
Pavel quit his job sooner than he expected and in a manner he had not foreseen. 
 
One frosty January day when Pavel had finished his shift and was ready to go home he 
found  that  the  lad  who  was  to  relieve  him  had  not  shown  up.  Pavel  went  to  the 
proprietor's wife and announced that he was going nevertheless, but she would not hear 
of it. There was nothing for him to do but to carry on, exhausted though he was after a 
day and night of work. By evening he was ready to drop with weariness. During the night 
interval he had to fill the boilers and have them ready for the three -o'clock train. 
 
Pavel  turned  the  tap  but  there  was  no  water;  the  pump  evidently  was  not  working. 
Leaving the tap open, he lay down on the woodpile to wait, but fatigue got the better of 
him, and he was soon fast asleep. 
A  few  minutes  later the  tap  began  gurgling  and  hissing  and the  water  poured  into  the  boiler,  filling 
it to overflowing and spilling over the tiled floor of the scullery which was deserted at this hour. The 
water flowed on until it covered the floor and seeped under the door into the restaurant. 
 
Puddles  of  water  gathered  under  the  bags  and  bundles  of  the  dozing  passengers,  but 
nobody noticed it until the water reached a passenger lying on the floor and he jumped to 
his feet with a shout. There was a rush for luggage and a terrific uproar broke out. 
And the water continued to pour in. 
 
Prokhoshka, who had been clearing the tables in the second hall, ran in when he heard 
the  commotion.  Leaping  over  the  puddles  he  made a  dash  for the  door and  pushed  it 
open violently. The water dammed behind it burst into the hall. 
There  was  more  shouting.  The  waiters  on  duty  rushed  into  the  scullery.  Prokhoshka 
threw himself on the sleeping Pavel. 
Blows rained down on the boy's head, stunning him. 
 
Still  half  asleep,  he  had  no  idea  of  what  was  happening.  He  was  only  conscious  of  blinding 
flashes of lightning  before his eyes and agonising  pain shooting through  his body.  
 
Pavel was so badly beaten that he barely managed to drag himself home. 
 
In the morning Artem, grim-faced and scowling, questioned his brother as to what had 
happened. Pavel told him everything. 
"Who beat you?" Artem asked 
hoarsely. "Prokhoshka." 
"All right, now lie still." 
 
Without another word Artem pulled on his jacket and walked out. 
 
"Where can I find Prokhor, the waiter?" he asked one of the dishwashers. Glasha stared 
at the stranger in workingman's clothes who had burst into the scullery. 
"He'll be here in a moment," she replied. 
 
The man leaned his enormous bulk against the door 
jamb. "All right, I can wait."  
Prokhor, carrying a mountain of dishes on a tray, kicked the door open and entered 
the scullery. "That's him," Glasha nodded at the waiter. 
Artem took a step forward and laying a heavy hand on Prokhor's shoulder looked him strai ght in 
 
 
 
第 21 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
the eye. 
 
"What did you beat up my brother Pavka for?" 
 
Prokhor tried to shake his shoulder loose, but a smashing blow laid him out on the floor; 
he tried to rise, but a second blow more terrible than the first pinned him down.  
The frightened dishwashers scattered on all 
sides. Artem turned and walked out. 
Prokhoshka lay sprawled on the floor, his battered face bleeding. 
That  evening  Artem  did  not  come  home  -from  the  railway yards. 
His mother learned that he was being held by the gendarmes. 
 
Six days later Artem returned late at night when his mother was already asleep. He went 
up to Pavel, who was sitting up in bed, and said gently: 
"Feeling  better, boy?"  Artem  sat  down  next  to  Pavel.  "Might have  been  worse."  After a 
moment's  silence  he  added:  "Never  mind,  you'll  go  to  work  at  the electric  station;  I've 
spoken to them about you. You'll learn a real trade there." 
Pavel seized Artem's powerful hand with both of his. 
 
 
 
Chapter Two 
 
Like a whirlwind the stupendous news broke into the small town: "The tsar's been 
overthrown!" The townsfolk refused to believe it. 
Then  one  stormy  winter  day  a  train  crawled  into  the  station:  two  students  in  army 
greatcoats,  with  rifles  slung  over  their  shoulders,  and  a  detachment  of  revolutionary 
soldiers  wearing  red  armbands  jumped  out  onto  the  platform  and  arrested  the  station 
gendarmes, an old colonel and the chief of the garrison. Now the townsfolk believed the 
news. Thousands streamed down the snowbound streets to the town square. 
Eagerly they drank in the new words: liberty, equality and fraternity. 
 
Turbulent days followed, days full of excitement and jubilation. Then a lull set in, and the 
red flag flying over the town hall where the Mensheviks and adherents of the Bund had 
ensconced  themselves  was  the  sole  reminder  of  the  change  that  had  taken  place. 
Everything else remained as before. 
Towards the end of the winter a regiment of the cavalry guards was billeted in the town. 
In  the  mornings  they  sallied  out  in  squadrons  to  hunt  for  deserters  from  the  South -
Western Front at the railway station. 
The  troopers  were  great,  beefy  fellows  with  well-fed  faces.  Most  of  their  officers  were 
counts and princes; they wore golden shoulder straps and silver piping on their breeches, 
just as they had in the tsar's time―for all the world as if there had been no revolution. 
For  Pavel,  Klimka  and Sergei  Bruzzhak  nothing  had changed.  The  bosses  were still there.  It  was 
not until November that something out of the ordinary began to happen. People of a new kind had 
appeared at the station and were beginning to stir things up; a steadily increasing number of them 
were soldiers from the firing lines and they bore the strange name of "Bolsheviks". 
 
Where that resounding, weighty name came from no one knew. 
 
The guardsmen  found it increasingly hard to detain the deserters. The crackle of rifles and the  
 
 
 
第 22 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
splintering of glass was heard more and more often down at the station. The men came 
from  the  front  in  groups  and  when  stopped  they  fought  back  with  bayonets.  In  the 
beginning of December they began pouring in by trainloads. 
The  guardsmen  came  down  in  force  to  the  station  with  the  intention  of  holding  the 
soldiers, but they found themselves raked by machine-gun fire. The men who poured out 
of the railway carriages were inured to death. 
The grey-coated frontliners drove the guards back into the town and then returned to the 
station to continue on their way, trainload after trainload. 
 
One  day  in  the  spring  of  nineteen  eighteen,  three  chums  on  their  way  from  Sergei  Bruzzhak's 
where they had been playing cards dropped into the Korchagins' garden and threw thems elves on 
the  grass.  They  were  bored.  All  the  customary  occupations  had  begun  to  pall,  and  they  were 
beginning  to  rack  their  brains  for  some  more  exciting  way  to  spend the  day  when they  heard  the 
clatter of horses' hoofs behind them and saw a horseman come galloping down the road. With one 
bound the horse cleared the ditch between the road and the low garden fence and the rider waved 
his  whip  at  Pavel  and  Klim. "Hi  there,  my  lads, come  over  here!"  Pavel  and  Klim sprang  to their 
feet and ran to the fence. The rider was covered with dust; it had settled in a heavy grey Layer on 
the  cap  which  he  wore  pushed  to the  back  of  his  head,  and  on  his  khaki tunic  and  breeches. A 
revolver and two German grenades dangled from his heavy soldier's belt. 
 
"Can you get me a drink of water, boys?" the horseman asked them. While Pavel dashed 
off  into  the  house  for  the  water,  he  turned  to  Sergei  who  was  staring  at  him.  "Tell  me, 
boy, who's in authority in your town?" 
Sergei breathlessly related all the local news to the newcomer. 
 
"There's been nobody in authority for two weeks. The homeguard's the government now. 
All the inhabitants take turns patrolling the town at night. And who might you be?" Sergei 
asked in his turn. 
"Now, now―if you know too much you'll get old too soon," the horseman smiled. 
 
Pavel ran out of the house carrying a mug of water. The rider thirstily emptied the mug at 
one gulp and handed it back to Pavel. Then jerking the reins he started off at a gallop, 
heading  for  the  pine  woods.  "Who  was  that?"  Pavel  asked  Klim.  "How  do  I  know?"  the 
latter replied, shrugging his shoulders. 
"Looks  like  the  authorities are  going  to  be  changed again.  That's  why  the  Leszczinskis 
left  yesterday.  And  if  the  rich  are  on  the  run  that  means  the  partisans  are  coming ," 
declared Sergei, settling the political question firmly and with an air of finality. 
The logic of this was so convincing that both Pavel and Klim agreed with him at once. 
 
Before the boys had finished discussing the question a clatter of hoofs from the  highway 
sent all three rushing back to the fence. 
Over by the  forest warden's cottage,  which  was barely  visible  among the t rees, they saw men 
and  carts  emerging  from  the  woods,  and  nearer  still  on  the  highway  a  party  of  fifteen  or  so 
mounted  men  with  rifles  across  their  pommels.  At  the  head  of  the  horsemen  rode  an  elderly 
man in khaki jacket and  officer's belt with  field glasses slung on his chest, and  beside him the 
man the boys had just spoken to.  The  elderly man wore a red ribbon on his breast.  
 
"What did I tell you?" Sergei nudged Pavel in the ribs. "See the red ribbon? Partisans. I'll be  
 
 
 
第 23 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
damned if they aren't partisans. . . ." And whooping with joy he leapt over the fence into 
the street. The others followed suit and all three stood by the roadside gazing at the 
approaching horsemen. When the riders were quite close the man whom the boys h ad 
met before nodded to them, and pointing to the Leszczinski house with his whip asked:  
"Who lives over there?" 
 
Pavel paced alongside trying to keep abreast the rider. 
 
"Leszczinski the lawyer. He ran away yesterday. Scared of you most 
likely. . . ." "How do you know who  we are?" the  elderly man asked, smiling.  
 
"What about that?" Pavel pointed to the ribbon. "Anybody can tell. . . ." 
 
People poured into the street to stare with curiosity at the detachment entering the town. 
Our three young friends too stood watching the dusty, exhausted Red Guards go by. And 
when the detachment's lone cannon and the carts with machine guns clattered over the 
cobblestones the boys trailed after the partisans, and did not go home until after the unit 
had halted in the centre of the town and the billeting began. 
That  evening  four  men  sat  around  the  massive  carved-legged  table  in  the  spacious 
Leszczinski parlour: detachment commander Comrade Bulgakov, an elderly man whose 
hair was touched with grey, and three members of the unit's commanding personnel. 
Bulgakov had spread out a map of the gubernia on the table and was now running his 
finger over it. 
"You  say  we  ought  t o  put  up  a  stand  here,  Comrade  Y ermachenko,"  he  said,  addressing  a 
man  with  broad  features  and  prominent  teeth,  "but  I  think  we  must  move  out  in  the  morning. 
Better still if we could get going during the night, but the men are in  need of a rest. Our task is 
to  withdraw  to  Kazatin  before  the  Germans  get  there.  To  resist  with  the  strength  we  have 
would be ridiculous. One  gun  with thirty rounds  of  ammunition, two hundred infantry and sixty 
cavalry.  A  formidable  force,  isn't  it,  when  the  Germans  are  advancing  in  an  avalanche  of 
steel.  We  cannot  put  up  a  fight  until  we  join  up  with  other  withdrawing  Red  units.  Besides, 
Comrades,  we  must  remember  that  apart  from  the  Germans  there'll  be  numerous  counter -
revolutionary  bands  of  all  kinds  to  deal  with  en  route.  I  propose  that  we  withdraw  in  the 
morning  after  first blowing  up the railway bridge  beyond the station. It'll tak e the Germans two 
or three days to  repair it and in t he meantime their advance along the  railway  will be held up. 
What do you think, Comrades? We must decide. . ." he turned to the others around the table.  
 
Struzhkov, who sat diagonally across from Bulgakov, sucked in his lips and looked first at 
the map and then at Bulgakov. 
"I agree with Bulgakov," he said finally. 
 
The youngest of the men, who was dressed in a worker's blouse, 
nodded. "Bulgakov's right," he said. 
But Yermachenko, the man who had spoken with the boys earlier in the day, shook his 
head. "What the devil did we get the detachment together for? To retreat from the 
Germans without putting up a fight? As I see it, we've got to have it out with the m here. 
I'm sick and tired of running. If it was up to me, I'd fight them here without fail. . . ." 
Pushing his chair back sharply, he rose and began pacing the room. 
Bulgakov looked at him with disapproval. 
 
"We must use our heads, Yermachenko. We can't throw our men into a battle that is bound to end 
 
 
 
第 24 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
in  defeat  and  destruction  Besides  it's  ridiculous.  There's  a  whole  division  with  heavy 
artillery  and armoured  cars  just  behind  us.  .  .  .  This  is  no  time  for  schoolboy  heroics, 
Comrade  Yermachenko.  .  .  ."  Turning  to the others,  he  continued:  "So  it's  decided,  we 
evacuate  tomorrow  morning.  .  .  .  Now  for  the  next  qu estion,  liaison,"  Bulgakov 
proceeded. "Since we are the last to leave, it's our job to organise work in the German 
rear. This is a big railway junction and there are two stations in the town. We must see to 
it that there is a reliable comrade to carry on the work on the railway. We'll have to decide 
here whom to leave behind to get the work going. Have you anyone in mind?" 
 
"I think the sailor Fyodor Zhukhrai ought to remain," Yermachenko said, moving up to the 
table. "In the first place he's a local man. Secondly, he's a fitter and mechanic and can 
get himself a job at the station. Nobody's seen Fyodor with our detachment ―he won't get 
here  until  tonight.  He's  got  a  good  head  on  his  shoulders  and  he'll  get  things  going 
properly. I think he's the best man for the job." 
Bulgakov nodded. 
 
"I  agree  with  you,  Yermachenko.  No  objections,  Comrades?"  he  turned  to  the  others.  "None. 
Then  t he  matter  is  settled.  We'll  leave  Zhukhrai  some  money  and  the  credentials  he'll  need 
for his work. . . . Now for the third and last question, Comrades. About the arms stored here in 
the town. There's quite a stock of rifles, twenty thousand of them, left over  from the tsarist war 
and  forgotten by every body.  They are  piled  up in  a peasant's shed. I have this from the  owner 
of  the  shed  who  happens  to  be  anxious  to  get  rid  of  them. We  are  not  going  to  leave  them  to 
the  Germans;  in  my  opinion  we  ought  to  burn  them,  and  at  once,  so  as  to  have  it  over  and 
done  with  by  morning.  The  only  trouble  is  that  the  fire  might  spread  to  the  surrounding  
cottages. It's on the  fringes of the town where the poor peasants live."  
 
Struzhkov stirred in his chair. He was a solidly built man  whose unshaven face had not 
seen a razor for some time. 
"Why burn the rifles? Better distribute them among the 
population." Bulgakov turned quickly to face him. 
"Distribute them, you say?" 
 
"A  splendid  idea!"  Yermachenko  responded  enthusiastically.  "Give  them  to  the  workers  and 
anyone  else  who  wants  them.  At  least  there  will  be  something  to  hit  back  with  when  the 
Germans  make  life  impossible.  They're  bound  to  do  their  worst.  And  when  things  come  to  a 
head,  the  men  will  be  able  to  take  up  arms.  Struzhkov's  right:  the  rifles  must  be  distributed. 
Wouldn't  be  a  bad  thing  to  take  some  to  the  villages  too;  the  peasants  will  hide  them  away, 
and  when the Germans begin to requisition everything the rifles are sure to come in handy."  
 
Bulgakov laughed. 
 
"That's all right, but the Germans are sure to order all arms turned in and everybody 
will obey." "Not everybody," Yermachenko objected. "Some will but others won't." 
Bulgakov looked questioningly at the men around the table. 
 
"I'm for distributing the rifles," the young workers supported Yermachenko and Struzhkov. 
 
"All right then, it's decided," Bulgakov agreed. "That's all for now," he said, rising from his 
chair. "We can take a rest till morning. When Zhukhrai comes, send him in to me, I want 
to have a talk with him. Yermachenko, you'd better inspect the sentry posts." 
When the others left, Bulgakov went into the bedroom next to the parlour, spread his greatcoat on 
 
 
 
第 25 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
the mattress and lay down. 
 
 
 
The following morning Pavel, coming home from the electric power station where he had 
been working as a stoker's helper for a year now, felt that something unusual was afoot. 
The town seethed with excitement. As he went along he met people carrying one or  two 
and sometimes even three rifles each. He could not understand what was happening and 
he  hurried  home  as  fast  as  he  could.  Outside  the  Leszczinski  garden  he  saw  his 
acquaintances of yesterday mounting their horses. 
 
Pavel ran into the house, washed quickly and, learning from his mother that Artem had 
not  come  home  yet,  dashed  out  again  and  hurried  over  to  see  Sergei  Bruzzhak,  who 
lived on the other side of the town. 
Sergei's father was an engine driver's helper  and owned  a tiny house and a small plot of 
land. Sergei  was out, and his mother, a stout, pale-faced woman, eyed Pavel sourly.  
 
"The  devil  knows  where  he  is!  He  rushed  out  first  thing  in  the  morning  like  one 
possessed. Said they were giving out rifles somewhere, so I suppose that's where he is. 
What you snotnosed warriors need is a good hiding―you've got out of hand completely. 
Hardly out of pinafores and already dashing off after firearms. You tell the scamp that if 
he  brings a  single  cartridge  into  this  house  I'll  skin  him  alive.  Who  knows  what  he 'll  be 
dragging in and then I'll have to answer for it. You're not going there too, are you?" 
 
But before Sergei's mother had finished scolding, Pavel was already racing down 
the street. On the highway he met a man carrying a rifle on each shoulder. Pavel 
dashed up to him. "Please, uncle, where did you get them?" 
"Over at Verkhovina." 
 
Pavel hurried off as fast as his legs could carry him. Two streets down he collided with a 
boy who was lugging a heavy infantry rifle with bayonet attached. Pavel stopped him. 
"Where'd you get that?" 
 
"The partisans were giving them away out there opposite the school, but there aren't any 
more. All gone. Handed them out all night and now only the empty cases are left. This is 
my second one," the boy declared proudly. 
Pavel was utterly dismayed by the news. 
 
"Damn it, I should've gone straight there," he thought bitterly. "Now it's too late!" 
 
Suddenly  an  idea  struck  him.  Spinning  around,  he  overtook  the  boy  in  two  or  three 
bounds and snatched the rifle out of his hands. 
"One's enough for you. This is going to be mine," he said in a tone that brooked no 
opposition. Infuriated by this robbery in broad daylight, the boy flung himself at Pavel, but 
the latter leapt back and pointed the bayonet at his antagonist. 
"Look out or you'll get hurt!" Pavel shouted. 
 
The boy burst into tears of helpless rage and  ran  away, swearing at Pavel  as he went. Pavel, 
vastly  pleased  with  himself,  trotted  home.  He  climbed  over  the  fence,  ran  into  the  shed,  laid 
his acquisition on the crossbeams under the roof, and, whistling gaily, entered the house.  
 
 
 
 
 
第 26 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
Summer  evenings  in  the  Ukraine,  especially  in  small  Ukrainian  towns  like  Shepetovka, 
which are more like villages on the outskirts, are beautiful indeed. These calm summer 
nights lure all the young folk out of doors. You will see them in groups and in pair s―on 
the porches, in the little front gardens, or perched on woodpiles lying by the side of the 
road. Their gay laughter and singing echo in the evening stillness. 
The  air  is  heavy and  tremulous  with  the  fragrance  of  flowers.  There  is a  faint pinpoint 
glimmer of stars in the depths of the sky, and voices carry far, far away. . . . 
Pavel dearly loved his accordion. He would lay the melodious instrument tenderly on his 
knees and let his nimble fingers run lightly up and down the double row of keys. A sighing 
from the bass, and a cascade of rollicking melody would pour forth. . . . 
How  can  you  keep  still  when  the  sinuous  bellows  weave  in  and  out  and  the  accordion 
breathes its warm compelling harmonies. Before you know it your feet are answering its 
urgent summons. Ah, how good it is to be alive! 
This is a particularly jolly evening. A merry crowd of young folk have gathered on the pile 
of  logs  outside  Pavel's  house.  And  gayest  of  them  all  is  Galochka,  the  daughter  of  the 
stonemason  who  lives  next  door  to  Pavel.  Galochka  loves to  dance  and  sing  with  the 
lads. She has a deep velvety contralto. 
Pavel is a wee bit afraid of her. For Galochka has a sharp tongue. She sits down beside 
Pavel and throws her arms around him, laughing gaily. 
"What  a  wonder  you  are  with  that  accordion!"  she  says.  "It's  a  pity  you're  a  bit  too  young  or 
you'd make me a  fine  hubby. I adore men who play the accordion, my poor heart just melts." 
 
Pavel blushes to the roots of his hair―luckily it is too dark for anyone to see. He edges 
away from the vixen but she clings fast to him. 
"Now then, you wouldn't run away from me, would you? A fine sweetheart you are," she 
laughs. Her firm breast brushes Pavel's shoulder, and he is strangely stirred in spite of 
himself, and the loud laughter of the others breaks the accustomed stillness of the lane. 
"Move up, I haven't any room to play," says Pavel, giving her shoulder a 
slight push. This evokes another roar of laughter, jokes and banter. 
Marusya comes to Pavel's rescue. "Play something sad, Pavel, something that tugs at 
your heartstrings." 
Slowly the bellows spread out, gently Pavel's fingers caress the keys and a familiar well-
loved tune fills the air. Galochka is the first to join in, then Marusya, and the others. 
 
All the boatmen to their cottage 
 
Gathered on the morrow, 
 
O, 'tis good 
 
And O, 'tis sweet 
 
Here to sing our sorrow. . . . 
 
The vibrant young voices of the singers were carried far away into the wooded 
distances. "Pavka!" It was Artem's voice. 
Pavel compressed the bellows of his accordion and fastened 
the straps. "They're calling me. I've got to go." 
 
第 27 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
"Oh, play just a little more. What's your hurry?" Marusya tried to wheedle him into 
staying. But Pavel was adamant. 
"Can't. We'll have some music tomorrow again, but now I've got to go. Artem's calling." 
And with that he ran across the street to the little house opposite. 
There  were  two  men  in  the  room  besides  Artem:  Roman,  a  friend  of  Artem's,  and  a 
stranger. They were sitting at the table. 
"You wanted me?" Pavel asked. 
 
Artem nodded to him and turned to the stranger: 
 
"This is that brother of mine we've been talking about." 
The stranger extended a knotted hand to Pavel. 
 
"See here, Pavka," Artem said to his brother. "You told me the electrician at the power 
plant is ill. Now  what I  want you to do is to find out tomorrow  whether they want a good 
man to take his place. If they do you'll let us know." 
The stranger interrupted him. 
 
"No need to do that. I'd rather go with him and speak with the boss myself." 
 
"Of  course  they  need  someone.  Today  the  power  plant  didn't  work  simply  because 
Stankovich  was  ill.  The  boss  came  around  twice―he'd  been  looking  high  and  low  for 
somebody to take his place but couldn't find anyone. He was afraid to start the plant with 
only a stoker around. The electrician's got the typhus." 
"That settles it," the stranger said. "I'll call for you tomorrow and we'll go over there 
together." "Good." 
Pavel's glance met the calm grey eyes of the stranger who was studying him carefully. 
The  firm,  steady  scrutiny  somewhat  disconcerted  him.  The  newcomer  was  wearing  a 
grey  jacket  buttoned  from  top  to  bottom―it  was  obviously  a  tight  fit  for  the  seams 
strained on his broad, powerful back. His head and shoulders were joined by a muscular, 
ox-like neck, and his whole frame suggested the sturdy strength of an old oak. 
"Good-bye  and  good  luck,  Zhukhrai,"  Artem  said  accompanying  him  to  the  door. 
"Tomorrow you'll go along with my brother and get fixed up in the job." 
 
 
The Germans entered the town three days after the detachment left. Their coming was 
announced by a locomotive whistle at the station which had latterly been deserted. 
"The Germans are coming," the news flashed through the town. 
 
The town stirred like a disturbed anthill, for although the townsfolk had known for some 
time that the Germans were due, they had somehow not quite believed it. And now these 
terrible Germans were not only somewhere on their way, but act ually here, in town. 
The townsfolk clung to the protection of their front-garden fences and wicket gates. They 
were afraid to venture out into the streets. 
The Germans came, marching single file on both sides of the highway; they wore olive -
drab  uniforms  and  carried  their  rifles  at  the  ready.  Their  rifles  were  tipped  with  broad 
knife-like bayonets; they wore heavy steel helmets, and carried enormous packs on their 
backs. They came from the station into the town in an endless stream, came cautiously, 
prepared to repel an attack at any moment, although no one dreamed of attacking them.  
 
第 28 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
In front strode two officers, Mausers in hand, and in the centre of the road walked the interpreter, a 
sergeant-major in the Hetman's service wearing a blue Ukrainian coat and a tall fur cap. 
 
The Germans lined up on the square in the centre of the town. The drums rolled. A small crowd of 
the more  venturesome  townsfolk  gathered.  The  Hetman's  man  in  the  Ukrainian coat climbed  onto 
the porch of the chemist's shop and read aloud an order issued by the commandant, Major Korf.  
 
§ 1 
 
All  citizens  of  the  town  are  hereby  ordered  to  turn  in  any  firearms  or  other  weapons  in  their 
possession within 24 hours.  The penalty for  violation of this order is death by shooting.  
 
§ 2 
 
Martial law is declared in the town and citizens are forbidden to  appear in the streets 
after 8 p.m. Major Korf, Town Commandant. 
 
The German Kommandantur took up quarters in the building formerly used by the town 
administration  and,  after  the  revolution,  by  the  Soviet  of  Workers'  Deputies.  At  the 
entrance  a  sentry  was  posted  wearing  a  parade  helmet  with  an  imperial  eagle  of 
enormous  proportions.  In  the  backyard of  the  same  building  were  storage  premises  for 
the arms to be turned in by the population. 
All day long weapons were brought in by townsfolk scared by the threat  of shooting. The 
adults did not show themselves; the arms were delivered by youths and small boys. The 
Germans detained nobody. 
Those who did not want to come in person dumped their weapons out on the road during 
the night, and in the morning a German patrol picked them up, loaded them into an army 
cart and hauled them to the Kommandantur. 
At  one o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  when  the  time  limit  expired,  German  soldiers  began  to 
take stock of their booty: fourteen thousand rifles. That meant that six thousand h ad not 
been turned in. The dragnet searches they conducted yielded very insignificant results. 
At  dawn  the next  morning two  railway  men  in  whose  homes  concealed rifles had  been 
found were shot at the old Jewish cemetery outside the town. 
As soon as he heard of the commandant's order, Artem hurried home. Meeting Pavel in 
the yard, he took him by the shoulder and asked him quietly but firmly: 
"Did you bring any weapons home?" 
 
Pavel had not intended to say anything about the rifle, but he could not lie to his  brother 
and so he made a clean breast of it. 
They  went  into the  shed  together.  Artem took the  rifle  down  from  its  hiding  place  on the  beams, 
removed  the  bolt  and  bayonet,  and  seizing the  weapon  by  the  barrel  swung  it  with  all  his might 
against  a  fence  post.  The  butt splintered. What  remained  of  the  rifle  was  thrown  far  away  into  the 
waste lot beyond the garden. The bayonet and bolt Artem threw into the privy pit. 
 
When he was finished, Artem turned to his brother. 
 
"You're not a baby any more, Pavka, and you ought to know you can't play with guns. You must 
 
 
 
第 29 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
not bring anything into the house. This is dead serious. You might have to pay  with your 
life  for  that  sort  of  thing  nowadays.  And  don't  try  any  tricks,  because  if  you  do  bring 
something like that home and they find it I'd be the first to be shot ―they wouldn't touch a 
youngster like you. These are brutal times, understand that!" 
Pavel promised. 
 
As  the  brothers  were  crossing  the  yard  to  the  house,  a  carriage  stopped  at  the 
Leszczinskis' gate and the lawyer and his wife and two children, Nelly and Victor, got out. 
"So  the fine birds have  flown  back  to  their nest,"  Artem  muttered  angrily.  "Now  the  fun 
begins, blast them!" He went inside. 
All day long Pavel thought regretfully of the rifle. In the meantime his friend Sergei was 
hard at work in an old, abandoned shed, digging a hole in the ground next to the wall. At 
last the pit was ready. In it Sergei deposited the three brand-new rifles, carefully wrapped 
in rags: he had picked them up when the Red Guard detachment distributed arms to the 
people. He had no intention of giving them up to the Germans and had laboured hard all 
night to make sure that they were safely hidden. 
 
He filled up the hole, tramped the earth down level, and then piled a heap of refuse on 
top. Critically reviewing the results of his efforts and finding them satisfactory he took off 
his cap and wiped the sweat off his forehead. 
"Now  let  them  search,  and  even  if  they  find  it,  they'll  never  know  who  put  it  there, 
because the shed is nobody's anyway." 
A firm friendship had sprung up between Pavel and the grim-faced electrician who had 
been  working  a  full  month  now  at  the  electric  station.  Zhukhrai  showed  the  stoker's 
helper how the dynamo was built and how it was run. 
The sailor took a liking to the bright youngster. He frequently visited Artem on free days 
and listened patiently to the mother's tale of domestic woes and worries, especially when 
she  complained about  her  younger  boy's  escapades. Thoughtful  and  serious,  Zhukhrai 
had a calming, reassuring effect on Maria Yakovlevna, who would forget her troubles and 
grow more cheerful in his company. 
One day Zhukhrai stopped Pavel as he was passing between the high piles of firewood 
in the power station yard. 
"Your mother tells me you're fond of a scrap," he said, smiling. " 'He's as bad as a game -
cock,' she says." Zhukhrai chuckled approvingly. "As a matter of fact, it doesn't hurt to be 
a fighter, as long as you know whom to fight and why." 
Pavel was not sure whether Zhukhrai was joking or serious. 
 
"I don't fight for nothing," he retorted, "I always fight for what's right and fair." 
"Want me to teach you to fight properly?" Zhukhrai asked unexpectedly. 
 
"What d'you mean, properly?" Pavel looked at the other in surprise. 
"You'll see." And Pavel was given a brief introductory lecture on boxing. 
It  did  not  come easy  to  Pavel. Time  and  again  he  found  himself  rolling  on  the  ground, 
knocked  off  his  feet  by  a  blow  from  Zhukhrai's  fist,  but  he  proved  a  diligent  and 
persevering pupil, and in the end he mastered the art. 
One  warm  day  after  a  visit to  Klimka's  place Pavel,  for  want  of something  better to  do,  decided  to 
climb up to his favourite spot―the roof of a shed that stood in the corner of the garden behind the 
 
第 30 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
house.  He  crossed  the  backyard  into  the  garden,  went  over  to  the clapboard shack,  and climbed 
up  onto  its  roof.  Pushing  through  the  dense  branches  of  the cherry  trees that  hung  over  the shed, 
he made his way to the centre of the roof and lay down to bask in the sunshine. 
 
One side of the shed jutted out into the Leszczinski garden, and from the end of the roof 
the whole garden and one side of the house were visible. Poking his head over the edge, 
Pavel  could  see  part  of  the  yard  and  a  carriage  standing  ther e.  The  batman  of  the 
German Lieutenant quartered at the Leszczinskis' was brushing his master's clothes. 
Pavel had often seen the Lieutenant at the gate leading to the grounds. He was a squat, 
ruddy-faced man who wore a tiny clipped moustache, pince-nez and a cap with a shiny 
lacquered peak.  Pavel  also  knew  that  he  lived  in  the  side room,  the  window  of  which 
opened onto the garden and was visible from the shed roof. 
At  this  moment  the  Lieutenant  was  sitting  at  the  table,  writing.  Presently  he picked  up 
what he had written and went out of the room. He handed the paper to the batman and 
walked off down the garden path leading to the gate. At the summer house he paused to 
talk  to  someone  inside.  A  moment  later  Nelly  Leszczinskaya  came  out. The  Lieutenant 
took her arm and together they went out of the gate into the street. 
Pavel watched the proceedings from his vantage point. Presently a drowsiness stole over 
him  and  he  was  about  to  close  his  eyes  when  he  noticed  the  batman  entering  the 
Lieutenant's room; he hung up a uniform, opened the window into the garden and tidied 
up  the room.  Then  he  went  out,  closing  the  door  behind  him.  The  next  moment  Pavel 
saw him over by the stable where the horses were. 
Through the open window Pavel had a good view of the whole room. On the table lay a 
belt and some shining object. 
Driven by an irresistible curiosity, Pavel climbed noiselessly off the roof onto the cherry 
tree and slipped down  into the Leszczinski garden. Bent double, he bounded across the 
garden  and  peered  through the  window  into  the  room.  Before  him  on  the  table  were a 
belt with a shoulder strap and holster containing a splendid twelve -shot Mannlicher. 
Pavel  caught  his  breath.  For  a  few  seconds  he  hesitated,  but  reckless  daring  gained  the  upper 
hand and reaching into the room, he seized the holster, pulled out the new blue-steel weapon and 
sprang down to the ground. With a swift glance around, he slipped the revolver into his pocket and 
dashed  across  the  garden  to the cherry tree. With the  agility  of  a  monkey  he climbed  to  the  roof 
and  paused  to  look  behind  him.  The  batman  was  still  chatting  pleasantly  with  the  groom.  The 
garden was silent and deserted. Pavel slid down the other side and ran home. 
 
His mother was busy in the kitchen cooking dinner and paid no attention to him.  
 
He  seized  a  rag  from  behind  a  trunk  and  shoved  it  into  his  pocket,  then  slipped  out 
unnoticed, ran across the yard, scaled the fence and emerged on the road leading to the 
woods. Holding the heavy revolver to prevent it from knocking against his thigh, he ran as 
fast as he could to the abandoned ruins of a brick kiln in the woods. 
His feet seemed barely to touch the ground and the wind whistled in his ears. 
 
Everything  was  quiet  at the  old  brick  kiln.  It  was  a  depressing sight,  with  the  wooden  roof  fallen  in 
here  and there,  the  mountains  of  brick  rubble  and  the collapsed  ovens.  The  place  was  overgrown 
with  weeds;  no  one  ever  visited  it  except Pavel  and  his two  friends  who  sometimes came  here  to 
play. Pavel knew places where the stolen treasure could be safely hidden. 
 
第 31 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
He  climbed  through a  gap  in one  of the  ovens  and  looked  around  him  cautiously,  but 
there was no one in sight. Only the pines soughed softly and a slight wind stir red the dust 
on the road. There was a strong smell of resin in the air. 
Pavel placed the revolver wrapped in the rag in a corner of the oven floor and covered it 
with a small pyramid of old bricks. On the way out he filled the opening in the old oven 
with loose bricks, noted the exact location, and slowly set out for home, feeling his knees 
trembling under him. 
"What will happen now?" he thought and his heart was heavy with foreboding. 
 
To  avoid  going  home  he  went  to  the  power  station  earlier  than  usual.  He   took  the  key 
from the watchman and opened the wide doors leading into the powerhouse. And while 
he  cleaned  out  the  ashpit,  pumped  water  into  the  boiler  and  started  the fire  going,  he 
wondered what was happening at the Leszczinskis. 
It was about eleven o'clock when Zhukhrai came and called Pavel 
outside. "Why was there a search at your place today?" he asked 
in a low voice. Pavel started. 
"A search?" 
 
"I don't like the look of it," Zhukhrai continued after a brief pause. "Sure you haven't any 
idea what they were looking for?" 
Pavel  knew  very  well  what  they  had  been  looking  for,  but  he  could  not  risk  telling 
Zhukhrai about the theft of the revolver. Trembling all over he asked: 
"Have they arrested Artem?" 
 
"Nobody was arrested, but they turned everything upside down in the house." 
 
This reassured Pavel slightly, although his anxiety did not pass. For a few minutes both he and Zhukhrai 
stood there each wrapped in his own thoughts. One of the  two knew why the search had been made 
and was worried about the consequences, the other did no t and hence was on the alert. 
 
"Damn them, maybe they've got wind of me somehow," Zhukhrai thought. "Artem knows 
nothing about me, but why did they search his place? Got to be more careful." 
The two parted without a word and returned to their 
work. The Leszczinski house was in a turmoil. 
When  the  Lieutenant  had  noticed  that the  revolver  was  missing,  he  had called  in  his  batman,  who 
declared  that the  weapon  must  have  been  stolen;  whereupon  the  officer  had  lost  his  temper  and 
had  smashed  his  fist  into  the  batman's  face.  The  batman,  swaying  from  the  impact  of  the  blow, 
stood stiffly at attention, blinking and submissively awaiting further developments. 
 
The lawyer, called in for an explanation, was loudly indignant at the theft and apologised 
to the Lieutenant for having allowed such a thing to occur in his house. 
It  was  Victor  Leszczinski  who  suggested  that  the  revolver  might  have  been  stolen  by  the 
neighbours,  and  in  particular  by  that  young  ruffian  Pavel  Korchagin.  His  father  lost  no  time  in 
passing on his son's conjecture to the Lieutenant, who at once  ordered a search made.  
 
The  search  was  fruitless,  and  the  episode  of  the  missing  revolver  showed  Pavel  that 
even enterprises as risky as this could sometimes succeed. 
 
 
Chapter Three 
 
第 32 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tonya  stood  at  the  open  window  and  pensively  surveyed  the  familiar  garden  bordered  by  the 
stately  poplars  now  stirring  faintly  in  the  gentle  breez e.  She  could  hardly  believe  that  a  whole 
year  had  passed  since  she  had  been  here  where  her  childhood  years  had  been  spent.  It 
seemed that she had left home only yesterday and ret urned by this morning's train.  
 
Nothing  had  changed:  the  rows  of  raspberry  bushes  were  as  carefully  trimmed  as  ever,  and 
the  garden  paths,  lined  with  pansies,  mother's  favourite  flowers,  were  laid  out  with  the  same 
geometric  precision.  E verything  in  the  garden  was  neat  and  tidy ―evidence  of  the  pedantic 
hand of the dendrologist. The sight of these clean -swept, neatly drawn paths bored  Tonya.  
 
She picked up the novel she had been reading, opened the door leading to the veranda 
and  walked  down  the  stairs  into  the  garden;  she  pushed  open  the  little  painted  wicket 
gate and slowly headed for the pond next to the station pump house. 
She passed the bridge and came out on the tree-lined road. On her right was the pond 
fringed with willows and alders; on the left the forest began. 
She was on her way to the ponds at the old stone-quarry when the sight of a fishing rod 
swung over the water made her pause. 
Leaning over the trunk of a twisted willow, she parted the branches and saw before her a 
sun-tanned, barefoot boy with trouser legs rolled up above the knee. Next to him  was  a 
rusty can with worms. The lad was too engrossed in his occupation to notice her. 
"Do you think you can catch fish here?" 
Pavel glanced angrily over his shoulder. 
 
A girl in a  white sailor blouse  with a striped blue collar and a short light -grey skirt stood on the 
bank,  holding  on  to  the  willow  and  bending  low  over  the  water.  Short  socks  with  a  coloured 
edging clung to her shapely suntanned legs. Her chestnut hair  was gathered in a heavy braid.  
 
A  slight  tremor  shook  the  hand  holding  the  fishing  rod  and  t he  goose-feather  float 
bobbed, sending circles spreading over the smoothness of the water. 
"Look, look, a bite!" the excited voice piped behind Pavel. 
 
He now lost his composure completely and jerked at the line so hard that the hook with 
the squirming worm on the end of it fairly leapt out of the water. 
"Not  much chance  to  fish  now,  damn  it!  What  the  devil  brought  her  here,"  Pavel  thought  irritably 
and  in  order  to  cover  up  his  clumsiness  cast  the  hook  farther  out,  landing  it,  however,  exactly 
where he should not have―between two burdocks where the line could easily get caught. 
 
He  realised  what  had  happened  and  without  turning  around,  hissed  at  the  girl  sitting 
above him on the bank: 
"Can't you keep quiet? You'll scare off all the fish that 
way." From above came the mocking voice: 
"Your black looks have scared the fish away long ago. No self-respecting angler goes 
fishing in the afternoon anyway!" 
Pavel had done his best to behave politely but this was too much for him. He got up and 
pushed his cap over his eyes, as he usually did when roused. 
"You'd do better, miss, if you took yourself off," he muttered through his teeth, drawing on 
the most inoffensive part of his vocabulary. 
Tonya's eyes narrowed slightly and laughter danced in them. 
 
第 33 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
"Am I really interfering?" 
 
The teasing note had gone from her voice and given way to a friendly, conciliatory tone, 
and Pavel, who had primed himself to be really rude to this "missy" who had sprung from 
nowhere, found himself disarmed. 
"You  can  stay  and  watch,  if  you  want  to.  It's  all  the  same  to  me,"  he  said  grudgingly  and  sat 
down to  attend to the float  again. It  had got stuck in the  burdock and there was no doubt that 
the  hook  had  caught  in  the  roots.  Pavel  was  afraid  to  pull  at  it.  I f  it  caught  he  would  not  be 
able to get it loose. And the girl  would be sure to laugh. He wished she would go away.  
 
Tonya,  however,  had  settled  more  comfortably  on  the  slightly  swaying  willow  trunk  and  with 
her  book on her knees was watching the sun -tanned, dark-eyed, rough-mannered young man 
who  had  given her such an  ungracious reception and was now deliberately ignoring her.  
 
Pavel saw the girl clearly reflected in the mirror-like surface of the pond, and when she 
seemed to be absorbed in her book he cautiously pulled at the entangled line. The float 
ducked under the water and the line grew taut. 
"Caught, damn it!" flashed in his mind and at the same moment he saw out of the corner 
of his eye the laughing face of the girl looking up at him from the water. 
Just  then  two  young  men,  both  seventh-grade  Gymnasium  students,  were  coming  across  the 
bridge at the pump house. One of them was the seventeen-year-old son of engineer Sukharko, the 
chief  of  the  railway yards,  a  loutish,  fair-haired,  freckle-faced  scapegrace  whom  his  schoolmates 
had clubbed Pockmarked Shurka. He was carrying a fancy fishing rod and line and had a cigarette 
stuck in the corner of his mouth. With him was Victor Leszczinski, a tall, effeminate youth. 
 
"Now  this  girl  is  a  peach,  there's  nobody  like  her  about  here,"  Sukharko  was  saying,  winking 
significantly as he bent toward his companion. "You can take my word for it that she's chock -full of 
r-r-romance.  She's  in the  sixth  grade  and  goes  to school in  Kiev.  Now  she's come to  spend  the 
summer with her father―he's the chief forest warden here. My sister Liza knows her. I wrote her a 
letter once in a sentimental sort of vein. 'I love you madly'―you know the sort of thing―'and await 
your answer in trepidation'. Even dug up some suitable verses from  Nadson." 
 
"Well, what came of it?" Victor asked curiously. 
 
"Oh,  she  was  frightfully  stuck  up  about  it,"  Sukharko  muttered  rather  sheepishly.  "Told 
me  not  to  waste  paper  writing  letters  and  all  that.  But  that's  how  it  always  is  in  the 
beginning. I'm an old hand at this sort of thing. As a matter of fact I can't be bothered with 
all that romantic nonsense― mooning about for ages, sighing. It's much simpler to take a 
stroll of an evening down to the repairmen's barracks where for three rubles you can pick 
up  a  beauty  that'd  make  your  mouth  water.  And  no  nonsense  either.  I  used  to go  out 
there with Valka Tikhonov―do you know him? The foreman on the railway." 
 
Victor scowled in disgust. 
 
"Do you mean to tell me you go in for foul stuff like that, 
Shura?" Shura chewed at his cigarette, spat and replied 
with a sneer: "Don't pretend to be so virtuous. We know 
what you go in for." Victor interrupted him. 
"Will you introduce me to this peach of yours?" 
 
"Of course. Let's hurry or she'll give us the slip. Yesterday morning she went fishing by herself." As 
the two friends came up to Tonya, Sukharko took the cigarette out of his mouth and greeted 
 
第 34 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
her with a gallant bow. 
 
"How do you do, Mademoiselle Tumanova. Have you come to fish 
too?" "No, I'm just watching," replied Tonya. 
"You two haven't met, have you?" Sukharko hastened to put in, taking Victor by the arm. 
"This is my friend Victor Leszczinski."  
Victor, blushing, extended his hand to Tonya. 
 
"And why aren't you fishing today?" Sukharko inquired in an effort to keep up the 
conversation. "I forgot to bring my rod," Tonya replied. 
"I'll get another one right away," Sukharko said. "In the meantime you can have mine. I'll 
be back in a minute." 
He  had  kept his  promise  to  Victor  to  introduce him  to  the  girl  and  was  now  anxious  to 
leave them alone. 
"I'd  rather  not,  we  should  only be  in  the  way.  There's  somebody  fishing  here  already," 
said Tonya. "In whose way?" Sukharko asked. "Oh, you mean him?" For the first time he 
noticed Pavel who was sitting under a bush. "Well, I'll get rid of him in two shakes."  
Before Tonya could stop him he had  slipped down to where Pavel was busy with his rod 
and line. "Pull in that line of yours and clear out," Sukharko told Pavel. "Hurry up now. . ." 
he added as Pavel continued fishing calmly. 
Pavel looked up and gave Sukharko a glance that boded 
no good. "Shut up. Who do you think you are!" 
"Wha-at!"  Sukharko  exploded.  "You've  got  the  cheek  to  answer  back,  you  wretched 
tramp! Clear out of here!" He kicked violently at the can of worms  which spun around in 
the air and fell into the pond, splashing water in Tonya's face. 
"You ought to be ashamed of yourself, Sukharko!" she cried. 
 
Pavel  leapt  to  his feet.  He  knew  that  Sukharko  was  the  son  of  the  chief of  the  railway 
yards  where  Artem  worked,  and  that  if  he  hit  that  flabby,  mousy  mug  of  his  he  would 
complain to his father and Artem would get into trouble. This alone prevented him from 
settling the matter then and there. 
Sensing that Pavel  would  hit  out  at  him  in  another moment,  Sukharko  rushed  forward  and  pushed 
him in the chest with both hands. Pavel, standing at the water's edge, teetered dangerously, but by 
frantically waving his arms regained his balance and saved himself from falling in. 
 
Sukharko was two years older than Pavel and notorious as a troublemaker and bully. The 
blow in the chest made Pavel see red. 
"So,  that's  what  you  want!  Take  this!"  And  with  a  short  swing  of  his  arm  he  punched 
Sukharko's  face.  Before  the  latter  had  time  to  recover,  Pavel  seized  him  firmly  by  his 
uniform blouse, clinched him and dragged him into the water. 
Knee-deep  in the  pond,  his  polished shoes  and  trousers  soaking  wet, Sukharko struggled  with  all 
his  might to  wrench  himself  loose  from Pavel's  powerful  grip.  Having  achieved  his  purpose, Pavel 
jumped ashore. The enraged Sukharko charged after him, ready to tear him to pieces. 
 
As he spun around to face his opponent, Pavel remembered: 
 
"Rest your weight on your left foot, with your right leg tense and right knee bent. Put the 
weight of your whole body behind the punch and strike upward, at the point of the chin." 
Crack! 
 
 
 
第 35 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
Sukharko's teeth clicked as Pavel's fist struck. Squealing from the excruciating pain that 
shot  through  his  chin  and  his  tongue  which  was  caught  between  the  teeth,  Sukharko 
flailed wildly with his arms and fell back into the water with a loud splash. 
Up on the bank Tonya was doubled up with laughter. 
"Bravo, bravo!" she cried, clapping her hands. "Well done!" 
 
Seizing  his  entangled  fishing  line,  Pavel  jerked  at  it  so  hard  that  it  snapped,  and 
scrambled up the bank to the road. 
"That's Pavel Korchagin, a rowdy if there ever was one," he heard Victor say to Tonya as he went. 
 
 
 
There was trouble brewing at the station. Rumour had it that the railwaymen on the line 
were downing tools. 
The  workers  of  the  yards  at  the  next  large  station  had  started  something  big.  The 
Germans  arrested  two  engine  drivers  suspected  of  carrying  proclamations  with  them. 
And  among  the  workers  who  had  ties  with  the  countryside  there  was  serious  ferment 
because of the requisitioning and the return of landlords to their estates. 
The  lashes  of  the  Hetman's  guards  seared  the  backs  of  the  peasants.  The  partisan 
movement was developing in the gubernia; the Bolsheviks had already organised nearly 
a dozen partisan detachments. 
There  was  no  rest  for  Zhukhrai  these  days.  During  his  stay  in  the  town  he  had 
accomplished  a  great  deal.  He  had  made  the  acquaintance  of  many  railway  workers, 
attended gatherings of young folk, and built up a strong group among the mechanics at 
the railway yards and the sawmill workers. He tried to find out where Artem stood, and he 
asked him once what he thought about the Bolshevik Party and its cause. 
"I  don't  know  much  about  these  parties,  Fyodor,"  the  burly  mechanic  replied.  "But  if 
there's help needed, you can count on me." 
Fyodor was satisfied, for he knew that Artem was made of the right stuff and would stand 
by his word. As for the Party, he wasn't ready for that yet. "Never mind," he thought, "in 
times like these he'll soon learn for himself." 
Fyodor left the power station for a job at the railway yards, where it was easier for him to 
carry on his work. At the electric station he had been cut off from the railway.  
Traffic  on  the railway  was  exceedingly  heavy. The Germans  were  shipping  carloads  of 
loot by the thousand from the Ukraine to Germany: rye, wheat, cattle. . . . 
One  day  the  Hetman's  guards arrested  Ponomarenko,  the  station  telegrapher.  He  was 
taken  to  the  guardhouse  and  brutally  beaten.  It  was  he,  evidently,  who  gave  away 
Roman Sidorenko, a workmate of Artem's. 
Two  Germans  and  a  Hetman's  guard,  the  Station  Commandant 's  Assistant, came  for  Roman 
during  working  hours.  Without  saying  a  word,  the  Assistant  Commandant  walked  over  to  the 
bench  where  Roman was working and cut him across the face with  his riding crop.  
 
"Come along, you sonofabitch!" he said. "You've got some explaining to do!" With an ugly 
leer he seized hold of the mechanic's arm and wrenched it violently. "We'll teach you to 
go around agitating!" 
Artem, who  had  been working  at the  vice next to Roman, d ropped his file and came at the 
 
 
 
第 36 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
Assistant Commandant, his massive frame menacingly poised. 
 
"Keep your fists off him, you bastard!" Artem spoke hoarsely, doing his best to restrain 
his rising fury. 
The  Assistant  Commandant  fell back,  unfastening  his  holster  as he  did  so.  One  of  the 
Germans,  a  short-legged  man,  unslung  his  heavy  rifle  with  the  broad-bladed  bayonet 
from his shoulder and sharply clicked the bolt. 
"Halt!" he barked, ready to shoot at another move. 
 
The tall, brawny mechanic stood helpless before the puny soldier; he could do nothing. 
 
Both Roman and Artem were placed under arrest. Artem was released an hour later, but 
Roman was locked up in a luggage room in the basement. 
Ten  minutes  after  the  arrest  not  a  single  man  was  working.  The  railway  yard  workers 
assembled  in  the  station  park  where  they  were  joined  by  the  switchmen  and  the  men 
employed  at  the  supply  warehouses.  Feeling  ran  high  and  someone  drafted  a  written 
demand for the release of Roman and Ponomarenko. 
Indignation rose higher still when the Assistant Commandant rushed into the  park at the 
head of a group of guards brandishing a revolver and shouting: 
"Back to work, or we'll arrest every last man of you on the spot! And put some of you up 
against the wall!" 
The  infuriated  workers  replied  with  a  bellow  that  sent  him  running  for  c over  to  the  station.  In 
the  meantime,  however,  the  Station  Commandant  had  summoned  German  troops  from  the 
town and truckloads of them were  already careering down the road leading to the station.  
 
The workers dispersed and hurried home. No one, not even the  stationmaster, remained 
on the job. Zhukhrai's work was beginning to make itself felt; this  was the first time the 
workers at the station had taken mass action. 
The Germans mounted a heavy machine gun on the platform; it stood there like a pointer that has 
spotted a quarry. Next to it squatted a German corporal, his hand resting on the trigger grip. 
 
The station grew deserted. 
 
At  night  the  arrests  began.  Artem  was  among  those  taken.  Zhukhrai  escaped  by  not 
going home that night. 
All  the  arrested  men  were  herded  together  in  a  huge  freight  shed  and  given  the 
alternative of either returning to work or being court-martialled. 
Practically  all  the  railwaymen  were  on strike  all  along  the  line.  For  a  day  and  a  night  not  a  single 
train  went through,  and  one  hundred  and  twenty  kilometres  away  a  battle  was  being  fought  with a 
large partisan detachment which had cut the railway line and blown up the bridges. 
 
During  the  night  a  German  troop  train  pulled  in  but  was  held  up  because  the  engine 
driver,  his  helper  and  the  fireman  had  deserted  the  locomotive.  There  were  two  more 
trains on the station sidings waiting to leave. 
The heavy doors of the freight shed swung open and in walked the Station Commandant, 
a German lieutenant, his assistant, and a group of other Germans. 
"Korchagin,  Polentovsky,  Bruzzhak,"  the  Commandant's  Assistant  called  out.  "You  will 
make up an engine crew and take a train out at once. If you refuse, you will be shot on 
the spot. What do you say?" 
The three workers nodded sullen consent. They were escorted under guard to the locomotive while 
 
 
 
第 37 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
the  Commandant's  Assistant  went  on  to  call  out  the  names  of  the  driver,  helper  and 
fireman for the next train. 
 
 
The  locomotive  snorted  angrily,  sending  up  geysers  of  s parks.  Breathing  heavily  it  breasted 
the  gloom  ahead  as  it  pounded  along  the  track  into  the  depths  of  night.  Artem,  who  had  just 
shovelled c oal into the  firebox, kicked the  door shut, took a gulp  of  water  from the snubnosed 
teapot standing on the toolbox, and turned to Polentovsky, the old engine driver.  
 
"Well, pa, are we taking it through?" 
 
Polentovsky's eyes blinked irritably under their overhanging 
eyebrows. "You will when there's a bayonet at your back." 
"We could chuck everything and make a dash for it," suggested Bruzzhak, watching the 
German soldier sitting on the tender from the corner of his eye. 
"I think so too," muttered Artem, "if it wasn't for that bird behind our backs." 
"That's right," Bruzzhak was noncommittal as he stuck his head out of the 
window. Polentovsky moved closer to Artem. 
"We  can't  take  the  train  through,  understand?"  he  whispered.  "There's  fighting  going  on  ahead. 
Our  fellows  have  blown  up  the  track.  And  here  we  are  bringing  these  swine  there  so  they  can 
shoot them down. You know, son, even in the tsar's time I never drove an engine when there was 
a  strike  on,  and  I'm  not  going  to  do  it  now.  We'd  disgrace  ourselves  for  life  if  we  brought 
destruction  down  on  our  own kind.  The  other  engine crew  ran  away,  didn't they?  They  risked their 
lives, but they did it. We just can't take the train through. What do you think?" 
 
"You're right, pa, but what are you going to do about him?" and he indicated the soldier 
with a glance. 
The engine driver scowled. He wiped his sweating forehead with a handful of waste and 
stared  with  bloodshot  eyes  at  the pressure gauge  as  if  seeking  an  answer  there  to  the 
question tormenting him. Then he swore in fury and desperation. 
Artem drank again from the teapot. The two men were thinking of one thing, but neither 
could bring himself to break the tense silence. Artem recalled Zhukhrai's question: "Wel l, 
brother, what do you think about the Bolshevik Party and the Gommunist idea?" and his 
own reply: "I am always ready to help, you can count on me. . . ." 
"A fine way to help," he thought, "driving a punitive expedition. . . ." 
Polentovsky was now bending over the toolbox next to Artem. Hoarsely 
he said: "That fellow, we've got to do him in. Understand?" 
Artem started. Polentovsky added through clenched teeth: 
 
"There's no other way out. Got to knock him over the head and chuck the throttle and the 
levers into the firebox, cut off the steam and then run for it." 
Feeling as if a heavy weight had dropped off his shoulders Artem said: "Right!" Leaning 
toward Bruzzhak, Artem told him of their decision. 
Bruzzhak  did  not  answer  at  once.  They  all  were  taking  a  ver y  great  risk.  Each  had a 
family at home to think of. Polentovsky's was the largest: he had nine mouths to feed. But 
all three knew that they could not take the train to its destination. 
"Good, I'm with you," Bruzzhak said. "But what about him? Who's going to. . . ." He did not finish 
 
 
 
第 38 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
the sentence but his meaning was clear enough to Artem. 
 
Artem turned to Polentovsky, who was now busy with the throttle, and nodded as if to say 
that  Bruzzhak  agreed  with  them,  but  then,  tormented  by  a  question  still  unsettled,  he 
stepped closer to the old man. 
"But how?" 
 
Polentovsky looked at Artem. 
 
"You  begin,  you're  the  strongest.  We'll  conk  him  with  the  crowbar  and  it'll  be  all  over." 
The old man was violently agitated. 
Artem frowned. 
 
"I can't do it. I can't. After all, when you come to think of it, the man isn't to blame. He's 
also been forced into this at the point of the bayonet." 
Polentovsky's eyes flashed. 
 
"Not to blame, you say? Neither are we for being made to do this ]ob. But don't forget it's 
a  punitive  expedition  we're  hauling.  These  innocents  are  going  out  to  shoot  down 
partisans. Are the partisans to blame then? No, my lad, you've mighty little sense  for all 
that you're strong as an ox. . . ." 
"All  right,  all  right,"  Artem's  voice  cracked.  He  picked  up  the  crowbar, but  Polentovsky 
whispered to him: 
"I'll do it, be more certain that way. You take the shovel and climb up to pass down the 
coal  from  the  tender.  If  necessary  you  give  him  one  with  the  shovel.  I'll  pretend  to  be 
loosening  up  the  coal."  Bruzzhak  heard  what  was  said,  and  nodded.  "The  old  man's 
right," he said, and took his place at the throttle. 
The German soldier in his forage cap with a red band around it was sitting at the edge of 
the tender holding his rifle between his feet and smoking a cigar. From time to time he 
threw a glance at the engine crew going about their work in the cab. 
When Artem climbed up on top of the tender the sentry paid  little attention to him. And 
when Polentovsky, who pretended he wanted to get at the larger chunks of coal next to 
the side of the tender, signed to him to move out of the way, the German readily slipped 
down in the direction of the door leading to the cab. 
The sudden crunch of the German's skull as it caved in under the crowbar made Artem 
and Bruzzhak jump as if touched by red-hot iron. The body of the soldier rolled limply into 
the passage leading to the cab. 
The blood seeped rapidly through the grey cloth forage cap and the rifle clattered against 
the iron side of the tender. 
"That's that," Polentovsky whispered as he dropped the crowbar. "No turning back for us 
now," he added, his face twitching convulsively. 
His voice broke, then rose to a shout to repel the silence that descended heavily on the 
three  men.  "Unscrew  the  throttle,  quick!" he  shouted.  In  ten  minutes  the  job  was  done. 
The locomotive, now out of control, was slowly losing speed. 
The dark ponderous shapes of trees on the  wayside lunged into th e radius of light around the 
engine  only  to  recede  into  the  impenetrable  gloom  behind.  In  vain  the  engine's  headlights 
sought to  pierce the t hick shroud of  night  for more than  a dozen metres  ahead,  and  gradually 
its stertorous breathing slowed down as if it had spent the last of its strength.  
 
第 39 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
"Jump,  son!"  Artem  heard  Polentovsky's  voice  behind  him  and  he  let  go  of  the  handrail.  The 
moment um of the train s ent his powerful  body hurtling  forward until  with a jolt his feet met the 
earth surging up  from below. He ran for a pace or two and tumbled heavily head over heels.  
 
Two other shadows left the engine simultaneously, one from each side of the cab. 
 
Gloom had settled over the Bruzzhak house. Antonina Vasilievna, Sergei's mother, had 
eaten  her  heart  out  during  the  past  four  days.  There  had  been  no  news  from  her 
husband; all she knew was that the Germans had forced him to man an engine together 
with Korchagin and Polentovsky. And yesterday three of the Hetman's guards had come 
around and questioned her in a rough, abusive manner. 
From what they said  she vaguely gathered that something had gone wrong and, gravely 
perturbed, she threw her kerchief over her head as soon as the men left and set out to 
see Maria Yakovlevna in the hope of learning some news of her husband. 
Valya, her eldest daughter, who was tidying up the kitchen, noticed her slipping out of 
the house. "Where're you off to, Mother?" the girl asked. 
"To  the  Korchagins,"  Antonina  Vasilievna  replied,  glancing  at  her  daughter  with  eyes 
brimming with tears. "Perhaps they know something about father. If Sergei comes home 
tell him to go over to the station to see the Polentovskys." 
Valya threw her arms around her mother's shoulders. 
"Don't worry, Mum," she said as she saw her to the door. 
 
As usual, Maria Yakovlevna gave Antonina Vasilievna a heart y welcome. Each had hoped that the 
other would have some news to tell, but the hope vanished as soon as they got talking. 
 
The Korchagins' place had also been searched during the night. The soldiers had been 
looking  for  Artem,  and  had  told  Maria  Yakovlevna  on  leaving  to  report  to  the 
Kommandantur as soon as her son returned. 
The coming of the patrol had frightened Pavel's mother almost out of her wits. She had 
been home alone, for Pavel as usual was on the night shift at the power plant. 
When  Pavel returned  from  work  early  in  the  morning  and  heard from  his  mother about 
the search, he was much troubled. He feared for his brother's safety. Despite differences 
in  character  and  Artem's  seeming hardness,  the  two  brothers  were  deeply  attached  to 
one another. It was a stern, undemonstrative affection, but Pavel knew that there was no 
sacrifice he would not make for his brother's sake, 
Without stopping to rest, Pavel ran over to the station to look for Zhukhrai. He could not 
find him, and the other workers he knew could tell him nothing about the missing men. 
Engine driver Polentovsky's family too was completely in the dark; all he could  learn from 
Polentovsky's  youngest  son,  Boris,  whom  he  met  in  the  yard,  was  that their  house  too 
had been searched that night. The soldiers had been looking for his father. 
Pavel came back to his mother with no news to report. Exhausted, he threw himself o n 
the bed and dropped instantly into fitful slumber. 
 
 
Valya looked up as the knock came at the door. 
"Who's there?" she asked, unhooking the catch. 
 
The dishevelled carroty head of Klimka Marchenko appeared in the open door. He had evidently 
 
第 40 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
been running, for he was out of breath and his face was red from 
exertion. "Is your mother home?" he asked Valya. 
"No, she's gone 
out." "Where to?" 
"To the Korchagins, I think." Valya seized hold of Klimka's sleeve as the boy was about 
to dash off. 
Klimka looked up at the girl in hesitation. 
 
"I've got to see her about something," he ventured. 
 
"What is it?" Valya would not let him go. "Out with it, you red-headed bear you, and stop 
keeping me in suspense," she commanded. 
Klimka  forgot  Zhukhrai's  warnings  and  his  strict  instructions  to  deliver  the  note  into 
Antonina Vasilievna's hands, and he pulled a soiled scrap of paper out of his pocket and 
handed it to the girl. He could not refuse anything to Sergei's pretty fair -haired sister, for 
truth to tell he had a soft spot in his heart for her. He was far too timid, however, to admit 
it even to himself. The girl quickly read the slip of paper he had handed  to her. 
"Dear Tonya! Don't worry. All's well. They're safe and sound. Soon you will have more 
news. Let the others know that everything is all right so they needn't worry. Destroy this 
note. Zykhar" Valya rushed over to Klimka. 
"My  dear  little  brown  bear,  where  did  you  get  this?  Who  gave  it  to  you?"  And  s he  shook 
Klimka  so  violently  that  he  quite  lost  his  presence  of  mind  and  made  his  second  blunder 
before  he  knew  it.  "Zhukhrai  gave  it  to  me  down  at  the  station."  Then,  remembering  that  he 
should not have said it, he added: "But he told me not to give it to anybody but your mother."  
 
"That's  all  right," Valya  laughed. "I  won't  tell  anybody.  Now you  run  along like  a  good little  bear  to 
Pavel's place and you'll find mother there." And she gave the lad a light push in the back. 
 
A second later Klimka's red head disappeared through the garden gate. 
 
None  of  the  three  railwaymen  returned  home.  In  the  evening  Zhukhrai  came  to  the 
Korchagins and told Maria Yakovlevna what had happened on the train. He did his best 
to calm the fear-stricken mother, and assured her that all three were safe with Bruzzhak's 
uncle  who  lived  in  an  out-of-the-way  village;  they  could  not  come back now,  of  course, 
but the Germans were in a tight fix and the situation was likely to change any day. 
The disappearance of the three men brought their families closer together than ever. The 
rare notes that were received from them were read with rejoicing, but home seemed an 
empty and dreary place without them. 
One  day  Zhukhrai  dropped  in  to  see  Polentovsky's  wife  as  if  in passing,  and  gave  her 
some money. 
"Here's something from your husband to keep you going," he said. "Only see you d on't 
mention it to anyone." 
The old woman gratefully clasped his hand. 
 
"Thanks. We need it badly. There's nothing to give the children 
to eat." The money came from the fund left by Bulgakov. 
"Well,  now  we'll see  what  comes  next," said  Zhukhrai to  himself  as  he  walked  back  to the station. 
"Even if the strike's broken under the threat of shooting, even if the workers are back at the job, the 
fire has been kindled and it can't be put out any more. As for those three, they're stout fellows, 
 
第 41 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
true proletarians," 
 
In a little old smithy whose soot-blackened  front faced the  road in the  outskirts of the  village of 
Vorobyova  Balka,  Polentovsky  stood  before  the  glowing  forge,  his  eyes  narrowed  from  the 
glare, and turned over a red-hot piece of iron with  a pair of long -handled tongs. 
 
Artem pumped the bellows suspended from a crossbeam overhead. 
 
"A skilled  worker  won't  go  under  in  the  villages these  days―there's  as  much  work to  be  had  as 
you  might  want,"  chuckling  good-naturedly  in  his  beard  the  engine  driver  said. "A  week  or two like 
this  and  we'll  be  able  to  send  some  fatback  and  flour  home  to  the  folks.  The  peasant  always 
respects  a  smith,  son.  You'll  see,  we'll  feed  ourselves  up  like  capitalists,  ha-ha!  Zakhar's  a  bit 
different from us―he hangs on to the peasantry, has his roots in the land through that uncle of his. 
Well,  I can't say  as  I  blame  him. You  and  me,  Artem,  we've  got  neither  harrow  nor  barrow, so  to 
say, nought but a strong back and a pair of hands―what they call eternal proletarians, that's us― 
ha-ha―but old Zakhar's kind of split in two, one foot in the locomotive and the other in the village." 
He  shifted the  red-hot  metal  with  the tongs  and  continued in  a more serious  vein:  "As  for  us, son, 
things  look  bad.  If  the  Germans  aren't  smashed  pretty  soon  we'll  have  to  get  through  to 
Yekaterinoslav  or  Rostov;  otherwise  we  might  find  ourselves  nabbed  and  strung  up  between 
heaven and earth before we know it." "You're right there," Artem mumbled. "I wish I knew how our 
people are getting on out there. Are the Haidamaks leaving them alone, I wonder." 
 
"Yes, pa, we're in a mess. We'll just have to give up thinking of going home." 
 
The engine  driver pulled  the  hot  piece  of  glowing  blue  metal  from  the  forge and  with  a 
dexterous movement laid it on the anvil. 
"Lay on to it, son!" 
 
Artem seized the sledge-hammer, swung it high above his head and then brought it down 
on the anvil. A fountain of bright sparks spurted with a hiss in all directions, lighting up for 
a  moment  the  darkest  corners of  the  smithy.  Polentovsky  turned  over  the r ed-hot  slab 
under the powerful blows and the iron obediently flattened out like so much soft wax.  
Through the open doors of the smithy came the warm breath of the dark night. 
 
 
 
Down  below  lay  the  lake,  dark  and  vast. The pines  surrounding  it  on all  sides  nodded 
their lofty heads. 
"Like living things," thought Tonya looking up at them. She was lying in a grass -carpeted 
depression  on  the  granite  shore.  High  above her beyond  the  hollow  the  woods  began, 
and below, at the very foot of the bluff, was the lake. T he shadows of the cliffs pressing in 
on the lake gave the dark sheet of water a still darker fringe. 
This  old  stone  quarry  not  far  from  the  station  was  Tonya's  favourite  haunt.  Springs  had  burst 
forth  in  the  deep  abandoned  workings  and  now  three  lakes  had  formed  there.  The  sound  of 
splashing  from  where  the  shore  dropped  into  the  water  caused  Tonya  to  raise  her  head. 
Parting  the  branches  in  front  of  her,  she  looked  in  the  direction  of  the  sound.  A  supple,  sun -
tanned  body  was  swimming  away  from  the  shore  with  strong  strokes.  Tonya  caught  sight  of 
the swimmer's brown back and dark head; he snorted like a walrus, cut through the water  with 
brisk  strokes, somersaulted  and  dived,  then  turned  over  on  his  back  and  floated,  squinting  in 
the bright sun, his arms stretched out and  his body slightly bent.  
 
第 42 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Tonya let the branch fall back into place. "It's not nice to look," she smiled to herself and 
returned to her reading. 
She  was  so  engrossed  in  the  book  which  Leszczinski  had  given  her  that  she  did  not 
notice  someone  climb  over  the  granite  rocks  that  separated  the  hollow  from  the  pine 
woods; only when a pebble, inadvertently set into motion by the intruder, rolled onto the 
book did she look up with a start to see Pavel Korchagin standing before her. He too was 
taken aback by the encounter and in his confusion turned to go. 
"It must have been him I saw in the water," Tonya thought as she noticed his 
wet hair. "Did I frighten you? I didn't know you were here," 
Pavel laid his hand on the rocky ledge. He had recognised Tonya. 
 
"You aren't interfering at all. You may stay and talk with me for a while if you 
like." Pavel looked at Tonya in surprise. 
"What could we talk 
about?" Tonya smiled. 
"Why don't you sit down―here, for instance?" She pointed to a stone. "What is your 
name?" "Pavka Korchagin." 
"My name's  Tonya. So now  we've introduced 
ourselves." Pavel twisted his cap in embarrassment. 
 
"So you're called Pavka?" Tonya broke the  silence. "Why Pavka? It doesn't sound nice, 
Pavel would be ever so much better. That's what I shall call you ―Pavel. Do you come 
here often. .. ." She wanted to say "to swim", but not wishing to admit having seen him in 
the water, she said instead: "for a walk?" 
"No,  not  often.  Only  when  I've  got  time  off,"  Pavel 
replied.  "So  you  work  somewhere?"  Tonya  questioned 
him further. "At the power plant. As a stoker." 
 
"Tell me, where did you learn to fight so skilfully?" Tonya asked unexpectedly. 
"What's my fighting to you?" Pavel blurted out in spite of himself. 
 
"Now  don't  be  angry,  Korchagin,"  said  Tonya  hastily,  seeing  that  her  question  had 
annoyed him. "I'm just interested, that's all. What a punch that was! You shouldn't be so 
merciless." She burst out laughing. 
"Sorry for him, eh?" Pavel asked. 
 
"Not at all. On the contrary, Sukharko only got what he deserved. I enjoyed it immensely. 
I hear you get into scraps quite often." 
"Who says so?" Pavel pricked up his ears. 
 
"Well, Victor Leszczinski declares you're a professional 
scrapper." Pavel's features darkened. 
"Victor's a swine and a softy. He ought to be thankful he didn't get it then. I heard what he 
said about me, but I didn't want to muck up my hands." 
"Don't use such language, Pavel. It's not nice," Tonya 
interrupted him. Pavel bristled. 
"Why did I have to start talking to this ninny?" he thought to himself. "Ordering me about 
like this: first it's 'Pavka' doesn't suit her and now she's finding fault with my language." 
"What have you against Leszczinski?" Tonya asked. 
 
第 43 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
"He's  a  sissy,  a  mama's  boy  without  any  guts!  My  fingers  itch  at  the  sight  of  his  kind:  always 
trying  to  walk  all  over  you,  thinks  he  can  do  anything  he  wants  because  he's  rich.  But  I  don't 
give  a  damn  for  his  wealth.  Just  let  him  try  to  touch  me  and  he'll  get  it  good  and  proper. 
Fellows like that are only asking  for a punch in the jaw," Pavel  went on, rous ed.  
 
Tonya regretted having mentioned Leszczinski. She could see that this young man had 
old  scores  to  settle  with  the  dandified  schoolboy.  To  steer  the  conversation  into  more 
placid channels she began questioning Pavel about his family and work. 
Before he knew it, Pavel was answering the girl's questions in great detail, forgetting that 
he had wanted to go. 
"Why didn't you finish school?" Tonya 
asked. "Got thrown out." 
"Why?" Pavel 
blushed. 
 
"I put some tobacco in the priest's dough, and so they chucked me out. He  was mean, 
that priest; he'd worry the life out of you." And Pavel told her the whole story. 
Tonya  listened  with  interest.  Pavel  got  over his  initial  shyness and  was  soon  talking  to 
her  as  if  she  were  an  old  acquaintance.  Among  other  things  he  told  her  about  his 
brother's disappearance. Neither of the two noticed the hours pass as they sat there in 
the hollow engrossed in friendly conversation. At last Pavel sprang to his feet. 
"It's  time  I  was  at  work.  I  ought  to  be  firing  the  boilers  instead of  sitting here  gassing. 
Danilo  is  sure  to raise  a fuss  now."  Ill  at  ease  once  more  he  added:  "Well,  good -bye, 
miss. I've got to dash off to town now." 
Tonya jumped up, pulling on her jacket. 
"I must go too. Let's go together." 
 
"Oh no, couldn't do that. I'll have to run." 
 
"All right. I'll race you. Let's see who gets there first." 
 
Pavel gave her a disdainful look. "Race me? You haven't a chance!" 
 
"We'll  see.  Let's  get  out  of  here  first."  Pavel  jumped  over  the  ledge  of  stone,  then  extended  a 
hand  to  Tonya,  and  the  two  trotted  through  the  woods  to  the  broad,  level  clearing  leading  to 
the  station.  Tonya  stopped  in  the  middle  of  the  road.  "Now,  let's  go:  one,  two,  three,  go!  Try 
and  catch  me!"  She  was  off  like  a  whirlwind  down  the  track,  the  soles  of  her  shoes  flashing 
and the tail of her blue jacket flying in the wind. Pavel raced after her.  
 
"I'll catch up with her in two shakes," thought Pavel as he sped after the flying jacket, but 
it was only at the end of the lane quite close to the station that he overtook her. Making a 
final spurt, he caught up with her and seized her shoulders with his  strong hands. 
"Tag! You're it!" he cried gaily, panting from the exertion. 
 
"Don't!  You're  hurting  me!"  Tonya  resisted.  As  they  stood  there  panting,  their  pulses 
racing,  Tonya,  exhausted  by  the  wild  chase,  leaned  ever  so  lightly  against  Pavel  in a 
fleeting moment of sweet intimacy that he was not soon to forget. 
"Nobody has ever overtaken me before," she said as she drew away from him. 
At this they parted and with a farewell wave of his cap Pavel ran toward town. 
 
When Pavel pushed open the boiler-room door, Danilo, the stoker, was already busy 
firing the boiler. 
 
 
 
 
第 44 页 共 259 页 
 
 
"Couldn't you make it any later?" he growled. "Expect me to do your work for you?" Pavel 
patted his mate on the shoulder placatingly. "We'll have the fire going full blast in a jiffy, 
old man," he said cheerfully and applied himself to the firewood. 
Toward midnight, when Danilo was snoring lustily on the woodpile, Pavel finished oiling 
the  engine,  wiped  his  hands  on  waste,  pulled  out  the  sixty-second  instalment  of 
Giuseppe Garibaldi from a toolbox, and was soon lost in the fascinating adventures of the 
Neapolitan "Redshirts' " legendary leader. 
"She gazed at the duke with her beautiful blue eyes. . . ." 
 
"She's  also  got  blue  eyes,"  thought  Pavel.  "And  she's  different,  not  at  all  like rich  folk. 
And she can run like the devil." 
Engrossed  in  the  memory  of  his  encounter  with  Tonya  during  the  day,  Pavel  did  not  hear  the 
rising  whine  of  the  engine  which  was  now  straining  under  the  pressure  of  excess  steam;  the 
huge flywheel whirled madly and a nervous tremor ran through the concrete mounting.  
 
A glance at the pressure gauge showed Pavel that the needle was several points above 
the red warning line. 
"Damn it!" Pavel leapt to the safety valve, gave it two quick turns, and the steam ejected 
through the exhaust pipe into the river hissed hoarsely outside the boiler room. Pulling a 
lever, Pavel threw the drive belt onto the pump pulley. 
He glanced at Danilo, but the latter was fast asleep, his mouth wide open and his nose 
emitting fearful sounds. 
Half a minute later the pressure gauge needle had returned to normal.  
 
 
 
After  parting  with  Pavel,  Tonya  headed  for  home,  her  thoughts  occupied  by  her 
encounter with the dark-eyed lad; she felt happy, though she did not know why.  
"What spirit he has, what grit! And he isn't at all the ruffian I imagined him to be. At any 
rate he's nothing like all those silly schoolboys. . . ." 
Pavel  was of another mould, he came  from an environment to which  Tonya was a 
stranger. "But he can be tamed," she thought. "He'll be an interesting friend to have."  
 
As she approached home, she saw Liza Sukharko and Nelly and Victor Leszczinski in the 
garden. Victor was reading. They were obviously waiting for her. 
They exchanged greetings and she sat down on a bench. In the midst of the empty small 
talk, Victor sat down beside her and asked: 
"Have you read the novel I gave you?" 
 
"Novel?" Tonya looked up. "Oh, I. . . ." She almost told him she had forgotten the book on 
the lakeshore. 
"Did you like the love story?" Victor looked at her questioningly. 
 
Tonya was lost in thought for a moment, then, slowly tracing an intricate pattern on the 
sand of the walk with the toe of her shoe, she raised her head and looked at Victor. 
"No. I have begun a far more interesting love story." "Indeed?" Victor drawled, annoyed. 
"Who's the author?" 
Tonya looked at him with shining, smiling 
eyes. "There is no author. . . ." 
 
第 45 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
"Tonya, ask your visitors in. Tea's served," Tonya's mother called from the balcony. 
 
Taking the two girls by the arm, Tonya led the way to the house. As he followed them, 
Victor puzzled over her words, unable to guess their meaning. 
 
 
This strange new feeling that had imperceptibly taken possession of him disturbed Pavel; 
he did not understand it and his rebellious spirit was troubled. 
Tonya's  father  was  the  chief forest  warden,  which,  as far  as  Pavel  was  concerned,  put 
him in the same class as the lawyer Leszczinski. 
Pavel  had  grown  up  in  poverty  and  want,  and  he  was  hostile  to  anyone  whom   he  considered 
to  be  well  off.  A nd  so  his  feeling  for  Tonya  was  tinged  wit h  apprehension  and  misgiving; 
Tonya  was  not  one  of  his  own  crowd,  she  was  not  simple  and  easy  to  understand  like 
Galochka,  the  stonemason's  daughter,  for  instance.  With  Tonya  he  was  always  on  his  guard, 
ready  to  rebuff  any  hint  of  the  mockery  or  condescension  he  would  expect  a  beautiful  and 
cultivated girl like her to show towards a common stoker like himself.  
 
He  had  not  seen  her  for  a  whole  week  and  today  he  decided  to  go  down  to  the  lake.  He 
deliberat ely  chose  the  road  that  took  him  past  her  house  in  the  hope  of  meeting  her.  As  he 
walked slowly past the fence, he caught sight of the  familiar s ailor  blous e at t he  far end of the 
garden. He picked up a pine cone lying on the  road, aimed it at the white blouse and let fly.  
 
Tonya turned, saw him and ran over to the fence, stretching out her hand with a warm 
smile. "You've come at last," she said and there was gladness in her voice. "Where have 
you been all this time? I went down to the lake to get the book I had left there. I thought 
you might be there. Won't you come in?" 
Pavel shook his 
head. "No." 
"Why not?" Her eyebrows rose in surprise. 
 
"Your father wouldn't like it, I bet. He'd likely give you hell for letting a ragamuffin like me 
into the garden." 
"What  nonsense,  Pavel," Tonya  said  in  anger.  "Come  inside  at once.  My  father  would 
never say anything of the kind. You'll see for yourself. Now come in." 
She ran to open the gate for him and Pavel followed her uncertainly. 
 
"Do you like books?" she asked him when they were seated at a round 
garden table. "Very much," Pavel replied eagerly. 
"What book do you like best of all?" 
 
Pavel pondered the question for a few moments before replying: "Jeezeppy Garibaldi." 
"Giuseppe Garibaldi," Tonya corrected him. "So you like that book particularly?" 
 
"Yes. I've read all the sixty-eight instalments. I buy five of them every pay day. Garibaldi, 
that's a man for you!" Pavel exclaimed. "A real hero! That's what I call the real stuff. All 
those battles he had to fight and he always came out on top. And he travelled all over the 
world!  If  he  was  alive  today  I  would  join  him,  I  swear  I  would.  He  used  to  take  young 
workers into his band and they all fought together for the poor folk." 
"Would you like me to show you our library?" Tonya said and took 
his arm. "Oh no, I'm not going into the house," Pavel objected. 
 
第 46 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
"Why are you so stubborn? What is there to be afraid of?" 
 
Pavel glanced down at his bare feet which were none too clean, and scratched the back 
of his head. 
"Are you sure your mother or your father won't throw me out?" 
 
"If you don't stop saying such things I'll get really annoyed with you," Tonya flared up. 
 
"Well, Leszczinski  would never let the likes of us into his house, he always talks to us in 
the kitchen. I had to go there for something once and Nelly wouldn't even let me into the 
room―must have been afraid I'd spoil her carpets or something," Pavel said  with a grin. 
"Come on, come on," she urged him, taking him by the shoulder and giving him a friendly 
little push toward the porch. 
She led him through the dining room into a room with a huge oak bookcase. And when 
she  opened  the  doors  Pavel  beheld  hundreds  of  books  standing  in neat rows.  He  had 
never seen such wealth in his life. 
"Now  we'll find an interesting book for you, and you must promise to come regularly for 
more. Will you?" 
Pavel nodded happily. 
"I love books," he said. 
 
They spent several pleasant hours together that day. She introduced him to her mother. 
It was not such a terrible ordeal after all. In fact he liked Tonya's mother. 
Tonya took Pavel to her own room and showed him her own books. 
 
On the dressing table stood a small mirror. Tonya led Pavel up to it and said with a little 
laugh: "Why do you let your hair grow  wild like that? Don't you ever cut it or comb it?"  
 
"I  just  shave  it  clean  off  when  it  grows  too  long.  What  else  should  I  do  with  it?"  Pavel 
said, embarrassed. 
Tonya laughed, and  picking up a comb from the dressing table she ran it quickly a few 
times through his unruly locks. 
"There, that's better," she said as she surveyed her handiwork. "Hair ought to be neatly 
cut, you shouldn't go around looking like an oaf." 
She  glanced  critically  at  his  faded  brown  shirt  and  his  shabby  trousers  but  made  no 
further comment. 
Pavel noticed the glance and felt ashamed of his clothes. 
 
When they said good-bye, Tonya invited him to come again. She made him promise to 
come in two days' time and go fishing with her. 
Pavel  left  the  house  by the  simple  expedient  of  jumping  out of  the  window;  he  did  not 
care to go through the other rooms and meet Tonya's mother again. 
With Artem gone, things grew hard for the Korchagins. Pavel's wages did not suffice. 
 
Maria Yakovlevna suggested to Pavel that she go out to work again, especially since the 
Leszczinskis happened to be in need of a cook. But Pavel was against  it. 
"No,  mother, I'll find some extra  work to do. They need men at the sawmill to stack the 
timber. I'll put in a half a day there and that'll give us enough to live on. You mustn't go to 
work, or Artem will be angry with me for not being able to get along  without that." 
His mother tried to insist, but Pavel was adamant. 
 
The next day Pavel was already working at the sawmill stacking up the freshly sawn boards to dry. 
 
 
 
第 47 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
There  he  met  several  lads  he  knew,  Misha  Levc hukov,  an  old  schoolmate  of  his,  and  Vanya 
Kuleshov.  Misha  and  he  teamed  together  and  working  at  piece  rates  they  earned  quite  well. 
Pavel spent his days at the sawmill and in the evenings went to his job at the power  plant.  
 
On the evening of the tenth day Pa vel brought his earnings to his mother. As he 
handed her the money, he fidgeted uneasily, blushed and said finally: 
 
"You know what, mother, buy me a sateen shirt, a blue one―like the one I had last year, 
remember? It'll take about half the money, but don't worry, I'll earn some more. This shirt 
of mine is pretty shabby," he added, as if apologising far his request. 
"Why,  of  course  I'll  buy  it  for  you,"  said  his  mother,  "I'll  get  the  material  today,  Pavlusha,  and 
tomorrow I'll sew it. You really do need a new shirt." And she gazed tenderly at her son.  
 
 
Pavel  paused  at  the  entrance  to  the  barbershop  and  fingering  the  ruble  in  his  pocket 
turned into the doorway. 
The  barber,  a  smart-looking  young  man,  noticed  him  entering  and  signed  toward  the 
empty chair with his head. 
"Next, please." 
 
As  he  settled  into  the  deep,  soft  chair,  Pavel  saw  in  the  mirror before  him  a  fluster ed, 
confused face. 
"Clip it close?" the barber asked. 
 
"Yes, that is, no―well,  what  I  want is a haircut―how do you call it?"  Pavel floundered, 
making a despairing gesture with his hand. 
"I understand," the barber smiled. 
 
A  quarter  of  an  hour  later  P avel  emerged,  perspiring  and  ex hausted  by  the  ordeal,  but  with 
his  hair  neatly  trimmed  and  combed.  The  barber  had  work ed  hard  at  the  unruly  mop,  but 
water and the comb had won out in the end and the bristling tufts now lay neatl y in place. 
 
Out in the street Pavel heaved a sigh of relief and pulled his cap down over 
his eyes. "I wonder what mother'll say when she sees me?" he thought. 
 
 
Tonya was vexed when Pavel did not keep his promise to go fishing with her. 
 
"That stoker boy  isn't very considerate," she thought with annoyance, but when several 
more days passed and Pavel failed to appear she began to long for his company. 
One day as she was about to go out for a walk, her mother looked into her room 
and said: "A visitor to see you, Tonya. May he come in?" 
Pavel appeared in the doorway, changed so much that Tonya barely recognised  him at first.  
 
He  was  wearing  a  brand-new  blue  sateen  shirt  and  dark  trousers.  His  boots  had  been 
polished  until  they  shone,  and,  as  Tonya  noted  at  once,  his  bristly  mop  had  been 
trimmed. The grimy young stoker was transformed. 
Tonya was about to express her surprise, but checked herself in time  for she did not want 
to embarrass the lad, who was uncomfortable enough as it was. So she pretended not to 
have noticed the striking change in his appearance and began scolding him instead. 
"Why didn't you come  fishing? You should be ashamed  of yourself!  Is that how you keep your 
 
 
 
第 48 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
promises?" 
 
"I've been working at the sawmill these days and just couldn't get away." 
 
He  could  not  tell  her  that  he  had  been  working  the  last  few  days  to  the  point  of 
exhaustion in order to buy himself the shirt and trousers. 
Tonya, however, guessed the truth herself and her annoyance with Pavel vanished. 
 
"Let's  go  for  a  walk  down  to  the pond,"  she  suggested, and they  went  out  through  the 
garden onto the road. 
Before  long  Pavel  was  telling  Tonya  about  the  revolver  he  had  stolen  from  the 
Lieutenant, sharing his big secret with her as with a friend, and promising her that some 
day very soon they would go deep into the woods to do some shooting. 
"But see that you don't give me away," Pavel said 
abruptly. "I shall never give you away," Tonya vowed. 
 
 
Chapter Four 
 
A fierce and merciless class struggle gripped the Ukraine. More and more people took to 
arms and each clash brought forth new fighters. 
Gone were the days of peace and tranquillity for the respectable citizen. 
 
The  little  tumbledown  houses  shook  in  the  storm  blasts  of  gun  salvos,  and  the  res pectable 
citizen huddled against the walls of his cellar  or took cover in  his backyard trench.  
 
An avalanche of Petlyura bands of all shades and hues overran the gubernia, led by little 
chieftains and big ones, all manner of Golubs, Archangels, Angels and Gordiuses and a 
host of other bandits. Ex-officers of the tsarist army, Right and Left Ukrainian Socialist -
Revolutionaries―any  desperado  who  could  muster  a  band  of  cutthroats,  declared 
himself Ataman, and some raised the yellow-and-blue Petlyura flag and established their 
authority over whatever area was within the scope of their strength and opportunities. 
 
Out  of  these  heterogeneous  bands  reinforced  by  kulaks and  the  Galician regiments  of 
Ataman  Konovalets'  siege  corps,  "Chief  Ataman"  Petlyura  formed  his  regiments  and 
divisions. And when Red partisan detachments struck at this Socialist -Revolutionary and 
kulak rabble the very earth trembled under the pounding of hundreds and thousands of 
hoofs and the rumble of the wheels of machine-gun carts and gun carriages. 
In April of that turbulent 1919, the respectable citizen, dazed and terrified, would open his 
shutters  of  a  morning  and,  peering  out  with  sleep-heavy  eyes,  greet  his  next-door 
neighbour with the anxious question: 
"Avtonom Petrovich, do you happen to know who's in power today?" 
 
And Avtonom Petrovich would hitch up his trousers and cast a frightened look around. 
 
"Can't say,  Afanas Kirillovich. Somebody  did  enter the  town  during the  night. Who it  was  we'll  find 
out  soon  enough;  if  they  start  robbing  the  Jews,  we'll  know  they're  Petlyura  men,  and  if  they're 
some of the 'comrades', we'll be able to tell at once by the way they talk. I'm keeping an eye open 
myself  so's  to  know  what  portrait  to  hang  up.  Wouldn't  care  to  get  into  trouble  like  Gerasim 
Leontievich  next  door.  You  see,  he  didn't  look  out  properly  and  had  just  gone  and  hung  up  a 
picture of Lenin when three men rushed in―Petlyura men as it turned out. They took one 
 
第 49 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
look at the picture and jumped on him―a good twenty strokes they gave him. 'We'll skin 
you alive, you Communist sonofabitch,' they shouted. And no matter how hard he tried to 
explain and how loud he yelled, nothing helped." 
Noting groups of armed men coming down the street the respectable citi zen closed his 
windows and went into hiding. Better to be on the safe side. . . . 
As  for  the  workers,  they  regarded  the  yellow-and-blue  flags  of  the  Petlyura  thugs  with 
suppressed hatred. They were powerless in the face of this wave of Ukrainian bourgeois 
chauvinism, and their spirits rose only when passing Red units, fighting fiercely against 
the yellow-and-blues that were bearing down on them from all sides,  wedged their way 
into the town. For a day or two the flag so dear to the worker's heart would fly  over the 
town hall, but then the unit would move on again and the engulfing gloom return. 
 
Now  the  town  was  in  the  hands  of  Colonel  Golub,  the  "hope  and  pride"  of  the 
Transdnieper Division. 
His band of two thousand cutthroats had made a triumphal entry int o the town the day before. 
Pan  the  Colonel  had  ridden  at  the  head  of  the  column  on  a  splendid  black  stallion.  In  spite  of 
the  warm  April  sun  he  wore  a  Caucasian  burk a,  a  lambskin  Zaporozhye  Cossack  cap  with  a 
raspberry-red  crown,  a  cherk esska,  and  the  weapons  that  went  with  the  outfit:  dagger  and 
sabre  with chased-silver hilts. Between his teeth he held  a pipe with a curved stem. 
 
A  handsome  fellow,  Pan  the  Colonel  Golub,  with  his  black  eyebrows  and  pallid 
complexion tinged slightly green from incessant carousals! 
Before  the  revolution  Pan  the  Colonel  had  been  an  agronomist  at the  beet  plantations  of  a sugar 
refinery,  but that  was  a  dull  life  not to  be compared  with  the  position  of  an Ataman,  and  so  on  the 
crest of the murky waves that swept the land the agronomist emerged as Pan the Colonel Golub. 
 
In the only theatre in town  a gala  affair  was got up in  honour of the new arrivals.  The "flower" 
of  the  Petlyura  intelligentsia  was  there  in  full  force:  Ukrainian  teachers,  the  priest's  two 
daughters,  the  beautiful  Anya  and  her  younger  sister  Dina,  some  ladies  of  lesser  standing, 
former  members  of  the  household  of  Count  Potocki,  a  few  memb ers  of  the  middle  class, 
remnants of the Ukrainian Socialist-Revolutionaries, who called themselves "free Cossacks". 
 
The  theatre  was  packed.  Spur-clicking  officers  who  might  have  been  copied  from  old 
paintings  of  Zaporozhye  Cossacks  pranced  around  the  teachers,  the  priest's  daughters 
and  the  burghers'  ladies  who  were  decked  out  in  Ukrainian  national  costumes 
ornamented with bright-coloured embroidered flowers and multihued beads and ribbons. 
The regimental band blared. On the stage feverish preparations we re under way for the 
performance of Nazar Stodolya scheduled for the evening. 
There  was  no  electricity,  however,  and  the  fact  was  reported in  due course to Pan the  Colonel  at 
headquarters by his adjutant, Sublieutenant Polyantsev, who had now Ukrainianised his name and 
rank  and styled  himself  Khorunzhy  Palyanytsya.  The  Colonel,  who  intended  to  grace  the  evening 
with his presence, heard out Palyanytsya and said casually but imperiously: 
 
"See that there is light. Find an electrician and start the electric po wer plant if you have to 
break your neck doing it." 
"Very good, Pan Colonel." 
 
Khorunzhy  Palyanytsya  found  electricians  without  breaking  his  neck.  Within  two  hours 
Pavel and two other workers were brought to the power plant by armed guards. 
 
第 50 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
"If you don't have the lights on by seven I'll have all three of you strung up," Palyanytsya 
told them curtly, pointing to an iron beam overhead. 
This blunt exposition of the situation had its effect and the lights came on at the  appointed 
time. The evening was in full swing when Pan the  Colonel arrived with his lady, the buxom 
yellow-haired daught er of the barkeeper in whose house he was staying. Her father being a 
man of means, she had  been educated  at the Gymnasium in the gubernia town.  
 
When the two had taken the seats reserved for them as guests of honour in the front row, 
Pan the Colonel gave the signal and the curtain rose so suddenly that the  audience had 
a glimpse of the stage director's back as he hurried off the stage. 
During  the  play  the  officers  and  their  ladies  whiled  away  the  time  at  the  refreshment  counter, 
filling  up on raw homebrew supplied by the ubiquitous Palyanytsya and delicacies acquired by 
requisitioning. By the end of the performance they were all well under the weather.  
 
After the final curtain Palyanytsya leaped on the stage 
 
"Ladies  and gentlemen,  the  dancing  is about  to  begin,"  he  announced  with  a  theatrical 
sweep of his arm. 
There  was  general  applause  and  the  audience  emptied  out  into  the  yard  to  give  the  Petlyura 
soldiers posted to guard the guests a chance to carry out the chairs and clear the dance  floor.  
 
A half an hour later the theatre was the scene of wild revelry. 
 
The Petlyura officers, flinging all restraint to the winds, furiously danced the hopak with 
local belles flushed from the heat, and the pounding of heavy boots rocked the walls of 
the ramshackle theatre building. 
In the meantime a troop of armed horsemen was approaching the town from the direction 
of the flour mill. A Petlyura sentry-post stationed at the town limits sprang in alarm to their 
machine  guns  and  there  was  a  clicking  of  breech-blocks  in  the  night.  Through  the 
darkness came the sharp challenge: 
"Halt! Who goes there?" 
 
Two dark figures loomed out of the darkness. One of them stepped forward and roared 
out in a hoarse bass: 
"Ataman Pavlyuk with his detachment. Who are you? Golub's 
men?" "That's right," replied an officer who had also stepped 
forward. "Where can I billet my men?" Pavlyuk asked. 
"I'll  phone headquarters at once,"  replied  the  officer  and  disappeared  into a  tiny  hut  on 
the roadside. 
A minute later he came out and began issuing orders: 
 
"Clear the machine gun off the road, men! Let the Pan Ataman pass." 
 
Pavlyuk reined in his horse in front of the brightly illuminated theatre where a great many 
people were strolling out in the open air. 
"Some  fun  going  on  here  by  the  look  of  it,"  he  said,  turning  to the  captain  riding  beside  him. "Let's 
dismount, Gukmach, and join the merrymaking. We'll pick ourselves a couple of women―I see the 
place is thick with them. Hey, Stalezhko," he shouted. "You billet the lads with the townsfolk. We'll 
stop here. Escort, follow me." And he heaved himself heavily from his staggering mount. 
 
At the entrance to the theatre Pavlyuk was stopped by two armed 
Petlyura men. "Tickets?" 
 
 
 
第 51 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
Pavlyuk gave them a derisive look and pushed one of them aside with his shoulder. The 
dozen men with him followed suit. Their horses were outside, tethered to the fence. 
The newcomers  were  noticed  at once.  Particularly  conspicuous  was  the  huge frame  of 
Pavlyuk; he was wearing an officer's coat of good cloth, blue breeches of the kind worn in 
the guards, and a shaggy fur cap. A Mauser hung from a strap slung over his shoulder 
and a hand grenade stuck out of his pocket. 
"Who's  that?"  the  whisper  passed  through  the  crowd  around  the  dance  floor  where 
Golub's second in command was executing a wild dance. 
His partner was the  priest's elder  daughter,  ^  who was whirling round  with such  abandon that 
her skirts flared out high enough to give the delighted men a  good  view of her silk petticoats. 
 
Forcing his way through the crowd, Pavlyuk went right out onto the dance floor. 
 
Pavlyuk stared with glazed eyes at the priest's daughter's legs, passed his tongue over 
his  dry  lips,  then  strode  across  the  dance  floor to  the  orchestra  platform,  stopped, and 
flicked his plaited riding whip. 
"Come on, give us the hopak!" 
 
The conductor paid no attention to the order. 
 
A sharp movement of Pavlyuk's hand and the whip cut down the conductor's back. The 
latter jumped as if stung and the music broke off, plunging the hall into silence. 
"What insolence!" The barkeeper's daughter was furious. "You can't let him do that," she 
cried, clutching at the elbow of Golub seated at her side. 
Golub heaved himself to his feet, kicked aside a chair, took three paces forward and stopped face 
to  face  with  Pavlyuk.  He  had  recognised  the  newcomer  at  once,  and  he  had scores  to  settle  with 
this  rival  claimant  for  local  power.  Only  a  week  ago  Pavlyuk  had  played  the  most  scurvy  trick  on 
Pan  the  Colonel.  At  the  height  of  a  battle  with  a  Red  regiment  which  had  mauled  Golub's 
detachment  on  more  than  one  occasion,  Pavlyuk,  instead  of  striking  at  the  Bolsheviks  from  the 
rear, had broken into a town, overcome the resistance of the small pickets the Reds had left there, 
and,  leaving  a  screening  force to  protect  himself,  sacked  the  place  in  the most thorough  fashion. 
Of  course,  being  a  true  Petlyura  man,  he  saw  to  it  that  the  Jewish  population  were  the  chief 
victims. In the meantime the Reds had smashed up Golub's right flank and moved on. 
 
And  now  this  arrogant  cavalry  Captain  had  burst  in  here  and  had  the  audacity  to  strike  Pan 
the Colonel's own bandmaster  under  his  very eyes. No, this was too much. Golub knew that if 
he did not put the conceited upstart in his place his prestige in the regiment would be gone.  
 
For several seconds the two men stood there in silence glaring at each other. 
 
Gripping the hilt of his sabre with one hand and feeling for the revolver in his pocket with 
the other, Golub rapped out: 
"How dare you lay your hands on my men, you scoundrel!" 
Pavlyuk's hand crept toward the grip of the Mauser. 
 
"Easy there, Pan Golub, easy, or you may trip yourself up. Don't step on my pet corn. I'm 
liable to lose my temper." 
This was more than Golub could stand. 
 
"Throw them out and give them twenty-five lashes each!" he shouted. 
The officers fell upon Pavlyuk and his men like a pack of hounds. 
 
A shot crashed out with a report that sounded as if an electric bulb had been smashed against the 
 
 
 
第 52 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
floor, and the struggling men swirled and spun down the hall like two packs of fighting dogs. In the 
wild melee men slashed at each other with sabres and dug their fingers into hair and throats, while 
the women, squealing with terror like stuck pigs, scattered away from the contestants. 
 
In a few  minutes Pavlyuk and his followers, disarmed and beaten, were dragged out of 
the hall, and thrown out into the street. 
Pavlyuk  lost  his  fur  hat  in  the  scrimmage,  his  face  was  bruised  and  his  weapons  were 
gone and now he was beside himself with rage. He and his men leapt into the saddle and 
galloped down the street. 
The  evening  was  broken  up.  No  one  felt  inclined  to  make  merry  after  what  had  happened.  The 
women refused to dance and insisted on being taken home, but Golub would not hear of it. 
 
"Post sentries," he ordered. "Nobody is to leave the 
hall." Palyanytsya hastened to carry out the orders. 
"The dancing will continue until morning, ladies and gentlemen," Golub replied stubbornly 
to the protests that showered upon him. "I shall dance the first waltz myself." 
The orchestra struck up again  but there was to be no more  frolicking that night nevertheless.  
 
The  Colonel  had  not  circled  the  dance  floor  once  with  the  priest's  daughter  when  the 
sentries ran into the hall shouting: 
"Pavlyuk's surrounding the theatre!" 
 
At that moment a  window facing the street crashed in and the snub -nosed muzzle of a 
machine gun was pushed in through the shattered window frame. It  moved stupidly this 
way and that, as if picking out the figures scattering wildly away from it toward the centre 
of the hall as from the devil himself. 
Palyanytsya fired at the thousand-candle-power lamp in the ceiling which exploded like a 
bomb, sending a shower of splintered glass down on everyone in the hall.  
The hall was plunged in darkness. Someone shouted in the yard: 
"Everybody get outside!" A stream of violent abuse followed. 
 
The wild, hysterical screams of the women, the furious commands issued by Golub as he 
dashed about the hall trying to rally his officers who had completely lost their heads, the 
firing and shouting out in the yard all merged into an indescribable pandemonium. In the 
panic nobody noticed Palyanytsya slip through the back door into a deserted side street 
and run for all he was worth to Golub's headquarters. 
A half an hour later a full-dress battle was raging in the town. The silence of the night was 
shattered  by  the  incessant  cracking  of  rifle  fire  interspersed   with  the  rattle  of  machine 
guns. Completely stupefied, the townsfolk leapt up from warm beds and pressed against 
window  panes.  At  last  the  firing abated,  and  only  one  machine  gun  somewhere  in  the 
outskirts kept up a desultory shooting like the barking of a dog. 
The fighting died down as the glimmer of dawn appeared on the horizon. . . . 
 
 
 
Rumours  that  a  pogrom  was  brewing  crept  through  the  town,  finally  reaching  the  tiny, 
low-roofed Jewish cottages with crooked windows that somehow managed to cling to the 
top of the filthy ravine leading down to the river. In these incredibly overcrowded hovels 
called houses lived the Jewish poor. 
 
第 53 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
The  compositors  and  other  workers  at the  printshop  where Sergei Bruzzhak  had  been  working  for 
more than a year were Jews. Strong bonds of friendship had sprung up between them and Sergei. 
Like  a  closely  knit  family,  they  stood  solid  against  their  employer,   the  smug,  well-fed  Mr. 
Blumstein. An  incessant struggle  went  on  between the  proprietor  and  the  printers.  Blumstein  did 
his best to grab more and pay his workers less. The printers had gone on strike several times and 
the  printshop  had  stood  idle  for  two  or  three  weeks  running.  There  were  fourteen  of them.  Sergei, 
the youngest, spent twelve hours a day turning the wheel of a hand press. 
 
Today Sergei noticed an ominous uneasiness among the workers. For the past several 
troubled  months  the  shop  had  had  little  to  do  apart  from  printing  occasional 
proclamations issued by the "Chief Ataman". 
A consumptive compositor named Mendel called Sergei into a corner. 
 
"Do you know there's a pogrom coming?" he said, looking at the boy with his 
sad eyes. Sergei looked up in surprise. 
"No, I hadn't the slightest idea." 
 
Mendel  laid  a  withered,  yellow  hand  on  Sergei's  shoulder  and  spoke  in  a  confiding,  paternal 
tone. "There's going to be  a pogrom―that 's a fact. The  Jews are going to be beaten  up. What 
I want to know is this―will you help your comrades in their misfortune or not?"  
 
"Of course I will, if I only can. What can I do, Mendel?" 
The compositors were now listening to the conversation. 
 
"You're a good boy, Seryozha, and we trust you. After all, your father's a worker like us. 
Now  you  run  home  and  ask  him  whether  he  would  agree  to  hide  some  old  men  and 
women  at  his place,  and  then  we'll  decide  who  they  will  be.  Ask  your people  if  there's 
anyone  else  they  know  willing  to  do  the  same.  The  Russians  will  be  safe  from  these 
bandits for the time being. Run along, Seryozha, there's no time to waste." 
"You can count on me, Mendel. I'll see Pavka and Klimka right away―their folks are sure 
to take in somebody." 
"Just  a  minute,"  Mendel  anxiously  halted  Sergei  who  was  about  to  leave.  "Who  are 
Pavka and Klimka? Do you know them well?"  
Sergei nodded confidently. 
 
"Of course. They're my pals. Pavka Korchagin's brother is a mechanic." 
 
"Ah,  Korchagin,"  Mendel  was  reassured.  "I  know  him  ―used  to  live  in  the  same  house.  Yes, 
you can see the Korchagins. Go, Seryozha, and bring back an answer as soon as you can."  
 
Sergei shot out into the street. 
 
 
 
The  pogrom  began  on  the  third  day  after  the  pitched  battle  between  the  Pavlyuk 
detachment and Golub's men. 
Pavlyuk, routed and driven out of Shepetovka, had cleared out of the neighbourhood and 
seized a small town nearby. The night encounter in Shepetovka had cost him a score of 
men. Golub had lost as many. 
The dead were hastily carted off to the cemetery and buried the same day without much ceremony, for 
there was nothing to boast about in the whole affair. The two Atamans had flown at each other's throats 
like two stray curs, and to make a fuss over the funeral would have been unseemly. 
 
第 54 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
True,  Palyanytsya  had  wanted  to  make  a  big  thing  of  it  and  declare  Pavlyuk  a  Red 
bandit, but the Socialist-Revolutionaries headed by the priest Vasili objected. 
The  skirmish  evoked  some  grumbling  in  Golub's  regiment,  especially  among  his  bodyguard 
which  had  sustained  the  heaviest  losses,  and  to  put  an  end  to  the  dissatisfaction  and  bolster 
up spirits, Palyanytsya proposed staging a pogrom―t o provide "a little diversion"  for the men, 
was  the  cynical  way  he  broached  the  subject  to  Golub.  He  argued  that  this  was  essential  in 
view  of  the  grumbling  in  the  unit.  And  although  the  Colonel  was  loth  to  disturb  t he  peace  in 
the town  on the eve  of his marriage to the  bark eeper's daughter, he finally gave in.  
 
Pan  the  Colonel  had  another  reason  for  objecting  to the  operation:  his  recent  admission  into  the 
S.R.  Party.  His  enemies  might  stir  up  trouble  again  by  branding  him  a  pogrom -monger,  and 
without  doubt  would  slander  him  to  the  "Chief  Ataman".  So  far,  however,  Golub  was  not  greatly 
dependent  on  the  "Chief", since  he  foraged  for  himself. Besides, the "Chief" knew  very  well  what 
riffraff  he  had  serving  under  him,  and  himself  had  time  and  again  demanded  money  for  the 
Directory's needs from the so-called requisitions; as for the reputation of a pogrom-monger, Golub 
already had quite a record in that respect. There was very little that he could add to it now. 
 
The pogrom began early in the morning. 
 
The  town  was  still  wrapped  in the grey  mist  of dawn.  The  narrow  streets  which  wound 
themselves  like  strips  of  wet  linen  around  the  haphazardly  built  blocks  of  the  Jewish 
quarter were deserted and dead. The windows were heavily curtained and shuttered. 
Outwardly  the  quarter  appeared  to  be  immersed  in  sound  early-morning  slumber,  but 
inside the houses there was no sleep. Entire families, fully dressed, huddled together in 
one room, preparing themselves for the impending disaster. Only children, too young to 
realise what was happening, slept peacefully in their mothers' arms. 
Salomyga,  the  chief  of  Golub's  bodyguard,  a  dark  fellow  wit h  the  swarthy  complexion  of  a 
Gypsy  and  a  livid  sabre  scar  across  his  cheek,  worked  hard  that  morning  to  wake  up  Golub's  
aide.  It  was  a  painful  awakening  for  Palyanytsya―he  could  not  shake  himself  loose  from  the 
nightmare  that  had  beset  him  all  night;  the  grimacing,  hunchbacked  devil  was  still  clawing  at  
his throat. At last he raised his splitting head and saw Salomyga  bending over him.  
 
"Get  up,  you  souse,"  Salomyga  was  shaking  him  by  the  shoulder.  "It's  high  time  to  get 
down to business!" 
Palyanytsya,  now  wide  awake,  sat  up  and,  his  face  grimacing  with  pain,  spat  out  the 
bitter saliva that filled his mouth. 
"What business?" he stared blankly at Salomyga. 
 
"To rip up the sheenies, of course! You haven't forgotten, I hope." 
 
It  all  came  back  to  Palyanytsya.  True enough,  he  had  forgotten  about  it.  The drinking 
bout  at  the  farm  where  Pan  the  Colonel  had  retired  with  his  fiancée  and  a  handful  of 
boon companions had been a heavy one. 
Golub  had  found  it  convenient  to  leave  town  for  the  duration  of  the  pogrom,  for 
afterwards  he  could  put  it  down  to  a  misunderstanding  in  his  absence,  and  in  the 
meantime Palyanytsya would have ample opportunity to make a thorough job of it. Yes, 
Palyanytsya was an expert when it came to providing "diversion"! 
Palyanytsya poured a pail of water over his head and, thus sobered, was soon striding 
about headquarters issuing orders. 
 
第 55 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
The bodyguard hundred was already in the saddle. To avoid possible complications, the farsighted 
Palyanytsya  ordered  pickets  posted  between  the town  proper  and  the  workers'  quarters  and  the 
station. A machine  gun  was mounted  in the  Leszczinski  garden  facing  the  road  in  order  to  meet 
the workers with a squall of lead if they took it into their heads to interfere. 
 
When all the preparations were complete, the aide and Salomyga leapt into the saddle. 
 
"Wait, I nearly forgot," Palyanytsya said when they had already set out. "Get two carts to 
bring  back  Golub's  wedding  present.  Ha-ha-ha!  The  first  spoils  as  always  to  the 
commander, and the first girl for his aide―and that's me. Got it, you blockhead?" 
The last remark was addressed to Salomyga, who glared back at him with 
jaundiced eyes. "There'll be enough for everybody." 
They  spurred  their  horses  down  the  highway,  the  aide  and  Salomyga  leading  the 
disorderly mob of mounted men. 
The mist had lifted when Palyanytsya reined in his horse in front of a two -storey house 
with a rusty sign reading "Fuchs, Draper". 
His thin-shanked grey mare nervously stamped her hoof against the cobblestones. 
"Well, with God's help we'll begin here," Palyanytsya said as he jumped to the ground. 
 
"All  right,  men,  dismount,"  he  turned  to  the  men  crowding  around  him.  "The  show's 
beginning. Now I don't want any heads bashed, there'll be a time for that. As for the girls, 
if you can manage it, hold out until evening." 
One of the men bared his strong teeth and protested: 
 
"Now then, Pan Khorunzhy, what if it's by mutual consent?" 
 
There  was  loud guffawing  all  around.  Palyanytsya  eyed  the  man  who  had  spoken  with 
admiring approbation. 
"Well, that's another story―if they're willing, go right ahead, nobody can prohibit that." 
Palyanytsya went up to the closed door of the store and kicked at it hard, but the sturdy 
oaken planks did not so much as tremble. 
This was clearly the wrong place to begin. Palyanytsya rounded the corner of the house 
and headed for the  door leading to Fuchs' place, supporting his sabre with his hand as 
he went. Salomyga followed. 
The people inside the house had heard the clatter of hoofs on the pavement outside and 
when  the  sound  ceased  in  front  of  the  shop  and the  men's  voices  carried  through  the 
walls their hearts seemed to stop beating and their bodies stiffened with fright. 
The wealthy Fuchs had left town the day before with his wife and daughters, leaving his 
servant  Riva,  a  gentle  timid  girl  of  nineteen,  to  look  after his  property.  Since  she  was 
afraid to remain alone in the house, he had suggested that she bring her old father and 
mother to stay with her until his return. 
When Riva had tried meekly to protest, the cunning merchant had assured her that in all 
probability  there  would  be  no  pogrom  at  all,  for  what  could  they  expect  to  get  from 
beggars? And he promised to give her a piece of stuff for a dress when he returned. 
 
Now  the  three  waited  in  fear  and  trembling,  hoping  against  hope  that  the  men  would  ride  past; 
perhaps they had been mistaken, perhaps it had only seemed that the horses had stopped in front 
of their house. But their hopes were dashed by the dull reverberation of a blow at the shop door. 
 
第 56 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Old, silvery-haired Peisakh stood in the doorway, his blue eyes wide open like a frightened child's, 
and  he  whispered  a  prayer  to  Almighty  Jehovah  with  all the  passion  of  the  fanatical  believer.  He 
prayed  to  God  to  protect  this  house  from  misfortune  and  for  a  while  the  old  woman  standing 
beside him could not hear the approaching footsteps for the mumble of his prayer. 
 
Riva had fled to the farthest room where she hid behind the big oaken sideboard. 
A shattering blow at the door sent a convulsive tremor through the two old people. 
 
"Open the door!" Another blow, still more violent than the first, descended on the door, 
followed by furious curses. 
But those within, numb with fright, could not lift a hand to unfasten the door. 
 
Outside the rifle  butts pounded until the bolts gave way and the splint ering door cras hed 
open. Armed men poured into the house; they searched every corner. A blow  from a rifle butt 
smashed in the  door leading into the shop and the front door bolts were drawn  from within.  
 
The looting began. 
 
When the carts had been piled high with cloth, shoes and other loot, Salomyga set out with 
the booty to Golub's quarters. When he returned he heard  a shriek of terror issuing  from the 
house. Palyanytsya, leaving his me n to sack the shop, had  walked into the proprietor's 
apartment and found the old folks and the girl standing there. Casting his green lynx -like eyes 
over them he snapped at the old couple: "Get out of here!" Neither mother nor father stirred.  
 
Palyanytsya took a step forward and slowly drew his sabre. 
 
"Mama!" the girl gave a heart-rending scream. It was this that Salomyga 
heard. Palyanytsya turned to his men  who  had  run in  at the cry. 
 
"Throw them out!" he barked, pointing at the two old people. When this  had been done, 
he  told  Salomyga  who  had  now  appeared.  "You  watch  here at  the door  while  I  have a 
chat with the wench." 
The girl screamed again. Old Peisakh made a rush for the door leading into the room, but 
a violent blow in the chest sent him reeling back against the wall, gasping with pain. Like 
a she-wolf fighting for her young, Toiba, the old mother, always so quiet and submissive, 
now flung herself at Salomyga. 
"Let me .in! What are you doing to my girl?" She was struggling to get to the door, and try 
as he might Salomyga could not break her convulsive grip on his coat. 
Peisakh, now recovered from the shock and pain, came to Toiba's 
assistance. "Let us pass! Let us pass! Oh my daughter!" 
Between them the old couple managed to push Salomyga away from the door. Enraged, 
he jerked his revolver from under his belt and brought the steel grip down hard upon the 
old man's grey head. Peisakh crumpled to the floor. 
Inside the room Riva was screaming. 
 
Toiba was dragged out of the house frantic with grief, and the street echoed to her wild 
shrieks and entreaties for help. 
Inside the house everything was quiet. 
 
Palyanytsya  came  out  of  the  room.  Without  looking  at  Salomyga,  whose  hand  was 
already on the door handle, he said: 
"No use going in―she choked when I tried to shut her up with a pillow." As he stepped 
over Peisakh's body he put his foot into a dark sticky mess. 
 
第 57 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
"Bad beginning," he muttered as he went outside. 
 
The others followed him without a word, leaving behind bloody footprints on the floor and 
the stairs. 
Pillage  was  in  full  swing  in  the  town.  Brief  savage  clashes  flared  up  between  brigands  over  the 
division  of  the  spoils,  and  here  and  there  sabres  flashed.  And  almost  everywhere  fists  flailed 
without restraint. From the beer saloon twenty-five gallon kegs were rolled out onto the street. 
 
Then the looters began to break into Jewish homes.  
 
There  was  no  resistance.  They  went  through  the  rooms,  hastily turned  every  corner  upside  down, 
and  went  away  laden  with  booty,  leaving  behind  disordered  heaps  of  clothing  and  the  fluttering 
contents  of  ripped  feather  beds  and  pillows.  The  first  day  took  a  toll  of  only  two  victims:  Riva  and 
her father; but the oncoming night carried with it the unavoidable menace of death. 
 
By evening the motley crew of scavengers was roaring drunk. The crazed Petlyura men 
were waiting for the night. 
Darkness released them from the last restraint. It is easier to destroy a man in the pit of 
night; even the jackal prefers the hours of gloom. 
Few  would  ever  forget  these two terrible  nights  and  three  days.  How many crushed  and  mangled 
lives  they  left  behind,  how  many  youthful  heads  turned  grey  in  these  bloody  hours,  how  many 
bitter tears were shed! It is hard to tell whether those were the more fortunate who were left to live 
with  souls  desolated,  in  the  agony  of  shame  and  humiliation,  gnawed  by  indescribable  grief  for 
loved  ones  who  would  never  return.  In  the  narrow  alleys  lay  the  lacerated,  tormented,  broken 
bodies of young girls with arms thrown back in convulsive gestures of agony. 
 
Only  at  the  very  riverfront,  in  the house  where  Naum  the  blacksmith  lived,  the  jackals 
who fell upon his young wife Sarah got a fierce rebuff. The smith, a man of powerful build 
in the prime of his twenty-four years and with the steel muscles of one who wielded the 
sledge-hammer for a living, did not yield his mate. 
In a  brief  but furious clash in the tiny cottage the skulls of two Petlyura men  were crushed like 
rotten melons. With the terrible fury of des pair, the smith  fought fiercely for two lives, and  for  a 
long  time  the  dry  crackle  of  rifle  fire  could  be  heard  from  the  river  bank  where  the  brigands 
now  rushed,  sensing  the  danger.  With  only  one  round  of  ammunition  left,  the  smith  mercifully 
shot his wife, and  himself rushed out to his death, bayonet in hand.  He  was met by a squall of 
lead and his powerful body crashed to the ground outside his front door.  
 
Prosperous  peasants  from  nearby  villages  drove  into  town  in  carts  drawn  by  well-fed  horses, 
loaded their waggon boxes with whatever met their fancy, and, escorted  by sons and relatives 
serving in Golub's force, hurried home so as to make another trip or t wo to town and back. 
 
Seryozha  Bruzzhak,  who  together  with  his  father  had  hidden  half  of  his  printshop 
comrades in the cellar and attic, was crossing the garden on his way home when he saw 
a man in a long, patched coat running up the road, violently swinging his arms.  
It  was  an  old  Jew,  and  behind  the  bareheaded,  panting  man  whose  features  were  paralysed 
with  mortal  terror,  galloped  a  Petlyura  man  on  a  grey  horse.  The  distance  bet ween  them 
dwindled  fast  and  the  mounted  man  leaned  forward  in  the  saddle  to  cut  down  his  victim. 
Hearing  the  hoofbeats  behind  him,  the  old  man  threw  up  his  hands  as  if  to  ward  off  the  blow. 
At that moment Seryozha leapt onto the road  and threw himself in front of the horse.  
 
"Stop, you dog of a bandit!" 
 
 
 
第 58 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
The  rider,  making  no  effort  to  stay  the descending  sabre,  brought  the  flat of  the  blade 
down on the fair young head. 
 
 
Chapter Five 
 
The  Red  forces  were  pressing  down  hard  on  "Chief  Ataman"  Petlyura's  units,  and 
Golub's  regiment  was  called  to  the  front.  Only  a  small  rearguard  detachment  and  the 
Commandant's detail were left in the town. 
The people stirred. The Jewish section of the population took advantage of the temporary 
lull to bury their dead, and life in the tiny huts of the Jewish quarter returned to normal. 
On quiet evenings an indistinct rumble was carried from the distance; somewhere not too 
far off the fighting was in progress. 
At the station, railwaymen were leaving their jobs to roam the countryside in search 
of work. The Gymnasium was closed. 
Martial law was declared in town. 
 
 
 
It was a black, ugly night, one of those nights when the eyes, strain as they might, cannot 
pierce the gloom, and a man gropes about blindly expecting at any moment to fall into a 
ditch and break his neck. 
The respectable citizen knows that at a time like this it is safer to sit at home in the dark; 
he will not light a lamp if he can help it, for light might attract unwelcome guests. Better 
the  dark,  much  safer.  There  are  of  course  those  who  are  always  restless ―let  them 
venture  abroad  if  they  wish,  that's  none  of  the  respectable  citizen's  business.  But  he 
himself will not risk going out―not for anything. 
It was one of those nights, yet there was a man abroad. 
 
Making his way to the Korchagin house, he knocked cautiously at the window. There was 
no answer and he knocked again, louder and more insistently. 
Pavel dreamed that a queer creature, anything but human, was  aiming a machine gun at 
him; he wanted to flee, but there was nowhere to go, and the machine gun had broken 
into a terrifying chatter. 
He woke up to find the window rattling. Someone was knocking. 
 
Pavel jumped out of bed and went to the window to see who it was, but all he could make 
out was a vague dark shape. 
He was all alone in the house. His mother had gone on a visit to his eldest sister, whose 
husband  was  a  mechanic  at  the  sugar  refinery.  And  Artem  was  blacksmithing  in  a 
neighbouring village, wielding the sledge for his keep. 
Yet it could only be Artem. 
 
Pavel decided to open the window. "Who's 
there?" he said into the darkness. 
 
There was a movement outside the window and a muffled bass 
replied: "It's me, Zhukhrai." 
 
第 59 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Two hands were laid on the windowsill and Fyodor's head came up until it was level with 
Pavel's face. 
"I've come to spend the night with you. Any objections, mate?" Zhukhrai 
whispered. "Of course not," Pavel replied warmly. "You know you're always 
welcome. Climb in." Fyodor squeezed his great bulk through the opening. 
He  closed  the  window  but  did  not  move  away  from  the  window  at  once.  He  stood 
listening  intently,  and  when  the  moon  slipped  out  from  behind  a  cloud  and  the  road 
became visible he scanned it carefully. Then he turned to Pavel. 
"We won't wake up your mother, will we?"  
 
Pavel told him there was nobody home besides himself. The sailor felt more at ease and 
spoke in a louder voice. 
"Those cutthroats are after my hide in earnest now, matey.  They've  got it in  for me after  what 
happened  over  at  the  station.  If  our  fellows  would  stick  together  a  bit  more  we  could  have 
given  the  greycoats  a  fine  reception  during  the  pogrom.  But  folks,  as you  see,  aren't  ready  to 
plunge  into  the  fire  yet,  and  so  nothing  came  of  it.  Now  they 're  looking  for  me,  twice  they 've 
had  the  dragnet  out  ―today  I  got  away  by  the  skin  of  my  teeth.  I  was  going  home,  you  see, 
by  the  back  way  of  course,  and  had  just  stopped  at  the  shed  to  look  around,  when  I  s aw  a 
bayonet sticking out from  behind  a tree trunk. I nat urally cast off  and headed  for your place.  If 
you've got nothing against it I'll drop anchor here  for  a few days. All right, mate? Good." 
 
Zhukhrai, still breathing heavily, began pulling off his mud-splashed boots. 
 
Pavel was glad he had come. The power plant had not been working latterly and Pavel 
felt lonely in the empty house. 
They  went  to  bed.  Pavel  fell  asleep  at  once,  but  Fyodor  lay  awake  for  a  long  time 
smoking.  Presently  he  rose  and,  tiptoeing  on bare  feet  to  the  window,  stared out  for a 
long time into the street. Finally, overcome by fatigue, he lay down and fell asleep,  but his 
hand remained on the butt of the heavy Colt which he had tucked under the pillow.  
 
 
Zhukhrai's  unexpected  arrival  that  night  and  the  eight  days  spent  in  his  company 
influenced the whole course of Pavel's life. From the sailor Pavel learned much that was 
new to him, and that stirred him to the depths of his being. 
Driven into hiding, Zhukhrai made use of his enforced idleness to pass on to the eager 
Pavel all his passionate fury and burning hatred for the Ukrainian Nationalists who were 
throttling the area. Zhukhrai spoke in language that was vivid, lucid and simple. He had 
no doubts, his path lay clearly before him, and Pavel came to see that all this tangle of 
political parties with high-sounding names―Socialist-Revolutionaries, Social-Democrats, 
Polish Socialists―was a collection of vicious enemies of the workers, and that the only 
revolutionary party which steadfastly fought against the rich was the Bolshevik Party. 
 
Formerly Pavel had been hopelessly confused about all this. 
 
And so this staunch,  stout-hearted  Baltic sailor  weathered  by sea squalls,  a confirmed Bolshevik, 
who had been a member of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party (Bolsheviks) since 1915, 
taught Pavel the harsh truths of life, and the young stoker listened spellbound. 
 
"I was something like you, matey, when I was young," he said. "Just didn't know what to do with 
 
 
 
第 60 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
my  energy,  a  restless  youngster  always  ready  to  kick  over  the  traces.  I  was  brought  up  in 
poverty.  And  at  times  the  very  sight  of  those  pampered,  well -fed  sons  of  the  town  gentry 
made  me  see  red.  Often  enough  I  beat  them  up  badly,  but  all  I  got  out  of  it  was  a  proper 
trouncing-  from my father. You can't change things by carrying  on a lone  fight. You, Pavlusha, 
have all the makings of  a good  fighter in the  workingman's cause, only you're still very young - 
and  you  don't  know  much  about  the  class  struggle.  I'll  put  you  on  the  right  road,  mate y, 
because  I  know  you'll  make  good.  I  can't  stand  the  quiet,  smug-  sort.  The  whole  world's  afire 
now.  The  slaves  have  risen  and  the  old  life's  got  to  be  scuttled.  But to  do  that  we  need  stout 
fellows, not sissies, who'll go crawling int o cracks like so many cockroaches when the fighting 
starts, but men with guts who'll hit out without mercy." 
 
His fist crashed down on the table. 
 
He got up, frowning1, and paced up and down the room with hands thrust deep in his 
pockets. His inactivity depressed him. He bitterly regretted having- stayed behind in this 
town, and believing any further stay to be pointless, was firmly resolved to make his way 
through the front to meet the Red units. 
A group of nine Party members would remain in town to carry on the work. 
 
"They'll manage without me. I can't sit around any longer doing - nothing1. I've wasted ten 
months as it is," Zhukhrai thought irritably. 
"What exactly are you, Fyodor?" Pavel had asked him once. 
 
Zhukhrai got up and shoved his hands into his pockets. He did not  grasp the meaning of 
the question at first. 
"Don't you know?" 
 
"I think you're a Bolshevik or a Communist," Pavel said in a low voice. 
 
Zhukhrai burst out laughing, slapping his massive chest in its tight -fitting striped jersey. 
 
"Right enough, matey! It's as much a fact as that Bolshevik and Communist are one and the same 
thing." Suddenly he grew serious. "But now that you've grasped that much, remember it's not to be 
mentioned to anyone or anywhere, if you don't want them to draw and quarter me. Understand?" 
 
"I understand," Pavel replied firmly. Voices  were heard from the yard and the door was 
pushed  open  without  a  preliminary  knock.  Zhukhrai's  hand  slipped  into  his  pock et  but 
emerged  again  when  Sergei  Bruzzhak,  thin  and  pale,  with  a  bandage  on  his  head, 
entered the room, followed by Valya and Klimka. 
"Hullo, old man," Sergei shook Pavel's hand and smiled. "Decided to pay you a visit, all 
three  of  us.  Valya  wouldn't  let  me  go  out alone,  and  Klimka  is  afraid  to  let  her  go  by 
herself. He may be a redhead but he knows what he's about." 
Valya  playfully  clapped  her  hand  over  his  mouth.  "Chatterbox,"  she  laughed.  "He  won't 
give Klimka any peace today." 
Klimka  showed  his  white  teeth  in  a  good-natured  grin.  "What  can  you  do  with  a  sick 
fellow? Brain pan's damaged, as you can see." They all laughed. 
Sergei,  who  had  not yet  recovered  from  the  effects  of the sabre  blow, settled  on  Pavel's  bed  and 
soon the young people were engaged in a lively conversation. As he told Zhukhrai the story of his 
encounter with the Petlyura bandit, Sergei, usually so gay and cheerful, was quiet and depressed. 
 
Zhukhrai knew the three young people, for he had visited the Bruzzhaks on several occasions. He 
liked these youngsters; they had not yet found their place in the vortex of the struggle, but the 
 
第 61 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
aspirations of their class were clearly expressed in them. He listened with interest to the 
young people's account of how they had helped to shelter Jewish families in their homes 
to  save  them  from  the  pogrom.  That  evening  he  told  the  young  folk  much  about  the 
Bolsheviks, about Lenin, helping them to understand what was happening. 
It was quite late when Pavel's guests left. Zhukhrai went out every evening and returned 
late at night; before leaving town he had to discuss with the comrades who would remain 
in town the work they would have to do. 
This particular night Zhukhrai did not come back, When Pavel woke up in the morning he 
saw at a glance that the sailor's bed had not been slept in. 
Seized  by some  vague  premonition, Pavel  dressed  hurriedly  and  left  the  house.  Locking  the  door 
and putting the key in the usual place, he went to Klimka's house hoping that the latter would have 
some  news  of  Fyodor. Klimka's  mother,  a stocky  woman  with  a  broad  face  pitted  with  pockmarks, 
was doing the wash. To Pavel's question whether she knew where Fyodor was she replied curtly: 
 
"You'd think I'd nothing else to do but keep an eye on your Fyodor. It's all through him―
the devil take him― that Zozulikha's house was turned upside down. What've you got to 
do with him? A queer lot, if you ask me. Klimka and you and the rest of them. . . ." She 
turned back in anger to her washtub. 
Klimka's mother was an ill-tempered woman, with a biting tongue. . . . 
 
From Klimka's house Pavel went to Sergei's where he voiced his fears. 
 
"Why should you be so worried?" said Valya. "Perhaps he stayed over at some friend's 
place." But her words lacked confidence. 
Pavel  was  too  restless  to  stop  at  the  Bruzzhaks  for  long,  and  although  they  tried  to 
persuade him to stay for dinner he took his leave. 
He headed back home in hopes of finding Zhukhrai there. 
 
The door was locked. Pavel stood outside for a while with a heavy heart; he couldn't bear 
the thought of going into the deserted house. 
For  a  few  minutes  he  stood  in  the  yard  deep  in  thought,  then,  moved  by  an  impulse,  he  went 
into the shed. He climbed up under the roof and brushing  away the cobwebs reached into his 
secret hiding place and brought out the heavy Mannlicher wrapped in rags.  
 
He left the shed and went down to the station, strangely elated by the feel of the revolver 
weighing down his pocket. 
But  there  was  no  news  of  Zhukhrai  at  the  station.  On  the  way  back  his step  slowed  down  as 
he  drew  alongside  the  now  familiar  garden  of  the  forest  warden.  With  a  faint  flicker  of  hope, 
he  looked  up  at  the  windows  of  the  house,  but  it  was  as  lifeless  as  the  garden.  When  he  had 
passed the garden he turned back to glance  at the paths now covered  with a rusty crop of last 
year's  leaves.  The  place  seemed  desolat e  and  neglected ―no  industrious  hand  had  laid  a 
visible imprint here―and the dead stillness of the big old house made Pavel feel  sadder still. 
 
His last quarrel with Tonya had been the most serious they had had. It had all happened 
quite unexpectedly, nearly a month ago. 
As  he  slowly  walked  back  to  town,  his  hands  shoved  deep  into  his  pockets,  Pavel 
recalled how it had come about. 
They had met quite by chance on the road and Tonya had invited him over to her place. 
 
 
 
第 62 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
"Dad and mother are going to a birthday party at the Bolshanskys, and I'll be all alone. 
Why  don't  you  come  over,  Pavlusha?  I  have  a  very  interesting  book  we  could  read ―
Leonid Andreyev's Sashka Zhigulyov. I've already finished it, but I'd like to reread it  with 
you. I'm sure it would be a nice evening. Will you come?" 
Her big, wide-open eyes looked at him expectantly from under the white bonnet she wore 
over her thick chestnut hair. 
"I'll come." 
 
At that they parted. 
 
Pavel  Hurried  to  his  machines,  and  the  very  thought  that  he  had  a  whole  evening  with 
Tonya to look forward to, made the flames in the firebox seem to burn more brightly and 
the burning logs to crackle more merrily than usual. 
When he knocked at the wide front door that evening it was a slightly disconcerted Tonya 
who answered. 
"I have visitors tonight. I didn't expect them, Pavlusha. But you must come in," 
she said. Pavel wanted to go and turned to the door. 
"Come in," she took him by the arm. "It'll do them good to know you." And putting her arm 
around his waist, she led him through the dining room into her own room. 
As they entered she turned to the young people seated there 
and smiled. "I want you to meet my friend Pavel Korchagin." 
There  were  three  people  sitting  around  the  small  table  in  the  middle  of  the  room:  Liza 
Sukharko,  a  pretty,  dark-complexioned  Gymnasium  student  with  a  pouting  little  mouth 
and a fetching coiffure, a lanky youth in a well-tailored black jacket, his sleek hair shining 
with hair-oil, and a vacant look in his grey eyes, and between them, in a foppish school 
jacket, Victor Leszczinski. It was him Pavel saw first when Tonya opened the door. 
Leszczinski too recognised Korchagin at once and his fine arched eyebrows lifted in surprise.  
 
For a few seconds Pavel stood silent at the door, eyeing Victor with frank hostility. Tonya 
hastened to break the awkward silence by asking Pavel to come in and turning to Liza to 
introduce her. 
Liza Sukharko, who was inspecting the new arrival with interest, rose from her chair. 
 
Pavel, however, turned sharply and strode out through the semidark dining room to the front door. 
He was already on the porch when Tonya overtook him and seized him by the shoulders. 
 
"Why are you running off? I especially wanted them to meet you." 
Pavel removed her hands from his shoulders and replied sharply: 
 
"I'm not going to be put on a show before that dummy. I don't belong to that crowd ―you 
may like them, but I hate them. If I'd known they were your friends I'd never have come." 
Tonya, suppressing her rising anger, interrupted him: 
 
"What right have you to speak to me like that? I don't ask you who your friends are and 
who comes to see you." 
"I don't care whom you see, only I'm not coming here any more," Pavel shot back at her 
as he went down the front steps. He ran to the garden gate. 
He had not seen Tonya since then. During the pogrom, when he and the electrician had 
hidden several Jewish families at the power station, he had forgotten about the quarrel, 
and today he wanted to see her again. 
 
第 63 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Zhukhrai's  disappearance  and  the  knowledge  that  there  was  no  one  at  home  depressed 
Pavel.  The  grey  stretch  of  road  swung  to  the  right  ahead  of  him.  The  spring  mud  had  not  yet 
dried,  and  the  road  was  pitted  with  holes  filled  with  brown  mire.  Beyond  a  house  whose 
shabby, peeling  facade jutted out onto the edge of the pavement  the road  forked off.  
 
 
Victor  Leszczinski  was  saying  good-bye  to  Liza  at  the  street  intersection  opposite  a 
wrecked stand with a splintered door and an inverted "Mineral Water" sign. 
He held her hand in his as he spoke, pleadingly gazing into 
her eyes. "You will come? You won't deceive me?" 
"Of course I shall come. You must wait for me," Liza replied coquettishly. 
And as she left him she smiled at him with promise in her misty hazel eyes. 
 
A  few  yards  farther  down  the  street  Liza  saw  two  men  emerge  from  behind  a  corner  onto  the 
roadway. The  first was a sturdy, broadchested man in  worker's clothes, his unbuttoned jacket 
revealing  a striped jers ey underneath, a black cap pulled down over his  forehead, and brown, 
low-t opped boots on his feet. There was a blue-black bruise under his eye.  
 
The man walked with a firm, slightly rolling gait. 
 
Three  paces  behind,  his  bayonet  almost  touching  the  man's  back,  came  a  Petlyura 
soldier  in  a  grey  coat  and  two  cartridge  pouches  at  his  belt.  From  under  his  shaggy 
sheepskin  cap  two  small,  wary  eyes  watched  the  back  of  his  captive's  head.  Yellow, 
tobacco-stained moustaches bristled on either side of his face. 
Liza slackened her pace slightly and crossed over to the other side o f the road. Just then 
Pavel emerged onto the highway behind her. 
As he passed the old house and turned to the right at the bend in the road, he too saw 
the two men coming toward him.  
Pavel stopped with a start and stood as if rooted to the ground. The arre sted man was 
Zhukhrai. "So that's why he didn't come back!" 
Zhukhrai was coming nearer and nearer. Pavel's heart pounded as if it would burst. His 
thoughts raced  madly  as  his  mind  sought  vainly  to  grasp  the  situation. There  was  not 
enough time for deliberation. Only one thing was clear: Zhukhrai was caught. 
Stunned and bewildered Pavel watched the two approach. What was to be done? 
 
At the last moment he remembered the revolver in his pocket. As soon as they passed 
him  he  would  shoot  the  man  with  the  rifle  in  the back,  and  Fyodor  would  be  free.  With 
that decision reached on the spur of the moment his mind cleared. After all, it was only 
yesterday that Fyodor had told him: "For that we need stout fellows. . . ." 
Pavel  glanced  quickly behind  him.  The  street  leading  to town  was  deserted;  there  was 
not  a  soul  in  sight.  Ahead  a  woman  in  a  light  coat  was  hurrying across  the  road.  She 
would not interfere. The second street branching off at the intersection he could not  see. 
Only far away on the road to the station some people were visible. 
Pavel moved over to the edge of the road. Zhukhrai saw him when they were only a few 
paces apart. 
Zhukhrai  looked  at  him  from  the  corner  of  his  eye  and  his  thick  eyebrows  quivered.  The 
unexpectedness of the encounter made him slow down his step. The bayonet pricked him in the 
 
第 64 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
back. 
 
"Lively, there, or you'll get a taste of this butt!" cried the escort in  a screechy falsetto. 
 
Zhukhrai quickened his pace. He wanted to speak to Pavel, but refrained; he only waved 
his hand as if in greeting. 
Fearing to attract the attention of the yellow-moustached soldier, Pavel turned aside as 
Zhukhrai passed, as if completely indifferent to what was going on. 
But in his head drilled the anxious thought: "What if I miss him and the bullet hits 
Zhukhrai. . . ." But there was no time to think. 
When the yellow-moustached soldier came abreast of him, Pavel made a sudden lunge 
at him and seizing hold of the rifle struck the barrel down. 
The bayonet hit the pavement with a grating sound. 
 
The attack caught the soldier unawares, and for a moment he was dumbfounded. Then 
he  violently  jerked  the  rifle  toward  himself.  Throwing  the  full  weight  of  his  body  on  it, 
Pavel  managed  to  retain  his  grip.  A  shot  crashed  out,  the  bullet  striking  a  stone  and 
ricocheting with a whine into the ditch. 
Hearing  the  shot,  Zhukhrai  leapt  aside  and  spun  around.  The  soldier  was  wrenching  at  the  rifle 
fiercely in  an  effort  to  tear  it  out  of  Pavel's  hands. Pavel's  arms  were  painfully twisted,  but  he  did 
not  release  his  hold.  Then  with  a sharp  lunge the  enraged  Petlyura man threw Pavel  down  on  the 
ground,  but still  he  could  not  wrench the  rifle  loose.  Pavel  went  down,  dragging  the  soldier  down 
with him. Nothing could have made him relinquish the rifle at this crucial moment. 
 
In two strides Zhukhrai was alongside the struggling pair. His iron fist swung through the 
air  and  descended  on  the  soldier's  head;  a  second  later  the  Petlyura  man  had  been 
wrenched off Pavel and, sagging under the impact of two smashing blows in the face, his 
limp body collapsed into the wayside ditch. 
The same strong hands that had delivered those blows lifted Pavel from the ground and 
set him on his feet. 
 
 
Victor, who by this time had gone a hundred paces or so from the intersection, walked on 
whistling  La  donna  e  mobile,  his  spirits  soaring  after  his  meeting  with  Liza  and  her 
promise to see him at the abandoned factory the next day. 
Among the Gymnasium yout hs Liza Sukharko  had the reputation  of  being rather daring in  her 
love  affairs.  That  arrogant  braggart  S emyon  Zalivano v  had  once  declared  that  Liza  had 
surrendered  to  him,  and  although  Victor  did  not  quite  believe  Semyon,  Liza  nevertheless 
intrigued him.  Tomorrow he  would find out whether Zalivanov had spoken the truth or not.  
 
"If  she  comes  I  shan't  be  bashful.  After  all,  she  lets  you kiss  her.  And  if  Semyon  is  telling  the 
truth. . . ." Here  his thoughts were interrupted  as he stepped aside to let two Petlyura soldiers 
pass.  One  of  them  was  astride  a  dock-tailed  horse,  swinging  a  canvas  bucket―evidently  on 
his way to  water the  animal. The  other, in a short jacket and loose  blue t rousers, was  walking 
alongside, resting his hand on the  rider's knee and telling him  a funny story.  
 
Victor  let  them  pass  and  was  about  to  continue  on  his  way  when  a  rifle  shot  on  the  highway 
made  him  stop  in  his  tracks.  He  turned  and  saw  the  mounted  man  spurring  his  horse  toward 
the sound, while the other soldier ran behind, supporting his sabre with  his hand.  
 
第 65 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Victor  ran  after  them. When  he  had  almost  reached the  highway  another shot  rang  out,  and  from 
around  the  corner  came  the  horseman  galloping  madly.  He  urged  on the  horse  with  his  heels  and 
the canvas bucket, and leaping to the ground at the first gateway shouted to the men in the yard: 
 
"To arms! They've killed one of our men!" 
 
A minute later several men dashed out of the yard, clicking the bolts of their rifles as 
they ran. Victor was arrested. 
Several people were now gathered on the road, among them Victor and Liza, who had 
been detained as a witness. 
Liza had been rooted to the spot from fright, and hence had a good view of Zhukhrai and 
Korchagin  when  they  ran  past;  much to  her  surprise  she realised  that  the  lad  who  had 
attacked the Petlyura soldier was the one Tonya had wanted to introduce to her. 
The  two  had  just  vaulted  over  the  fence  into  a  garden  when  the  horseman  came  galloping 
down  the  street.  Noticing  Zhukhrai  running  with  a  rifle  in  his   hands  and  the  stunned  soldier 
struggling to get back on his  feet, the rider spurred his horse towards the fence.  
 
Zhukhrai,  however,  turned  around,  raised  the  rifle  and  fired  at  the  pursuer,  who  swung 
around and beat a hasty retreat. 
The soldier, barely able to speak through his torn lips, was now telling what had happened.  
 
"You  dunderhead,  what  do  you  mean  by  letting  a  prisoner  get  away  from  under  your 
nose? Now you're in for twenty-five strokes for sure." 
"Smart,  aren't  you?"  the  soldier  snapped  back  angrily.  "From  under  my  nose,  eh?  How 
was I to know the other bastard would jump on me like a madman?" 
Liza too  was questioned. She told the same story as the escort, but she omitted to say 
that  she  knew  the  assailant.  Nevertheless  they  were  all  taken  to  the   Commandant's 
office, and were not released until evening. 
The Commandant himself offered to see Liza home, but she refused. His breath smelled 
of vodka and the offer boded no good. 
Victor escorted Liza home. 
 
It  was  quite  a  distance  to the  station and as  they  walked  along  arm  in  arm  Victor  was 
grateful for the incident. 
"You  haven't  any  idea  who  it  was  that  freed  the  prisoner?"  Liza  asked  as  they  were 
approaching her home. 
"No, I haven't. How can I?"  
 
"Do you remember the evening Tonya wanted to introduce a certain young 
man to us?" Victor halted. 
"Pavel Korchagin?" he asked, surprised. 
 
"Yes, I think his name was Korchagin. Remember how he walked out in such a funny 
way? Well, it was he." 
Victor stood dumbfounded. 
"Are you sure?" he asked Liza. 
 
"Yes. I remember his face 
perfectly." "Why didn't you tell the 
Commandant?" Liza was indignant. 
"Do you think I would do anything so vile?" 
 
 
 
第 66 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
"Vile? You call it vile to tell who attacked the escort?" 
 
"And  do  you  consider  it  honourable?  You  seem  to  have  forgotten  what  they've  done. 
Have you any idea how many Jewish orphans there are at the Gymnasium, and yet you'd 
want me to tell them about Korchagin? I'm sorry, I didn't expect that of you." 
Leszczinski was much surprised by Liza's reply. But since it did not fit in with his plans to 
quarrel with her, he tried to change the subject. 
"Don't be angry, Liza, I was only joking. I didn't know you were so 
upright." "The joke was in very bad taste," Liza retorted dryly. 
As he was saying good-bye to her outside the Sukharko house, 
Victor asked: "Will you come then, Liza?" 
"I don't know," she replied vaguely. 
 
Walking back to town, Victor turned the matter over in his mind. "Well, mademoiselle, you 
may think it vile, but  I happen to think differently. Of course it's all the same to me who freed 
whom." To him as a Leszczinski, the scion of an old Polish family, both sides were  equally 
obnoxious. The only government he recognised was the government of the Polish gentry, the 
Rzecz Pospolita, and that would soon come with the Polis h legions. But here  was an 
opportunity to get rid of that scoundrel Korc hagin. They'd twist his neck  sure enough. 
 
Victor was the only member of the family to have remained in town. He was staying with 
an aunt, who was  married to the assistant director of the sugar refinery. His family had 
been living for some time in Warsaw, where his father Sigismund Leszczinski occu pied a 
position of some importance. 
Victor walked up to the Commandant's office and turned into the open door. 
 
Shortly  afterwards  he  was  on  his  way  to  the  Korchagin  house  accompanied  by  four 
Petlyura men. "That's the place," he said quietly, pointing to a lighted window. "May I go 
now?" he asked the Khorunzhy. 
"Of course. We'll manage ourselves. Thanks for 
the tip." Victor hurried away. 
 
 
The last blow in the back sent Pavel reeling into the dark room to which they had led him, 
and  his  outstretched  arms  collided  with  the  opposite  wall.  Feeling  around  he  found 
something like a bunk, and he sat down, bruised and achin g in body and spirit. 
The  arrest  had  come  as  a  complete surprise.  How  had  the Petlyura crowd  found  out  about  him? 
He was sure no one had seen him. What would happen next? And where was Zhukhrai? 
 
He had left the sailor at Klimka's place. From there he had gone to Sergei, while Zhukhrai 
remained to wait for the evening in order to slip out of town. 
"Good thing I hid the revolver in the crow's nest," Pavel thought. "If they had found it, it 
would have been all up with me. But how did they find out?" There was  no answer to the 
question that tormented him. 
The  Petlyura men  had  not  got  much  out  of  the Korchagin  house  although they made  a thorough 
search  of  its  every  corner.  Artem  had taken  his  best suit  and  the  accordion  to  the  village,  and  his 
mother had taken a trunk with her, so that there was little left for them to pick up. 
 
The journey to the guardhouse, however, was something Pavel would never forget. The night was 
 
 
 
第 67 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
pitch black, the sky overcast with clouds, and he had blundered along, blindly and half -
dazed, propelled by brutal kicks from all sides. 
He could hear voices behind the door leading into the next room, which was occupied by 
the Commandant's guard. A bright strip of light showed under the door. Pavel got up and 
feeling his way along the wall walked around the room. Opposite the bunk he discovered 
a  heavily barred  window.  He  tried  the  bars  with  his  hand―  they  were  immovable.  The 
place had obviously been a storeroom. 
He made his way to the door  and stood there  for a moment listening.  Then he pressed lightly 
on the handle. The door gave a sickening creak and Pavel swore  violently under his breath.  
 
Through  the  narrow  slit  that  opened  before  him  he  saw  a  pair  of  calloused  feet  with 
crooked toes sticking out over the edge of a bunk. Another light push against the handle 
and  the door protested  louder  still.  A  dishevelled  figure  with  a  sleep -swollen  face  now 
rose up in the bunk and fiercely scratching his lousy head with all five fingers burst into a 
long tirade. When the obscene flow of abuse ended, the creature reached out to the rifle 
standing at the head of the bunk and added phlegmatically: 
 
"Shut that door and if I catch you looking in here once more  I'll bash i n 
your. . . ." Pavel shut the door.  There was a roar of laughter in the next room.  
 
He  thought  a  great  deal  t hat  night.  His  initial  attempt  to  take  a  hand  in  the  fight  had  ended 
badly for him.  The  very first step had brought capture and now he was trapped like a mous e.  
 
Still sitting up, he drifted into a restless half-sleep, and the image of his mother with her 
peaked,  wrinkled  features  and  the  eyes  he  loved  so  well  rose  before  him.  And  the 
thought: "It's a good thing she's away―that makes it less painful." 
A gre y square of light from the window appeared on the floor. The 
darkness was .gradually retreating. Dawn was approaching. 
 
 
Chapter Six 
 
A light shone in only one window of the big old house; the curtains were drawn. Outside 
Tresor, now chained for the night, suddenly barked in his reverberating bass. 
Through a sleepy haze Tonya heard her mother speaking in a 
low voice. "No, she is not asleep yet. Come in, Liza." 
The light footsteps of her friend and the warm, impulsive hug finally dispelled her 
drowsiness. Tonya smiled wanly. 
"I'm so glad you've come, Liza. Papa passed the crisis yesterday and today he has been 
sleeping soundly all day. Mama and I have had some rest too after so many sleepless 
nights. Tell me all the news." Tonya drew her friend down beside her on the couch. 
"Oh,  there's  plenty  of news,  but  some  of  it's  for  your  ears  only,"  Liza  smiled  with  a  sly 
look at Yekaterina Mikhailovna. 
Tonya's  mother  smiled.  She  was  a  matronly  woman  of  thirty-six  with  the  vigorous 
movements of a young girl, clever grey eyes and a face that was pleasant if not be autiful. 
"I  will gladly leave you alone in a few minutes, but first I want to hear the news that is fit 
for everybody's ears," she joked, pulling a chair up to the couch. 
 
第 68 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
"Well,  to  begin  with  we've  finished  with  school.  The  board  has  decided  to  issue 
graduation  certificates  to  the  seventh-graders.  I  am  glad.  I'm  so  sick  of  all  this  algebra 
and geometry! What good is it to anyone? The boys may possibly continue their studies, 
although they don't know where, with all this fighting going on. It's simply terrible. . . . As 
for us, we'll be married and wives don't need algebra," Liza laughed. 
After sitting with the girls for a little while, Yekaterina Mikhailovna went to her own  room. 
 
Liza  now  moved  closer  to  Tonya  and  with  her  arms  about  her  gave  her  a  whispered 
account of the encounter at the crossroads. 
"You can imagine my surprise, Tonya, when I recognised the lad who was running away. 
Guess who it was?" 
Tonya, who was listening with interest, shrugged her 
shoulders. "Korchagin!" Liza blurted out breathlessly. 
Tonya started and 
winced. "Korchagin?" 
Liza, pleased with the impression she had made, went on to describe her quarrel with Victor. 
Carried away by her story, Liza did not notice  Tonya's face grow  pale  and her  fingers pluck 
nervously at her blue blouse. Liza did not know how Tonya's heart const ricted with anxiety, 
nor did she notice how the long lashes that hid  her  beautiful eyes trembled.  
 
Tonya paid scant heed to Liza's story of the drunken Khorunzhy. One thought gave her 
no rest: "Victor Leszczinski knows  who attacked the soldier. Oh, why did Liza tell him?" 
And in spite of herself the words broke from her lips. 
"What did you say?" Liza could not grasp her meaning at once. 
 
"Why did you tell Leszczinski about Pavlusha . . . I mean Korchagin? He's sure to betray 
him. . . ." "Oh, surely not!" Liza protested. "I don't think he would do such a thing. After all, 
why should he?" 
Tonya sat up sharply and hugged her knees so hard that it hurt. 
 
"You  don't  understand,  Liza!  He  and  Korchagin  are  enemies,  and  besides,  there  is 
something else. . . . You made a big mistake when you told Victor about Pavlusha." 
Only  now  did  Liza  notice  Tonya's  agitation,  and  her  use  of  Korchagin's  first  name 
confirmed what she had vaguely suspected. 
She could not help feeling guilty and lapsed into an embarrassed silence. 
 
"So  it's  true,"  she  thought.  "Fancy  Tonya  falling  in  love  with  a  plain  workman."  Liza 
wanted  to  talk  about  it  very  much,  but  out  of  consideration  for  her  friend  she  refrained. 
Anxious to atone for her guilt in some way, she seized Tonya's. 
"Are you very worried, Tonya?" 
 
"No, perhaps Victor is more honourable than I think," Tonya replied absently. 
 
The awkward silence that ensued was broken by the arrival of a schoolmate of theirs, a 
bashful, gawky lad named Demianov. 
After seeing her friends off, Tonya stood for a long time leaning against the wicket gate and staring 
at the dark strip of road leading to town. The wind laden with a chill dampness and the dank odour 
of  the  wet  spring soil  fanned  her  face.  Dull  red  lights  blinked  in  the  windows  of  the  houses  over  in 
the town. There it was, that town that lived a life apart from hers, and somewhere there, under one 
of those roofs, unaware of the danger that threatened him, was her rebellious 
 
第 69 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
friend Pavel. Perhaps he had forgotten her―how many days had flown by since their last 
meeting?  He  had  been  in  the  wrong  that  time,  but  all  that  had  long  been  forgotten. 
Tomorrow she would see him and their friendship would be restored, a moving, warming 
friendship.  It  was  sure  to  return―of  that Tonya  had not  the  slightest  doubt.  If  only  the 
night  did  not  betray  him,  the  night  that  seemed  to  harbour  evil,  as  if  lying  in  wait  for 
him.  .  .  .  A  shiver ran  through  her,  and  after  a  last  look at  the  road,  she  went  in.  The 
thought, "If only the night does not betray him", still drilled in her head as she dozed off. 
 
Tonya  woke  up  early  in  the  morning  before  anyone  else  was  about,  and  dressed  quickly.  She 
slipped out of the house quietly so as not to wake up the family, untied the big shaggy Tresor and 
set  out  for  town  with  the  dog.  She  hesitated  for  a  moment  in  front  of  the  Korchagin  house, then 
pushed the gate open and walked into the yard. Tresor dashed ahead wagging his tail. . . . 
 
Artem had returned from the village early that same morning. The blacksmith he had 
worked for had given him a lift into town on his cart. On reaching home he threw the sack 
of flour he had earned on his shoulders and walked into the yard, followed by the 
blacksmith carrying the rest of his belongings. Outside the open door Artem set the sack 
down on the ground and called out; "Pavka!" 
There was no answer. 
 
"What's the hitch there? Why not go right in?" said the smith as he came up. 
 
Setting his belongings down in the kitchen, Artem went into the next room. The sight that 
met his eyes there dumbfounded him: the place was turned upside down  and old clothes 
littered the floor. "What the devil is this?" Artem muttered completely at a loss. 
"It's a mess all right," agreed the blacksmith. 
 
"Where's the boy got to?" Artem was getting angry. But the place was deserted 
and dead. The blacksmith said good-bye and left. 
Artem went into the yard and looked around. 
 
"I can't make head or tail of this! All the doors wide open and no Pavka." 
 
Then he heard footsteps behind him. Turning around he saw a huge dog with ears 
pricked standing before him. A girl was walking toward the house from the gate. 
"I want to see Pavel Korchagin," she said in a low voice, surveying Artem. 
 
"So do I. But the devil knows where he's gone. When I got here the house was unlocked 
and no Pavka anywhere about. So you're looking for him too?" he addressed the girl. 
The girl answered with a question: 
"Are you Korchagin's brother 
Artem?" "I am. Why?" 
Instead of replying, the girl stared in alarm at the open door. "Why didn't I come last 
night?" she thought. "It can't be, it can't be. . . ." And her heart grew heavier still.  
"You found the door open and Pavel gone?" she asked Artem, who was staring at her in 
surprise. "And what would you be wanting of Pavel, may I ask?" Tonya came closer to 
him and casting a look around spoke jerkily: 
"I don't know for sure, but if Pavel isn't at home he must have been 
arrested." Artem started nervously. "Arrested? What for?" 
"Let's go inside," Tonya said. 
 
Artem listened in silence while Tonya told him all she knew. By the time she had finished he was 
 
 
 
第 70 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
despairing. 
 
"Damn it all! As if there  was n't enough trouble  without this mess," he muttered gloomily. "Now 
I  see  why  the  place  was  turned  upside  down.  What  the  hell  did  the  boy  have  to  get  mixed  up 
in this business for. . . . Where can I find him  now? And  who may you be, miss?"  
 
"My father is forest warden Tumanov. I'm a friend of Pavel's." 
 
"I see," Artem said absently. "Here I was bringing flour to feed the boy up, and now 
this. . . ." Tonya and Artem looked at each other in silence. 
"I must go now," Tonya said softly as she prepared to go. "I hope you'll find him. I'll come 
back later." 
Artem gave her a silent nod. 
 
 
 
A lean fly just awakened from its winter sleep buzzed in a corner of the window. On the 
edge of an old threadbare couch sat a young peasant woman, her elbows resting on her 
knees and her eyes fixed blankly on the filthy floor. 
The Commandant, chewing a cigarette stuck in the corner of his mouth, finished writing 
on a sheet of paper with a flourish, and, obviously pleased with himself, added an ornate 
signature  ending  in  a  curlicue  under  the  title  "Commandant of  the  town  of  Shepetovka, 
Khorunzhy''. From the door came the clinking of spurs. The Commandant looked up. 
Before him stood Salomyga with a bandaged arm. 
 
"Hullo, what's blown you in?" the Commandant greeted him. 
 
"Not  a  good  wind,  at  any  rate.  Got  my  hand  sliced  to  the  bone  by  a  Bogunets." 
( Bogunets―a fighting man of the Red Army Regiment named after Bogun, the hero of 
the national liberation struggle waged by the Ukrainian people in the 17th century.) 
Ignoring the  woman's presence Salomy ga cursed 
violently. "So what are you doing here? Convalescing?"  
 
"We'll have time to convalesce in the next world. They're pressing down pretty hard on us 
at the front." 
The Commandant interrupted him, nodding toward the 
woman. "We'll talk about that later." 
Salomyga sat down heavily on a stool and removed his cap, which bore a cockade with 
an enamel trident, the emblem of the UNR ( Ukrainian National Republic). 
"Golub sent me," he began in a low tune. "A division of regulars is going to be transferred 
here  soon.  In  general  there's  going  to  be  some  doings  in  town,  and  it 's  my  job  to  put 
things straight. The 'Chief himself may come here with some foreign bigwig or other, so 
there's to be no talk about any 'diversions'. What're you writing?" 
The Commandant shifted the cigarette to the other corner of his mouth. 
 
"I've  got  a damn  nuisance  of  a  boy  here.  Remember  that  chap  Zhukhrai,  the  one  who 
stirred up the railway-men against us? Well, he was caught at the station." 
"He was, eh? Go on," Salomyga pulled his stool closer. 
 
"Well,  that  blockhead  Omelchenko,  the  Station  Commandant,  sent  him  over  escorted  by  a 
Cossack, and on the way the lad I've got in here took the prisoner away from him in broad daylight. 
The Cossack was disarmed and got his teeth knocked out, and was left to whistle for his 
 
第 71 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
prisoner.  Zhukhrai got  away,  but  we  managed to  grab  this  fellow.  Here  you  have  it all 
down on paper," and he pushed a sheaf of sheets covered with writing toward Salomyga.  
The latter scanned through the report, turning over the sheets with his 
left hand. When he had finished, he looked at the Commandant. 
"And so you got nothing out of him?" 
 
The Commandant pulled nervously at the peak of his cap. 
 
"I've been at him for five days now, but all he says is, 'I don't know anything and I didn't 
free him.' The young scoundrel! You see, the escort recognised him―practically choked 
the life out of him as soon as he saw him.  I could hardly pull the fellow off ―no wonder, 
he'd good reason to be sore because Omelchenko at the station had given him twenty -
five strokes with the cleaning rod for losing his prisoner. There's no sense in keeping him 
any more, so I'm sending this off to headquarters for permission to f inish him off." 
 
Salomyga spat in disdain. 
 
"If  I  had  him  he'd  speak  up  sure  enough.  You're  not  much  at  conducting  enquiries. 
Whoever heard of a theology student making a Commandant! Did you try the rod?" 
The Commandant was furious. 
 
"You're going a bit too far. Keep your sneers to yourself. I'm the Commandant here and 
I'll ask you not to interfere." 
Salomyga looked at the bristling Commandant and roared with laughter. 
 
"Ha-ha-ha.  .  .  .  Don't  puff  yourself  up  too  much,  priest's  son,  or  you'll  burst.  To  hell   with  you 
and your problems. Better tell me where a fellow can get a couple of bottles of samogon?"  
 
The Commandant 
grinned. "That s easy. " 
"As for this," Salomyga jabbed at the sheaf of papers with his finger, "if you want to fix 
him properly put him down as eighteen years instead of sixteen. Round the top of six off 
like that. Otherwise they mightn't pass it." 
 
 
 
 
There were three of them in the storeroom. A bearded old man in a threadbare coat lay 
on his side on the bunk, his spindle legs in their wide linen trousers drawn up under him. 
He had been arrested because the horse of the Petlyura men billeted with him ha d been 
missing from the shed. An elderly woman with small shifty eyes and a pointed chin was 
sitting on the floor. She made her living by selling samogon and had been thrown in here 
on a charge of stealing a watch and other valuables. Korchagin lay semicon scious in the 
corner under the window, his head resting on his crushed cap. 
 
A young woman, in a peasant kerchief, her eyes wide with terror, was led into the storeroom. 
She stood for a moment or two and then sat down next to the samogon woman. 
 
"Got caught, eh, wench?" the latter spoke rapidly, inspecting the newcomer with 
curious eyes. There was no answer, but the samogon woman would not give up. 
"Why'd they pick you up, eh? Nothing to do with samogon by any chance?" The peasant 
girl got up and looked at the persistent 
"No, it's because of my brother," she replied quietly. 
 
第 72 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
"And who's he?" the old woman 
persisted. The old man spoke up. 
"Why don't you leave her alone? She's got enough to worry about without your 
chattering." The woman turned quickly toward the bunk. 
"Who are you to tell me what to do? I'm not talking to you, 
am I?" The old man spat. 
"Leave her alone, I tell you." 
 
Silence descended again on the storeroom. The peasant girl spread out a big shawl and 
lay down, resting her head on her arm. 
The samogon woman began to eat. The old man sat up, lowered his feet onto the floor, 
slowly rolled himself a cigarette and lit it. Clouds of acrid smoke spread out. 
"A person can't eat in peace with that stink," the woman grumbled, her jaws working 
busily. "You've smoked the whole place up." 
The old man returned with a sneer: 
 
"Afraid of losing weight, eh? You won't be able to get through the door soon. Why don't 
you give the boy something to eat instead of stuffing it all into yourself?" 
The woman made an angry gesture. 
 
"I tried, but he doesn't want anything. And as for that you can keep your mouth shut―it's 
not your food I'm eating." 
The girl turned to the samogon woman and, nodding toward Korchagin, 
asked: "What is he in here for?" 
The woman brightened up at being addressed and readily replied: 
"He's  a  local  lad―Korchagin's younger  boy.  His  mother's  a cook." 
Leaning over to the girl, she whispered in her ear: 
 
"He  freed  a  Bolshevik―a  sailor  we  had  hereabouts  .who  used  to  lodge  with  my 
neighbour Zozulikha." 
The  young  woman  remembered  the  words,  she  had overheard:  "I'm  sending t his  off  to 
headquarters for permission to finish him off." 
 
 
One  after  the  other  troop  trains  pulled  in  at  the  junction,  and  battalions  of  regulars  poured  out in a 
disorderly  mob.  The  armoured train  Zaporozhets,  four  cars  long,  its steel  sides  ribbed  with  rivets, 
crawled  along  a side  track.  Guns  were  unloaded  and  horses  were led  out  of closed  box  cars.  The 
horses were saddled on the spot and mounted men jostled their way through the milling crowds of 
infantrymen to the station yard where the cavalry unit was lining up. 
 
Officers ran up and down, calling the numbers of their units. 
 
The  station  buzzed  like  a  wasps'  nest.  Gradually  the regular  squares  of platoons  were 
hammered out of the shapeless mass of vociferous, swirling humanity and soon a stream 
of armed men was pouring into town. Until late in the evening carts creaked and ratt led 
and the stragglers bringing up the rear of the rifle division trailed along the highway.  
The  procession  finally  ended  with  the  headquarters  company  marching  briskly  by, 
bellowing from a hundred and twenty throats: 
 
 
 
第 73 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
What's the shouting? 
 
What's the noise? 
 
It's Petlyura 
 
And his boys 
 
Come to town. . . . 
 
Pavel Korchagin got up to look out of the  window.  Through the early twilight he could hear the 
rumbling of wheels on the street, the tramping of many feet, and the lusty singing.  
 
Behind him a soft  voice said: 
"The troops have come to 
town." Korchagin turned round. 
 
The speaker was the girl who had been brought in the day before. 
 
He  had  already  heard  her  story―the  samogon  woman  had  wormed  it  out  of  her.  She 
came from a village seven versts from the town, where her elder brother, Gritsko, now a 
Red partisan, had headed a poor peasants' committee when the Soviets were in power. 
When the Reds left, Gritsko girded  himself with  a mac hine -gun  belt and  went with t hem.  Now 
the family was being  hounded incessantly. Their only horse had  been tak en  away from them. 
The father had been imprisoned  for  a while and had a rough time of it. The  village elder ― one 
of  those  on  whom  Gritsko  had  clamped  down―was  always  billeting  strangers  in  their  house, 
out  of  sheer  spite.  The  family  was  destitute.  And  when  the  Commandant  had  come  to  the 
village  the  day  before  to  make  a  search,  the  elder  had  brought  him  to  the  girl's  place.  She 
struck his fancy and the next morning he brought her to town wit h him "for interrogation".  
 
Korchagin  could  not  fall  asleep,  try  as he  might  he  could  not  find  rest,  and  in  his  brain 
drilled one insistent thought which he could not dispel: "What next?" 
His bruised body ached, for the guard had beaten him with bestial fury. 
 
To escape the bitter thoughts crowding his mind he listened to the whispering of the two 
women. In a barely audible voice the girl was telling how the Commandant had pestered 
her, how he had threatened and coaxed, and when she rebuffed him, turned on her in 
fury. "I'll lock you up in a cellar and let you rot there," he had said. 
Dark ness  lurked  in  the  corners  of  the  cell.  There  was  another  night  ahead,  a  stifling,  restless 
night.  It  was  the  seventh  night  in  captivity,  but  to  Pavel  it  seemed  that  he  had  been  there  for 
months.  The  floor  was  hard,  and  pain  racked  his  body.  There  were  three  of  them  now  in  the 
storeroom.  The  samogon  woman  had  been  releas ed  by  the  Khorunzhy  to  procure  some 
vodka.  Grandpa  was  snoring  on  the  bunk  as  if  he  were  at  home  on  his  Russian  stove;  he 
bore  his  misfortune  with  stoic  calm  and  slept  soundly  through  the  night.  Khristina  and  P avel 
lay on the  floor, almost side by side. Yesterday Pavel  had seen Sergei through the window ―
he had stood  for  a long time out in the street, looking sadly at the windows of the houses . 
 
"He knows I' m here," Pavel had thought. 
 
For three days running someone had brought sour black bread for him―who it was the 
guards would not tell. And for two days the Commandant had repeatedly questioned him. 
What could it all mean? 
 
During the questioning he had given nothing away; on the contrary he had denied everything. Why 
he had kept silent, he did not know himself. He wanted to be brave and strong, like those of 
 
第 74 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
whom he had  read in books, yet that night when he  was being taken t o prison  and one  of his 
captors had said, "What's the use of dragging him along, Pan Khorunzhy? A bullet in the back 
will fix him", he had been  afraid. Yes, the thought of dying at sixteen  was terrifying! Death  was 
the end of  everything. Khristina was also thinking. She knew more than the y oung man. Most 
likely he did not know yet what  was in store for him . . . what she had overheard.  
 
He  tossed  about  restlessly  at  night  unable  to  sleep.  Khristina  pitied  him,  though  the  prospect 
she  hers elf  faced  was  hardly  better―she  could  not  forget  the  menac e  of  the  Commandant's 
words:  "I'll  fix  you  up  tomorrow―  if  you  won't  have  me  it's  the  guardhouse  for  you.  The 
Cossacks will be  glad to get you. So take your choice." Oh, how  hard it was, and  no mercy to 
be expected any where! Was it her fault that Gritsko had joined the Reds?  How cruel life was!  
 
A dull pain choked  her and in the  agony of helpless despair and  fear  her body was racked by 
soundless sobs. A shadow moved in the corner by the wall. "Why are you crying?"  
 
In a passionate whisper Khristina poured out her woes to her silent cell mate. He did not 
speak, but laid his hand lightly on hers. 
"They'll torture me to death, curse them," she whispered in terror, gulping down her tears. 
"Nothing can save me." What could Pavel say to this girl? There was nothing to say. Life 
was crushing them both in an iron ring. 
Perhaps  he  ought  to  put  up  a  fight  when  they  came  for  her  tomorrow?  They'd  only  beat  him  to 
death,  or  a  sabre  blow  on  the  head  would  end  it  all.  Wishing  to  comfort  the  distraught  girl 
somehow,  he  stroked  her  hand  tenderly.  The  sobbing  ceased.  At  intervals  the  sentry  at  the 
entrance  could  be  heard  challenging  a  passer-by  with  the  usual  "Who  goes  there?"  and  then 
everything was quiet again. Grandpa was fast asleep. The interminable minutes crawled slowly by. 
Then, to his utter surprise, Pavel felt the girl's arms go around him and pull him toward her. 
 
"Listen," hot lips were whispering, "there is no escape for me: if it isn't the officer, it'll be 
those others. Take me, love, so that dog won't be the first to have me." 
"What are you saying, Khristina!" 
 
But  the  strong  arms  did  not  release  him.  Full,  burning  lips  pressed  down  on  his ―they  were 
hard to escape.  The girl's words were simple, tender―and he knew why she uttered them.  
 
For  a  moment  everything  receded―the  bolted  door,  the  red-headed  Cossack,  the 
Commandant, the brutal beatings, the seven stifling, sleepless nights―all were forgotten, 
and only the burning lips and the face moist with tears existed. 
Suddenly he remembered Tonya. 
 
How could he forget her? Those dear, wonderful eyes. 
 
He mustered his strength and broke away from Khristina's embrace. He staggered to his 
feet like a drunken man and seized hold of the grill. Khristina's hands found him. 
"Why, what is the matter?" 
 
All her heart was in that question. He bent down to her and pressing her hands 
said: "I can't, Khristina. You are so . . . good." He hardly knew what he was saying. 
 
He stood up again in the intolerable silence and went over to the bunk. Sitting down on 
the edge, he woke up the old man. 
"Give me a smoke, please, Granddad." 
 
The girl, huddled in her shawl, wept in the corner. 
 
The next day the Commandant came  with some  Cossacks and took Khristina away. Her eyes  
 
 
 
第 75 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
sought Pavel's in farewell, and there was reproach in them. And when the door slammed 
behind her his soul was more desolate and dreary than ever. 
All  day  long  the  old  man  could  not  get  a  word  out  of  Pavel.  The  sentries  and  the 
Commandant 's  guard  were  chang ed.  Toward  evening  a  new  prisoner  was  brought  in.  Pavel 
recognised  him: it was Dolinnik, a joiner  from the sugar refinery, a short thickset man  wearing 
a faded yellow shirt under a threadbare jacket. He surveyed the storeroom  with a keen  eye.  
 
Pavel had seen him in February 1917, when the reverberation of the revolution reached 
their town. He had heard only one Bolshevik speak during the noisy demonstrations held 
then  and  that  Bolshevik  was  Dolinnik.  He  had  climbed  onto  a  roadside  fence  and 
addressed the troops. Pavel remembered his closing words: 
"Follow the Bolsheviks, soldiers, they will not betray 
you!" He had not seen the joiner since. 
Granddad was glad to have a new cell mate, for he obviously found it hard to sit silent all 
day long. Dolinnik settled  down next to him on the edge of the bunk, smoked a cigarette 
with him and questioned him about everything. 
Then the newcomer moved over to Korchagin. "Well, young man?" he asked Pavel. "And 
how did you get in here?" 
Pavel replied in monosyllables and Dolinnik saw that it was caution that kept the young 
man from speaking. When he learned of the charge laid against Pavel his intelligent eyes 
widened with amazement and he sat down beside the lad. 
"So you say you got Zhukhrai away? That's interesting. I didn't know they'd nabbed you." 
 
Pavel, taken by surprise, raised himself on his elbow. "I don't know any  Zhukhrai. They 
can pin anything on you here." 
Dolinnik,  smiling,  moved  closer  to  him.  "That's  all right,  my  boy.  You don't  need  to  be 
cautious with me. I know more than you do." 
Quietly, so that the old man should not overhear he continued: 
 
"I  saw  Zhukhrai  off  myself,  he's  probably  reached  his  destination  by  now.  He  told  me  all  about 
what  happened."  After  a  moment's  pause,  Dolinnik  added:  "I  see  you're  made  of  the  right  stuff, 
boy. Though, the fact that they caught you and know everything is bad, Very bad, I should say." 
 
He took off his jacket and spreading it on the floor sat down on it with his  back against 
the wall, and began to roll another cigarette. 
Dolinnik's  last  remark  made  everything  clear  to  Pavel.  There  was  no  doubt  about  it, 
Dolinnik was all right. Besides, he had seen Zhukhrai off, and that meant. . . . 
That evening he learned that Dolinnik had been arrested for agitation among Petlyura's 
Cossacks. Moreover, he had been caught distributing an appeal issued by the gubernia 
revolutionary committee calling on the troops to surrender and go over to the Reds. 
 
Dolinnik was careful not to tell Pavel much. 
 
"Who knows," he thought to himself, "they may use the ramrod on the boy. He's still too 
young." Late at night when they were settling themselves for sleep, he voiced his 
apprehensions in the brief remark: 
"Well, Korchagin, we seem to be in a pretty bad fix. Let's see what will come of it."  
 
The next day a new prisoner was brought in―the flop-eared, scraggy-necked barber Shlyoma 
 
 
 
第 76 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
Zeltser. 
 
"Fuchs,  Bluvstein  and  Trachtenberg  are  going  to  welcome  him  wit h  bread  and  salt,"  he  told 
Dolinnik  gesturing  excitedly  as  he  spoke.  "I said  that  if they  want  to  do  that,  they can,  but  will 
the  rest  of  the  Jewis h  population  back  them  up?  No,  they  won't,  you  can  take  it  from  me.  Of 
course they have their own  fish to fry. Fuchs has a store and  Trachtenberg's got the  flour mill. 
But what 've I  got? And the rest of the hungry lot? Nothing―paupers, that's what we  are. Well, 
I've  got  a  long  tongue,  and  today  when  I  was  shaving  an  officer―one  of  the  new  ones  who 
came  recently  ―I  said:  'Do  you  think  Ataman  Petlyura  knows  about  these  pogroms  or  not ? 
Will  he  see  the  delegation?'  Oi,  how  many  times  I've  got  into  trouble  through  this  tongue  of 
mine. So what do you think this officer did  when  I had shaved him and powdered his face  and 
done  all  in  fine  style  too?  He  gets  up  and  instead  of  paying  me  arrests  me  for  agitating 
against  the  authorities."  Zeltser  struck  his  chest  with  his  fist.  "Now  what  sort  of  agitation  was 
that? What did I say?  I only asked the  fellow. . . . And to lock me up for that. . . ." 
 
In his excitement Zeltser twisted a button on Dolinnik's shirt and tugged at his arms. 
Dolinnik smiled in spite of himself as he listened to the indignant Shlyoma. 
 
"Yes, Shlyoma," he said gravely when the barber had finished, "that was a stupid thing 
for a clever fellow like you to do. You chose the wrong time to let your tongue run away 
with you. I wouldn't have advised you to get in here." 
Zeltser nodded understandingly and made a gesture of despair with his hand. Just then 
the  door  opened  and  the  samogon  woman  was  pushed  in.  She  staggered  in,  heaping 
foul curses on the Cossack who brought her. 
"You and your Commandant ought to be roasted on a slow fire! I hope he shrivels up and 
croaks from that booze of mine!" 
The guard slammed the door shut and they heard him locking it on the outside. 
 
As the woman settled down on the edge of the bunk the old man greeted her jocularly: 
"So you're back with us again, you old chatterbox? Sit down and make yourself at home." 
 
The samogon woman darted a hostile glance at him and picking up her bundle sat down 
on the floor next to Dolinnik. 
It  turned out  that  she  had  been released  just  long  enough  for her  captors  to  get  some 
bottles of samogon out of her. 
Suddenly shouts and the sound of running feet could be heard from the guardroom next 
door. Somebody was barking out orders. The prisoners stopped talking to listen. 
 
 
Strange  things  were  happening  on  the  square  in  front of  the  ungainly  church  with  the 
ancient belfry. On three sides the square was lined  with rectangles of troops ― units of 
the division of regular infantry mustered in full battle kit. 
In  front,  facing  the  entrance  to  the  church,  stood  three  regiments  of  infantry  in  squares 
placed in checkerboard fashion, their ranks buttressed against the school fence. 
This grey, rather dirty mass of Petlyura soldiers standing there with rifles at rest, wearing 
absurd  Russian  helmets  like  pumpkins  cut  in  half,  and  heavily  laden  down  with 
bandoliers, was the best division the "Directorate" had. 
Well-uniformed and shod  from the stores of the former tsarist army and consisting mainly of  
 
 
 
第 77 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
kulaks who were consciously fighting the Soviets, the division had been transferred here 
to  defend  this  strategically  important  railway  junction.  Five  different  railway  lines 
converged at Shepetovka, and for Petlyura the loss of the junction would have meant the 
end of everything. As it was, the "Directorate" had very little territory left in its hands, and 
the small town of Vinnitsa was now Petlyura's capital. 
The "Chief Ataman" himself had decided to inspect the troops and now everything was in 
readiness for his arrival. 
Back  in  a  far  corner  of  the  square  where  they  were  least  likely  to  be  seen  stood  a 
regiment of new recruits― barefoot youths in shabby civilian clothes of all descriptions. 
These were farm lads picked up from their beds by midnight raiding parties or seized on 
the streets, and none of them had the least intention of doing any fighting. 
"Let them look for fools somewhere else," they said. 
 
The most the Petlyura officers could do was to bring the recruits to town under escort, divide them 
into  companies  and  battalions  and  issue  them  arms.  The  very  next  day,  however,  a  third  of  the 
recruits thus herded together would disappear and with each passing day their numbers dwindled. 
 
It  would  have  been  more  than  foolhardy  to  issue  them  boots,  particularly  since  the  boot  stocks 
were  far  from  plentiful.  And  so  everyone  was  ordered  to  report  for  conscription shod.  The  result 
was an astonishing collection of dilapidated footwear tied on with bits of string and wire. 
 
They were marched out for parade barefoot. 
Behind the infantry stood Golub's cavalry regiment. 
 
Mounted men held back the dense crowds of curious townsfolk who had come to see the 
parade. After all, the "Chief Ataman" himself was to be present! Events like this were rare 
enough in town and no one wanted to miss the free entertainment it promised.  
On  the  church  steps  were  gathered  the  colonels  and  captains,  the  priest's  two  daughters,  a 
handful  of  Ukrainian  schoolteachers,  a  group  of  "free  Cossacks",  and  the  slightly  hunchbacked 
mayor―in  a  word,  the  elite  representing  the  "public",  and  among  them  the  Inspector-General  of 
Infantry wearing a Caucasian cherkesska. It was he who was in command of the parade. 
 
Inside the church Vasili, the priest, was garbing himself in his Easter service vestments. 
 
Petlyura was to be received in  grand style. For one thing, the newly -mobilised  recruits were to 
take the oath of allegiance, and  for this purpose a yellow-and-blue  flag had been brought out.  
 
The Division Commander set out for the station in a rickety old Ford car to meet Petlyura. 
 
When he had gone, the Inspector of Infantry called over Colonel Chernyak, a tall, well -
built officer with a foppishly twirled moustache. 
"Take  someone  along  with  you  and  see  that  the  Commandant 's  office  and  the  rear  services 
are in proper shape. If you find any prisoners there look them  over and get rid of the riffraff." 
 
Chernyak clicked his heels, took along the first Cossack captain his eye lighted on and 
galloped off. 
The Inspector turned politely to the priest's elder daughter. 
"What about the banquet, everything in order?" 
 
"Oh, yes. The Commandant's doing his best," she replied, gazing avidly at the handsome 
Inspector. 
Suddenly a stir passed through the crowd: a rider was coming down the road at a mad 
gallop, bending low over the neck of his horse. He waved his hand and shouted: 
 
第 78 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
"They're coming!" 
 
"Fall in!" barked the Inspector. 
The officers ran to their places. 
 
As the Ford chugged up to the church the band struck up The Ukraine Lives On. 
 
Following the Division Commander, the "Chief Ataman" heaved himself laboriously out of 
the car. Petlyura was a man of medium height, with a square head firmly planted on a red 
bull neck; he wore a blue tunic of fine wool cloth girded tight with a yellow belt to which a 
small  Browning  in  a  chamois  holster  was  attached.  On  his  head  was  a  peaked  khaki 
uniform cap with a cockade bearing the enamel trident. 
There was nothing especially warlike about the figure of Simon Petlyura. As a matter of 
fact, he did not look like a military man at all. 
He heard out the Inspector's report with an expression of displeasure on his face. Then 
the mayor addressed him in greeting. 
Petlyura listened absently, staring at the assembled regiments over the 
mayor's head. "Let us begin," he nodded to the Inspector. 
Mounting the small platform next to the flag, Petlyura delivered a ten -minute speech  to 
the troops. The speech was unconvincing. Evidently tired from the journey, the Ataman 
spoke without enthusiasm. He finished to the accompaniment of the regulation shouts of 
"Slava!  Slava!"  from  the  soldiers  and  climbed  down  from  the  platform  dabbing  his 
perspiring  forehead  with  a  handkerchief.  Then,  together  with   the  Inspector  and  the 
Division Commander, he inspected the units. 
 
As he passed the ranks of the newly-mobilised recruits his eyes narrowed in a disdainful 
scowl and he bit his lips in annoyance. 
Toward the end of the inspection, when the platoons of new recruits marched in uneven 
ranks to the flag, where the priest Vasili was standing, Bible in hand, and kissed first the 
Bible and then the hem of the flag, an unforeseen incident occurred. 
A  delegation  which  had  contrived  by  some  unknown  means  to  reach  the  square  approached 
Petlyura.  At  the  head  of the  group came the  wealthy  timber merchant Bluvstein  with  an  offering  of 
bread and salt, followed by Fuchs the draper, and three other well-to-do businessmen. 
 
With  a  servile  bow  Bluvstein  extended  the  tray  to  Petlyura.  It  was  taken  by  an  officer 
standing alongside. 
"The Jewish population wishes to express its sincere gratitude and respect for you, the 
head of the state. Please accept this address of greeting." 
"Good," muttered Petlyura, quickly scanning the sheet of 
paper. Fuchs stepped forward. 
"We most humbly beg you to allow us to open our enterprises and we ask for protection 
against pogroms." Fuchs stumbled over the last word. 
An angry scowl darkened Petlyura's features. 
 
"My army does not engage in pogroms. You had better remember 
that." Fuchs spread out his arms in a gesture of resignation. 
 
Petlyura's shoulder twitched nervously. The untimely appearance  of the delegation irri tat ed 
him. He turned to Golub, who was standing behind chewing  his black moustache.  
 
"Here's a complaint against your Cossacks, Pan Colonel. Investigate the matter and take measures 
 
 
 
第 79 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
accordingly," said Petlyura. Then, addressing the Inspector, he 
said dryly: "You may begin the parade." 
The ill-starred delegation had not expected to run up against Golub and they hastened to 
withdraw. The attention of the spectators was now  wholly absorbed by the preparations 
for the ceremonial march-past. Sharp commands were rapped out. 
Golub, his features outwardly calm, walked over to Bluvst ein and said in a loud 
whisper: "Get out of here, you rotten heathens, or I'll make mincemeat out o f you!"  
 
The  band  struck  up  and  the  first  units  marched  throu gh  the  square.  As  they  drew 
alongside Petlyura, the troops bellowed a mechanical "Slava!" and then swung down the 
highway  to  disappear  into  the  sidestreets.  At  the  head  of  the  companies, uniformed  in 
brand-new khaki outfits, the officers marched at an easy gait as if they were simply taking 
a stroll, swinging their swagger sticks. The swagger stick mode, like cleaning rods for the 
soldiers, had just been introduced in the division. 
 
The new recruits brought up the rear of the parade. They came in a disorder ly mass, out 
of step and jostling one another. 
There was a low rustle of bare feet as the mobilised men shuffled by, prodded on by the 
officers who worked hard but in vain to bring about some semblance of order. When the 
second  company  was  passing  a  peasant  lad  in  a  linen  shirt  on  the  side  nearest  the 
reviewing stand gaped in such wide-eyed amazement at the "Chief" that he stepped into 
a hole in the road and fell flat on the ground. His rifle slid over the cobblestones with a 
loud clatter. He tried to get up but was knocked down again by the men behind him. 
 
Some of the spectators burst out laughing.  The company broke ranks and  passed through the 
square in complete disorder. The luckless lad picked up  his rifle  and  ran  after the others.  
 
Petlyura turned away from this sorry spectacle and walked over to the car without waiting 
for the end of the review. The Inspector, who followed him, asked diffidently: 
"Pan the Ataman will not stay for dinner?" 
"No," Petlyura flung back curtly. 
 
Sergei Bruzzhak, Valya and Klimka were watching the parade in the crowd of spectators 
pressed against the high fence surrounding the church. Sergei, gripping the bars of the 
grill, looked at the faces of the people below him with hatred in his eyes. 
"Let's go, Valya, they've shut up shop," he said in a deliberately loud defiant voice, and 
turned away from the fence. People stared at him in astonishment. 
Ignoring everyone, he walked to the gate, followed by his sister and Klimka.  
 
 
 
Colonel  Chernyak and the  Capt ain galloped up to the Commandant's office and dismount ed. 
Leaving the horses in the charge of  a dispatch rider they strode rapidly into the  guardhouse. 
"Where's the Commandant?" Cherny ak asked the dispatch rider sharply.  
 
"Dunno," the man stammered. "Gone off somewhere.'' 
 
Chernyak looked around the filthy, untidy room, the unmade beds and the Cossacks of 
the Commandant's guard who sprawled on them and made no attempt to rise when the 
officers entered. 
"What sort of a pigsty is this?" Chernyak roared. "And who gave you permission to wallow about 
 
 
 
第 80 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
like hogs?" he lashed at the men lying flat on their backs. 
One of the Cossacks sat up, belched and growled: 
 
"What're you squawking for? We've got our own squawker here." 
 
"What!"  Chernyak  sprang  toward  the  man.  "Who  do  you  think  you're  talking  to,  you 
bastard?  I'm  Colonel  Chernyak.  D'you hear,  you  swine!  Up,  all  of  you,  or  I'll  have  you 
flogged!" The enraged Colonel dashed about the guardhouse. "I'll give you one minute to 
sweep  out  the  filth,  straighten  out  the  bedding  and  make  your  filthy  mugs presentable. 
You look like a band of brigands, not Cossacks!" 
Beside himself with rage, the Colonel violently kicked at a slop pail obstructing his path. 
 
The  Captain  was  no  less  violent,  and,  adding  emphasis  to  his  curses  by  wielding  his 
three-thonged whip, drove the men out of their bunks. 
"The Chief Ataman's reviewing the parade. He's liable to drop in here any minute. Get a 
move on there!" 
Seeing  that  things  were  taking  a  serious  turn  and  that  they  really  might  be  in  for  a  flogging ―
they knew Chernyak's reput ation well enough―the Cossacks sprang into  feverish activity. 
 
In no time work was in full swing.  
 
"We  ought  to  have  a  look  at  the  prisoners,"  the  Captain  suggested.  "There' s  no  telling 
whom they've got locked up here. Might be trouble if the Chief looks in." 
"Who has the key?" Chernyak asked the sentry. "Open the door 
at once." A Sergeant jumped up and opened the lock. 
"Where's the Commandant? How long do you think I'm going  to wait for him? Find him at 
once and send him in here," Chernyak ordered. "Muster the guard in the yard! Why are 
the rifles without bayonets?" 
"We only took over yesterday," the Sergeant tried to explain, and hurried off in search of 
the Commandant. 
The  Captain  kicked  the  storeroom door  open.  Several  of  the  people  inside  got up from 
the floor, the others remained motionless. 
"Open the door wider," Chernyak commanded. "Not enough light 
here." He scrutinised the prisoners' faces. 
"What are you in for?" he snapped at the old man sitting on the edge of the bunk. 
 
The old man half rose, hitched up his trousers and, frightened by the sharp order, 
mumbled: "Dunno myself. They just locked me up and here I am. There was a horse 
disappeared from the yard, but I've got nothing to do with it." 
"Whose horse?" the Captain interrupted him. 
 
"An army horse, of course. My billets sold him and drank the proceeds and now they're 
blaming me." 
Chernyak ran his eye swiftly over the old man and wit h an impatient jerk of his shoul der 
shouted: "Pick up your things and get out of here!" Then he turned to the samogon  woman.  
 
The old man could not believe his ears. Blinking his shortsighted eyes, he turned to the 
Captain: "Does that mean I can go?" 
The Cossack nodded as much as to say: the faster you get out the better. 
 
Hurriedly the old man seized his bundle which hung over the edge of the bunk and 
dashed through the door. 
 
第 81 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
"And what are you in for?" Chernyak was questioning the samogon woman.  
 
Swallowing the mouthful of pie she had been chewing, the woman rattled off a ready 
answer: "It's an injustice it is that I should be in here, Pan Chief. Just think of it, to drink a 
poor widow's samogon and then lock her up." 
"You're not in the samogon business, are you?" Chernyak asked. 
 
"Business? Nothing of the kind," said the woman  with an injured air. "The Commandant 
came and took four bottles and didn't pay a kopek. That's how it is: they drink your booze 
and never pay. You wouldn't call that business, would you?" 
"Enough. Now go to the devil!" 
 
The  woman  did  not  wait  for  the  order  to  be  repeated.  She  picked  up  her  basket  and 
backed to the door, bowing in gratitude. 
"May God bless you with good health, your honours." 
Dolinnik watched the comedy with frank amazement. 
 
None of the prisoners could make out what it was all about. The only thing that was clear was that 
the arrivals were chiefs of some kind who had the power to dispose of them as they saw fit. 
 
"And you there?" Chernyak spoke to Dolinnik. 
 
"Stand up when Pan the  Colonel speaks to you!" barked the 
Capt ain. Slowly Dolinnik raised himself to his feet from the  floor.  
 
"What are you in for?" Chernyak repeated. 
 
Dolinnik  looked  at  the  Colonel's  neatly  twirled  moustache,  at  his  clean -shaven  face, 
looked at the peak of his new cap with the enamel cockade, and a wild thought flashed 
through his mind: Maybe it'll work! 
"I  was arrested for being out on the streets after eight o'clock," he said, blurting out the 
first thing that came into his head. 
He awaited the answer in an agony of 
suspense. "What were you doing out at night?" 
 
"It wasn't night, only about eleven o'clock." 
 
He no longer believed that this shot in the dark would succeed. 
His knees trembled when he heard the brief command: 
 
"Get out." 
 
Dolinnik walked hurriedly out of the door, forgetting his jacket; the Captain was already 
questioning the next prisoner. 
Korchagin was the last to be interrogated. He sat on the floor' completely dumbfounded 
by  the  proceedings.  At  first  he  could  not  believe  that  Dolinnik  had  been  released.  Why 
were  they  letting  everyone  off  like  this?  But  Dolinnik  .  .  .  Dolinnik had  said  that  he  had 
been arrested for breaking the curfew. . . . Then it dawned upon him.  
The Colonel began questioning the scraggy Zeltser with the usual "What are you 
in for?" The barber, pale with nervousness, blurted out: 
"They tell me I was agitating, but I don't know what they're talking 
about." Chernyak pricked up his ears. 
"What's that? Agitation? What were you agitating 
about?" Zeltser spread out his arms in bewilderment.  
 
"I don't know myself, I only said that they were collecting signatures to a petition to the Chief  
 
 
 
第 82 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
Ataman for the Jewish population." 
 
"What sort of petition?" both  Chernyak and the  Capt ain moved menacingly toward Zeltser.  
 
"A petition asking that pogroms be prohibited. You know, we had a terrible pogrom. The 
whole population's afraid. 
"That's  enough,"  Chernyak  interrupted  him.  "We'll  give  you  a  petition  you  won't  forget,  you  dirty 
Jew."  Turning  to  the  Captain,  he  snapped:  "Put  this  one  away  properly.  Have  him  taken  to 
headquarters―I'll talk to him there personally. We'll see who's behind this petition business." 
 
Zeltser tried to protest but the Captain struck him sharply across the back with his 
riding crop. "Shut up, you bastard!" 
His face twisted with pain, Zeltser staggered back into a corner. His lips trembled and he 
barely restrained his sobs. 
While  this  was  going on,  Pavel  rose to his  feet.  He  was  now  the  only  prisoner  besides 
Zeltser in the storeroom. 
Chernyak stood in front of the boy and inspected him with his piercing 
black eyes. "Well, what are you doing here?" 
Pavel had his answer ready. 
 
"I cut off a saddle skirt for soles," he said 
quickly. ("What saddle?" the Colonel asked. 
"We've got two Cossacks billeted at our place and I cut off a bit of an old saddle to sole 
my boots with. So the Cossacks hauled me in here." Seized by a wild hope to regain his 
freedom, he added: "I didn't know it wasn't allowed. . . ." 
The Colonel eyed Pavel with disgust. 
 
"Of all the things this Commandant thought of, blast him! Look at the prisoners he picked 
up!" As he turned to the door, he shouted: "You can go home, and tell your father to give 
you the thrashing you deserve. Out with you!" 
Still  unable  to  believe  his  ears,  Pavel  snatched up  Dolinnik's  jacket  from  the  floor  and 
rushed for the door, his heart pounding as if it would burst. He ran through the guardroom 
and slipped outside behind the Colonel who was walking out into the yard. In a moment 
Pavel was through the wicket gate and in the street. 
The  unlucky  Zeltser  remained  alone  in  the  storeroom.  He  looked  round  with  harassed  eyes, 
instinctively  took  a  few  steps towards  the  exit,  but  just then  a  sentry  entered  the  guardhouse, 
closed the door, inserted the padlock, and sat down on a stool next to the door. 
 
Out on the porch Chernyak, much pleased with himself, said to the Captain: 
 
"It's a good thing we looked in. Think of the rubbish we found there ―we'll have to lock up 
that Commandant for a couple of weeks. Well, it's time we were going." 
The Sergeant had mustered his detail in the yard. When he saw the Colonel, he ran over 
and reported: 
"Everything's in order, Pan Colonel." 
 
Chernyak inserted a boot into a stirrup and sprang lightly into the saddle. The Captain was having 
some trouble with his restive horse. Reining in his mount, the Colonel said to the Sergeant: 
 
"Tell the Commandant I cleared out all the rubbish he'd collected in there. And tell him I'll 
give him two weeks in the guardhouse for the way he ran things here. As for the fellow in 
there now, transfer him to headquarters at once. Let the guard be in readiness." 
 
第 83 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
"Very good, Pan Colonel," said the Sergeant and saluted. 
 
Spurring on their horses, the Colonel and the Captain galloped back to the square where 
the parade was already coming to an end. 
 
 
Pavel swung himself over another fence and stopped exhausted. He could go no farther. 
Those days cooped up in the stifling storeroom without food had sapped his strength. 
Where should he go? Home was out of the question, and to go to the Bruzzhaks might 
bring disaster upon the whole family if anyone discovered him there. 
He  did  not  know  what  to  do,  and  ran  on  again  blindly,  leaving  behind  the  vegetable 
patches  and  back  gardens at  the  edge  of  the  town.  Colliding  heavily  with  a  fence,  he 
came  to  himself  with  a  start  and  looked  about  him  in  amazement:  there  behind  the  tall 
fence  was  the  forest  warden's  garden.  So  this  was  where  his  weary  legs  had  brought 
him! He could have sworn that he had had no thought of coming this way. How then did 
he happen to be here? For that he could find no answer. 
 
Yet rest awhile he must; he had to consider the situation and decide on the next step. He 
remembered that there was a summerhouse at the end of the garden. No one would see 
him there. Hoisting himself to the top of the fence, he clambered over and dropped into 
the garden below. With a brief glance at the house, barely visible among the trees, he 
made for the summerhouse. To his dismay he found that it was open on nearly all sides. 
The wild vine that had walled it in during the summer had withered and now all was bare.  
 
He  turned  to  go  back,  but  it  was  too  late.  There  was  a  furious barking  behind him.  He 
wheeled  round and  saw  a  huge  dog  coming  straight  at  him  down  the  leaf-strewn  path 
leading from the house. Its fierce growls rent the stillness of the garden. 
Pavel made ready to defend himself. The first attack he repulsed  with a heavy kick. But 
the  animal  crouched  to  spring  a  second  time.  There  is  no  saying  how  the  encounter 
would have ended had a familiar voice not called out: "Come here, Tresor! Come here!" 
 
Tonya came running down the path. She dragged Tresor back by th e collar and turned to 
address the young man standing by the fence. 
"What are you doing  here? You might have been badly mauled by the dog. It's lucky I. . . ." 
 
She stopped short and her eyes widened in surprise. How extraordinarily like Korchagin 
was this stranger who had wandered into her garden. 
The figure by the fence stirred. 
 
"Tonya!" said the young man softly. "Don't you recognise 
me?" Tonya cried out and rushed impulsively over to him. 
"Pavel, you?" 
 
Tresor, taking the cry as a signal for attack, sprang forward. 
 
"Down, Tresor, down!" A few cuffs from Tonya and he slunk back with an injured air 
toward the house, his tail between his legs. 
"So you're free?" said Tonya, clinging to Pavel's 
hands. "You knew then?" 
"I know everything," replied  Tony a breathlessly. "Liza told me. But however did you get here?  
 
 
 
第 84 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
Did they let you go?" 
 
"Yes, but only by mistake," Pavel replied wearily. "I ran away.  I suppose they're looking 
for  me  now.  I  really  don't  know  how  I  got  here.  I  thought  I'd  rest  a  bit  in  your 
summerhouse. I'm awfully tired," he added apologetically. 
She gazed at him for a moment or two and a  wave of pity and tenderness swept over her.  
 
"Pavel, my darling Pavel," she murmured holding his hands fast in hers. "I love you. . . . 
Do you hear me? My stubborn boy, why did you go away that time? Now you're coming 
to us, to me. I shan't let you go for anything. It's nice and quiet in our house and you can 
stay as long as you like." 
Pavel shook his head. 
 
"What if they find me here? No, I can't stay in your place." 
Her hands squeezed his fingers and her eyes flashed. 
 
"If  you  refuse,  I  shall  never  speak  to  you  again.  Artem  isn't  here,  he  was  marched  off  under 
escort to the locomotive. All the railwaymen are being mobilised. Where will you go?"  
 
Pavel shared her anxiety, and only his fear of bringing trouble to this girl now grown so 
dear  to  him  held  him  back.  But  at  last,  worn out  by  his harrowing  experiences,  hungry 
and exhausted, he gave in. 
While  he  sat on  the  sofa  in  Tonya's room,  the  following  conversation  ensued between 
mother and daughter in the kitchen. 
"Mama, Korchagin is in my room. He was my pupil, you remember? I don't want to hide 
anything from you. He was arrested for helping a Bolshevik sailor to escape. Now he has 
run  away  from  prison,  but  he  has  nowhere  to  go."  Her  voice  trembled.  "Mother  dear, 
please let him stay here for a while." 
The mother looked into her daughter's pleading eyes. 
 
"Very well, I have no objection. But where do you intend to put 
him?" Tonya flushed. 
"He can sleep in  my room on the sofa," she said. "We needn't tell Papa anything for the 
time being." 
Her mother looked straight into her eyes. 
 
"Is this what you have been fretting about so much lately?" she 
asked. "Yes." 
"But he is scarcely more than a boy." 
 
"I  know,"  replied  Tonya, nervously  fingering  the  sleeve  of  her  blouse.  "But  if  he  hadn't 
escaped they would have shot him just the same." 
Yekaterina  Mikhailovna  was  alarmed  by  Korchagin's  presence  in  her home.  His  arrest 
and her daughter's obvious infatuation with a lad she scarcely knew disturbed her. 
But  Tonya,  considering  the  matter  settled,  was  already  thinking  of  attending  to  her 
guest's comfort. 
"He must have a bath, first thing, Mama. I'll see to it at once. He is as dirty as a chimney 
sweep. It must be ages since he had a wash." 
And she bustled off to heat the water for the bath and find some clean linen for Pavel. 
When all was ready  she rushed into the room, seized Pavel by the arm and hurried him 
off to the bathroom without more ado. 
 
第 85 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
"You  must  have  a  complete  change of  clothes.  Here  is  a  suit  for  you  to  put  on.  Your 
things will have to be washed. You can wear that in the meantime," she said pointing to 
the chair where a blue sailor blouse with striped white collar and a pair of bell -bottomed 
trousers were neatly laid out. 
Pavel looked surprised. Tonya smiled. 
 
"I  wore it at a  masquerade ball once," she explained. "It  will be  just right for you. Now, 
hurry. While you're washing, I'll get you something to eat." 
She  went  out  and  shut  the  door,  leaving  Pavel  with  no  alternative   but  to  undress  and 
climb into the tub. 
An hour later all three, mother, daughter and Pavel, were dining in the kitchen. 
 
Pavel, who was ravenously hungry, consumed three helpings before he was aware of it. 
He  was rather shy of Yekaterina Mikhailovna at first but soon thawed out when he saw 
how friendly she was. 
After dinner they retired to Tonya's room and at Yekaterina Mikhailovna's request Pavel 
related his experiences. 
"What do you intend doing now?" Yekaterina Mikhailovna asked when he had finished. 
 
Pavel pondered the question a moment. "I should like to see Artem first, and then I shall 
have to get away from here." 
"But where will you go?" 
 
"I think I could make my  way to Uman or perhaps to Kiev. I don't know myself yet, but I 
must get away from here as soon as possible." 
Pavel could hardly believe that everything had changed so quickly. Only that morning he 
had  been  in  the  filthy  cell  and  now  here  he  was  sitting  beside  Tonya,  wearing  clean 
clothes, and, what was most important, he was free. 
What queer turns life can take, he thought: one moment the sky seems black as night, 
and then the sun comes shining through again. Had it not been for the danger of being 
arrested again he would have been the happiest lad alive at this moment.  
But he knew that even in this large, silent house he was far from safe. He must go away from here, 
it  did  not  matter  where.  And  yet  he  did  not  at  all  welcome  the  idea  of  going  away.  How thrilling  it 
had  been  to  read  about  the  heroic  Garibaldi!  How  he  had  envied  him!  But  now  he  realised  that 
Garibaldi's  must  have  been  a  hard  life,  hounded  as  he  was  from  place to  place.  He,  Pavel,  had 
only lived through seven days of misery and torment, yet it had seemed like a whole year. 
 
No, clearly he was not cut out to be a hero. 
 
"What are you thinking about?" Tonya asked, bending over toward him. The deep blue of 
her eyes seemed fathomless. 
"Tonya, shall I tell you about Khristina?" 
"Yes, do," Tonya urged him. 
 
He told her the sad story of his fellow-captive. 
 
The clock ticked loudly in the silence as he ended his story: ".. .And that was the last we 
saw of her," his 
 
words came with difficulty. Tonya's head dropped and she had to bite her lips to force 
back the tears. 
 
 
 
 
第 86 页 共 259 页 
 
 
Pavel looked at her. "1 must go away tonight," he said with 
finality. "No, no, 1 shan't let you go anywhere tonight." 
She stroked his bristly hair tenderly with her slim warm fingers. . . . 
 
"Tonya,  you  must  help  me.  Someone  must  go  to  the  station  and  find  out  what  has 
happened  to  Artem  and  take a  note  to  Seryozha.  I  have a  revolver hidden  in  a  crow's 
nest. I daren't go for it, but Seryozha can get it for me. Will you be able to do this for me ?" 
Tonya got up. 
 
"I'll go to Liza Sukharko right away. She and I will go to the station together. Write your 
note and I'll take it to Seryozha. Where does he live? Shall I tell him where you are if he 
should want to see you?" 
Pavel considered for a moment before replying. "Tell him to bring the gun to your garden 
this evening." 
It  was  very  late  when  Tonya  returned.  Pavel  was  fast  asleep.  The  touch  of  her  hand 
awoke him and he opened his eyes to find her standing over him, smiling happily.  
"Artem  is  coming  here  soon.  He  has  just  come  back.  Liza's  father  has  agreed  to  vouch  for 
him and they're letting him  go  for  an  hour.  The engine is standing at the station.  I couldn't tell 
him you are here. I just told him  I had something  very important to tell him. There h e is now!"  
 
Tonya ran to open the door. Artem stood in the doorway dumb with amazement, unable 
to believe his eyes. Tonya closed the door behind him so that her father, who was lying ill 
with typhus in the study, might not overhear them. 
Another  moment  and  Artem  was  giving  Pavel  a  bear's  hug  that  made  his bones  crack, 
and crying: "Pavel! My little brother!" 
 
 
And  so  it  was  decided:  Pavel  was  to  leave  the  next  day.  Artem  would  arrange  for 
Bruzzhak to take him on a train bound for Kazatin. 
Artem,  usually  grave  and  reserved,  was  now  almost  beside  himself  with  joy  at  having 
found his brother after so many days of anxiety and uncertainty. 
"Then  it's  settled.  Tomorrow  morning  at  five  you'll  be  at  the  warehouse.  While  they're 
loading on fuel you can slip in. I wish I could stay and have a chat with you but I must be 
getting back. I'll see you off tomorrow. They're making up a battalion of railwaymen. We 
go about under an armed escort just like when the Germans were here." 
Artem said good-bye to his brother and left. 
 
Dusk gathered fast, Sergei would be arriving soon with the revolver. While he waited, Pavel paced 
nervously up and down the dark room. Tonya and her mother were with the forest warden. 
 
He  met  Sergei  in  the darkness  by  the  fence  and  the  two  friends  shook  hands  warmly. 
Sergei had brought Valya with him. They conversed in low tones. 
"I  haven't  brought  the  gun,"  Sergei  said.  "That  backyard  of  yours  is  thick  with  Petlyura 
men.  There  are  carts  standing  all  over  the  place  and  they  had  a  bonfi re  going.  So  I 
couldn't climb the tree to get the gun. It's a damn shame." Sergei was much put out. 
"Never  mind,"  Pavel  consoled  him.  "Perhaps  it's  just  as  well.  It  would  be  worse  if  I 
happened to be caught on the way with the gun. But make sure you get ho ld of it." 
Valya moved closer to Pavel. 
 
 
 
第 87 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
"When are you leaving?" 
"Tomorrow, at daybreak." 
 
"How did you manage to get away? Tell us." 
 
In  a  rapid  whisper  Pavel  told  them  his  story. Then  he  took  leave  of  his  comrades.  The 
jolly Sergei was unusually silent. 
"Good luck, Pavel, don't forget us," Valya said in a choking voice. 
 
And with that they left him, the darkness swallowing them up in an  instant. 
 
Inside the house all was quiet. The measured ticking of the clock was the only sound in 
the stillness. 
For two of the house's inmates there was no thought of sleep that night. How could they sleep 
when in six hours they were to part, perhaps never to meet again. Was it possible in that brief 
space of time to give utterance to the myriad  of unspoken thoughts that seethed within them?  
 
Youth,  sublime  youth,  when  passion,  as  yet  unknown,  is  only  dimly  felt  in  a  quickening  of  the 
pulse; when your hand coming in chance c ontact with your sweetheart's  breast trembles as if 
affrighted and  falters, and  when the sacred  friendship of yout h guards  you  from the  final step! 
What can be sweeter than to feel her arm about your  neck and her burning kiss on your lips.  
 
It  was  the  second  kiss  they  had  exchanged  throughout  their  friendship.  Pavel,  who  had 
experienced  many  a  beating  but  never  a  caress  except  from  his  mother,  was  stirred  to  the 
depths  of  his  being.  Hitherto  life  had  shown  him  its  most  brutal  side,  and  he  had  not  known  it 
could be such a  glorious thing; now this girl had taught him  what happiness could mean.  
 
He breathed the perfume of her hair and seemed to see her eyes in the darkness. "I 
love you so, Tonya, I can't tell you how much, for I don't know how to say it."  
 
His brain was in a whirl. How responsive her supple body. . . . But youth's friendship is a 
sacred trust. 
"Tonya, when all this mess is over I'm bound to get a job as a mechanic, and if you really 
want me, if you're really serious and not just playing with me, I'll be a good husband to 
you. I'll never beat you, never do anything to hurt you, I swear it." 
Fearing to fall asleep in each other's arms―lest Tonya's mother find them and think ill of 
them― they separated. 
Day was breaking  when they fell asleep after having made a solemn compact never to 
forget one another. 
Yekaterina Mikhailovna woke Pavel early. He jumped quickly out of bed. While he was in 
the  bathroom,  putting  on  his  own  clothes  and  boots,  with  Dolinnik's  jacket  on  top, 
Yekaterina Mikhailovna woke Tonya. 
They hurried through the grey morning mist to the station. When they reached the timber yards by 
the back way they found Artem waiting impatiently for them beside the loaded tender. 
 
A  powerful  engine  moved  up  slowly,  enveloped  in  clouds  of  hissing  steam.  Bruzzhak 
looked out of the cab. 
Pavel  bid Tonya  and  Artem  a  hasty  farewell,  then gripped  the  iron  rail  and  climbed  up 
into the engine. Looking back he saw two familiar figures at the crossing: the tall figure of 
Artem  and  the  small  graceful  form  of  Tonya  beside  him.  The  wind  tore  angrily  at  the 
collar of her blouse and tossed her chestnut hair. She waved to him. 
Artem glanced at  Tonya out of the corner  of his eye and noticing that she was on the  verge  of  
 
 
 
第 88 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
tears, he sighed. 
 
"I'll be damned if there isn't something up between these two," he said to himself. "And 
me thinking Pavel is still a little boy!" 
When the train disappeared behind the bend he turned to Tonya and said: "Well, shall we 
be friends?" And Tonya's tiny hand was lost in his huge paw. 
From the distance came the rumble of the train gathering speed. 
 
 
 
Chapter Seven 
 
For  a  whole  week  the  town,  belted  with  trenches  and  enmeshed  in  barbed-wire  entanglements, 
went  to sleep  at  night  and  woke  up  in  the morning  to  the  pounding  of  guns  and the  rattle  of  rifle 
fire.  Only  in the small  hours  would the  din subside,  and  even  then  the  silence  would  be shattered 
from  time  to  time  by  bursts  of  fire  as  the  outposts  probed  out  each  other.  At  dawn  men  busied 
themselves  around  the  battery  at the  railway station.  The  black  snout  of  a  gun  belched savagely 
and the men hastened to feed it another portion of steel and explosive. Each time a gunner pulled 
at  a  lanyard  the  earth  trembled  underfoot.  Three  versts  from  town  the  shells  whined  over  the 
village occupied by the Reds, drowning out all other sounds, and sending up geysers of earth. 
 
The Red battery was stationed on the grounds of an old Polish monastery standing on a 
high hill in the centre of the village. 
The Military Commissar of the battery, Comrade Zamostin, leapt to his feet. He had been 
sleeping  with  his  head  resting  on  the  trail  of  a  gun.  Now,  tightening  his  belt  with  the 
heavy  Mauser  attached  to  it,  he  listened  to  the  flight  of  the  shell  and  waited  f or  the 
explosion. Then the courtyard echoed to his resonant voice. 
"Time to get up, Comrades!" 
 
The gun crews slept beside their guns, and they were on their feet as quickly as the Commissar. 
All but Sidorchuk, who raised his head reluctantly and looked around with sleep-heavy eyes. "The 
swine―hardly light yet and they're at it again. Just out of spite, the bastards!" 
 
Zamostin laughed. 
 
"Unsocial elements, Sidorchuk, that's what they are. They don't care whether you want to 
sleep or not." 
The artilleryman grumblingly roused himself. 
 
A  few  minutes  later  the  guns  in  the  monastery  yard  were  in  action  and  shells  were 
exploding in the town. 
On a platform of planks rigged  up on top of the tall smoke stack of the sugar  refinery squatted 
a Petlyura officer and a telephonist. They had climbed up the iron ladder inside the chimney.  
 
From  this  vantage  point  they  directed  the  fire  of  their  artillery.  Through  their  field  glasses  they 
could  see  every  movement  made  by  the  Red  troops  besieging  the  town.  Today  the  Bolsheviks 
were  particularly  active.  An  armoured  train  was slowly  edging  in  on the Podolsk Station,  keeping 
up  an  incessant  fire  as  it  came. Beyond  it  the  attack  lines  of  the  infantry could  be seen. Several 
times  the  Red  forces  tried  to  take  the  town  by  storm,  but  the  Petlyura  troops  were  firmly 
entrenched  on  the  approaches.  The  trenches  erupted  a  squall  of  fire,  filling  the  air  with  a 
maddening din which mounted to an unintermittent roar, reaching its highest pitch during the 
 
第 89 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
attacks.  Swept  by  this  leaden  hailstorm,  unable  to  stand  the  inhuman  strain,  the 
Bolshevik lines fell back, leaving motionless bodies behind on the field. 
Today  the  blows  delivered  at  the  town  were  more  persistent  and  more  frequent  than  before. 
The  air  quivered  from  the  reverberations  of  the  gunfire.  From  the  height  of  the  smok e  stack 
you  could  see  the  steadily  advancing  Bolshevik  lines,  the  men  throwing  themselves  on  the 
ground only to rise again and press irresistibly forward. Now they had all but taken the station. 
The  Petlyura  division's  available  reserves  were  sent  into  action,  but  they  could  not  close  the 
breach  driven  in  their  positions.  Filled  wit h  a  des perate  resolve,  the  Bolshevik  attack  lines 
spilled  into  the  streets  adjoining  the  station,  whos e  defenders,  the  third  regiment  of  the 
Petlyura  division,  routed  from  their  last  positions  in  the  gardens  and  orchards  at  the  edge  of 
the  town  by  a  brief  but  terrible  thrust,  scattered  into  the  town.  Before  they  could  recover 
enough  to  make  a  new  stand,  the  Red  Army  men  poured  into  the  streets,  sweeping  away  in 
bayonet charges the Petlyura pickets left behind to cover the  retreat.  
 
Nothing  could  induce  Sergei  Bruzzhak  to  stay  down  in  the  basement  where  his  family  and  the 
nearest  neighbours  had  taken  refuge. And  in  spite  of  his  mother's  entreaties  he  climbed  out  of  the 
chilly  cellar.  An  armoured  car  with  the  name  Sagaidachny  on  its  side  clattered  past  the  house, 
firing wildly as it went. Behind it ran panic-stricken Petlyura men in complete disorder. One of them 
slipped  into  Sergei's yard,  where  with  feverish  haste  he tore  off  his cartridge  belt,  helmet  and  rifle 
and then vaulted over the fence and disappeared in the kitchen gardens beyond. Sergei looked out 
into the  street. Petlyura soldiers  were  running  down  the  road leading to  the  Southwestern Station, 
their  retreat  covered  by  an  armoured  car.  The  highway  leading to  town  was  deserted.  Then  a  Red 
Army  man  dashed  into  sight.  He  threw  himself  down  on  the  ground  and  began  firing  down  the 
road.  A second  and  a  third  Red  Army  man came into  sight  behind  him.  .  .  .  Sergei  watched them 
coming, crouching down and firing as they ran. A bronzed Chinese with bloodshot eyes, cl ad in an 
undershirt  and  girded  with  machine-gun  belts,  was  running  full  height,  a  grenade  in  each  hand. 
And  ahead  of  them  all came  a  Red  Army  man,  hardly  more than  a  boy,  with  a  light  machine  gun. 
The  advance  guard  of the  Red Army  had  entered  the  town. Sergei,  wild  with  joy,  dashed  out  onto 
the road and shouted as loud as he could: 
 
"Long live the comrades!" 
 
So unexpectedly did he rush out that the Chinese all but knocked him off his feet. The 
latter was about to turn on him, but the exultation on Sergei's face stayed him. 
"Where is Petlyura?" the Chinese shouted at him, panting heavily. 
 
But  Sergei  did  not  hear  him.  He  ran  back  into  the  yard,  picked  up  the  cartridge  belt  and  rifle 
abandoned by the Petlyura man and hurried  after the  Red Army men.  They did  not notice  him 
until  they  had  stormed  the  Southwestern  Station.  Here,  after  cutting  off  several  trainloads  of 
munitions  and  supplies  and  hurling  the  enemy  into  the  woods,  they  stopped  to  rest  and 
regroup.  The young machine gunner came over to Sergei and asked in surprise:  
 
"Where are you from, Comrade?" 
 
"I'm from this town. I've been waiting for you to come." 
Sergei was soon surrounded by Red Army men. 
 
"I  know  him,"  the  Chinese  said  in  broken  Russian.  "He  yelled 'Long  live  comrades!'  He 
Bolshevik, he with us, a good fellow!" he added with a broad smile, slapping Sergei on 
the shoulder approvingly. 
 
 
 
 
第 90 页 共 259 页 
 
 
Sergei's heart leapt with joy. He had been accepted at once, accepted as one of them. 
And together with them he had taken the station in a bayonet charge. 
The  town  bestirred  itself.  The  townsfolk,  exhausted  by  their  ordeal,  emerged  from  the 
cellars and basements and came out to the front gates to see the Red Army units enter 
the  town.  Thus  it  was  that  Sergei's  mother  and  his  sister  Valya  saw  Sergei  marching 
along with the others in the ranks of the Red Army men. He was hatless, but girded with 
a cartridge belt and with a rifle slung over his shoulder. 
Antonina Vasilievna threw up her hands in indignation. 
 
So her Seryozha had got mixed up in the fight. He would pay for this! Fancy him parading 
with a rifle in front of the whole town! There was bound to be trouble later on. Antonina 
Vasilievna could no longer restrain herself: 
"Seryozha,  come  home  this  minute!"  she  shouted.  "I'll  show  you  how  to  behave,  you 
scamp!  I'll  teach  you  to  fight!"  And  at  that  she  marched  out  to  the  road  with  the  firm 
intention of bringing her son back. 
But this time her Seryozha, her boy whose ears she had so often boxed, looked sternly at 
his mother, his face burning with shame and anger as he snapped at her: "Stop shouting! 
I'm staying where I am." And he marched past without stopping. 
Antonina Vasilievna was beside herself with anger. 
 
"So that's how you treat your mother! Don't you dare come home 
after this!" "I won't!" Sergei cried, without turning around. 
Antonina  Vasilievna  stood  speechless  on  the  road  staring after  him,  while  the  ranks  of 
weather-beaten, dust-covered fighting men trudged past. 
"Don't cry, mother! We'll make your laddie a commissar," a strong, jovial voice rang out. 
A roar of good-natured laughter ran through the platoon. Up at the head of the company 
voices struck up in unison: 
 
Comrades, the bugles are sounding, 
 
Shoulder your arms for the fray. 
 
On to the kingdom of liberty 
 
Boldly shall we fight our way. . . . 
 
The  ranks  joined  in  a  mighty  chorus and  Sergei's ringing  voice  merged  in the  swelling 
melody. He had found a new family. One bayonet in it was his, Sergei's. 
On  the  gates  of  the  Leszczinski  house  hung  a  strip  of  white  cardboard  with  the  brief 
inscription: "Revc om." Beside it  was an arresting  poster  of a  Red Army man looking into your 
eyes and pointing his finger straight at you over the words: "Have you joi ned the  Red Army?" 
 
The  Political  Department  people  had  been  at  work  during  the  night  putting  up  these 
posters all over the town. Nearby hung the Revolutionary Committee's first proclamation 
to the toiling population of Shepetovka: 
 
"Comrades! The proletarian troops have taken this town. Soviet power has been restored. We call 
on  you  to  maintain  order.  The  bloody  cutthroats  have  been  thrown  back,  but  if  you  want  them 
never to return, if you want to see them destroyed once and for all, join the ranks of the  Red 
 
第 91 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Army. Give all your support to the power of the working folk. Military authority in this town 
is  in  the  hands of  the  chief  of  the  garrison.  Civilian  affairs  will  be  administered  by  the 
Revolutionary Committee. 
"Signed: Dolinnik 
 
"Chairman of the Revolutionary Committee." 
 
People of a new sort appeared in the Leszczinski house. The word "comrade", for which 
only  yesterday  people  had  paid  with  their  life,  was  now  heard  on  all  sides.  That 
indescribably moving word, "comrade"! 
For  Dolinnik  there  was  no  sleep  or  rest  these  days.  The  joiner  was  busy  establishing 
revolutionary government. 
In  a  small  room  on  the  door  of  which  hung  a  slip  of  paper  with  the  pencilled  words  "Party 
Committee"  sat  Comrade  Ignatieva,  calm  and  imperturbable  as  always.  The  Political 
Department entrusted her and Dolinnik wit h the task of setting up the organs of Soviet power.  
 
One  more  day  and  office  workers  were  seated  at  desks  and  a  typewriter  was  clicking  busily. 
A Commissariat of Supplies  was organised under nervous, dynamic  Tyzycki. Now that Soviet 
power  was  firmly  established  in  the  town,  Tyzycki,  formerly  a  mechanic's  helper  at  the  local 
sugar  refinery,  proceeded  with  grim  determination  to  wage  war  on  the  bosses  of  the  sugar 
refinery who, nursing a bitter hatred for the Bolsheviks, were lying low and biding their time.  
 
At a meeting of the refinery workers he summed up the situation in harsh, unrelenting  terms. "The 
past is gone never to return," he declared, speaking in Polish and banging his fist on the edge of 
the rostrum to drive home his words. "It is enough that our fathers and we ourselves slaved all 
 
our lives for the Potockis. We built palaces for them and in return His Highness the Count 
gave us just enough to keep us from dying of starvation. 
"How  many  years  did  the  Potocki  counts  and  the  S anguszko  princes  ride  our  backs?  Are 
there  not  any  number  of  Polish  workers  whom  P otocki  ground  down  just  as   he  did  the 
Russians  and  Ukrainians?  And  yet  the  count's  henchmen  have  now  spread  the  rumour 
among these  very same  workers that the Soviet power will rule them all  with an iron hand.  
 
"That  is  a  foul  lie,  Comrades !  Never  have  workingmen  of  different  nationalities  had  such 
freedom  as  now.  All  proletarians  are  brothers.  As  for  the  gentry,  we  are  going  to  curb  them, 
you  may  depend  on  that."  His  hand  swung  down  again  heavily  on  the  barrier  of  the  rostrum. 
"Who  is  it  that  has  made  brothers  spill  each  other's  blood?  For  centuries  kings  and  nobles 
have  sent  Polish  peasants  to  fight  the  Turks.  They  have  always  incited  one  nation  against 
another.  Think of all the bloodshed and misery they have caused! And who benefited by it all? 
But  soon  all  that  will  stop.  This  is  the  end  of  those  vermin.  The  Bolsheviks  have  flung  out  a 
slogan  t hat  strikes  terror  into  the  hearts  of  the  bourgeoisie:  'Workers  of  all  c ountries,  unite!' 
There  lies  our  salvation,  there  lies  our  hope  for  a  better  future,  for  the  day  when  all 
workingmen will be brothers. Comrades, join the Communist Party! 
 
"There will be a Polish republic too one day but it will be a Soviet republic without the Potockis, for 
they  will  be  rooted  out  and  we  shall  be  the  masters  of  Soviet  Poland.  You  all  know  Bronik 
Ptaszinski,  don't you?  The  Revolutionary  Committee  has  appointed  him  commissar  of  our  factory. 
'We were naught, we shall be all.' We shall have cause for rejoicing, Comrades. Only take care not 
to give ear to the hissing of those hidden reptiles! Let us place our faith in the workingman's cause 
 
第 92 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
and we shall establish the brotherhood of all peoples throughout the world!" 
 
These words were uttered with a sincerity and fervour that came from the bottom of this 
simple  workingman's  heart.  He  descended  the  platform  amid  shouts  of  enthusiastic 
acclaim  from  the  younger  members  of  the  audience.  The  older  workers,  however, 
hesitated to speak up. Who knew but what tomorrow the Bolsheviks might have to give 
up the town and then those who remained would have to pay dearly for every rash word. 
Even if you escaped the gallows, you would lose your job for sure. 
 
The  Commissar  of  Education,  the  slim,  well-knit  Czarnopyski,  was  so  far  the  only 
schoolteacher in the locality who had sided with the Bolsheviks. 
Opposite the premises of the Revolutionary Committee the Special Duty Company  was 
quartered; its men were on duty at the Revolutionary Co mmittee. At night a Maxim gun 
stood  ready  in  the  garden  at  the  entrance  to  the  Revcom,  a  sinewy  ammunition  belt 
trailing from its breech. Two men with rifles stood guard beside it. 
Comrade  Ignatieva  on  her  way  to  the  Revcom  went  up  to  one  of  them,  a  young  Red 
Army man, and asked: 
"How old are you, Comrade?" 
"Going on seventeen." 
 
"Do you live here?" 
 
The Red Army man smiled. "Yes, I only joined the army the day before yesterday during 
the fighting." 
Ignatieva studied his face. 
"What does your father do?" 
 
"He's an engine driver's assistant." 
 
At that moment Dolinnik appeared, accompanied by a man in uniform. 
 
"Here you are," said Ignatieva, turning to Dolinnik, "I've found the very lad to put in 
charge of the district committee of the Komsomol. He's a local man." 
Dolinnik glanced quickly at Sergei―for it was he. 
 
"Ah yes. You're Zakhar's boy, aren't you? All right, go ahead and stir up the 
young folk." Sergei looked at them in surprise. "But what about the company?" 
"That's all right, we'll attend to that," Dolinnik, already mounting the steps, threw over his 
shoulder. 
Two days later the local committee of the Young Communist League of the  Ukraine was 
formed. Sergei plunged into the  vort ex of the new life that had burst suddenly and swiftly 
upon the town. It filled his entire existence so completely that he  forgot his family although it 
was so near at hand. He, Sergei Bruzzhak, was now a Bolshevik. For the hundredt h time he 
pulled out of his pocket the document issued by the  Committee of the Ukrainian Communis t 
Party, certifying that he, Sergei, was a Komsomol  and Secretary of the Komsomol 
Committee. And should anyone entertain any doubts on that score there was the impressive 
Mannlicher―a gift from dear old Pavel―in its makeshift canvas holster hanging  from the belt 
of his tunic. A most convincing credential that ! Too bad Pavlushk a wasn't around!  
 
Sergei's  days  were spent  on  assignments  given  by the  Revcom.  Today too  Ignatieva  was  waiting 
for  him.  They  were  to  go  down  to  the  station  to  the  Division  Political  Department  to  get 
newspapers and books for the Revolutionary Committee. Sergei hurried out of the building to the 
 
第 93 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
street, where a man from the Political Department was waiting for them with an automobile. During 
the long drive to the station where the Headquarters and Political Department of the First Soviet 
Ukrainian Division were located in railway carriages, Ignatieva plied Sergei with questions. "How 
has your work been going? Have you formed your organisation yet? You ought to persuade your 
friends, the workers' children, to join the Komsomol. We shall need a group of Communist youth 
very soon. Tomorrow we shall draw up and print a Komsomol leaflet. Then we'll hold a big youth 
rally in the theatre. When we get to the Political Department I'll introduce you to Ustinovich. She is 
working with the young people, if I'm not mistaken." 
 
Ustinovic h  turned  out  to  be  a  girl  of  eighteen  with  dark  bobbed  hair,  in  a  new  khaki  tunic  with 
a  narrow  leather  belt.  She  gave  Sergei  a  great  many  pointers  in  his  work  and  promised  to 
help  him. Before he left she  gave  him a large bundle of books and  newspapers, including  one 
of particular importance, a booklet containing the programme and rules of the Koms omol.  
 
When he  returned late that night to the Revcom Sergei found Valya waiting for him  outside,  
 
"You ought to be ashamed of yourself!" she cried. "What do you mean by staying away 
from  home  like  this?  Mother  is  crying  her eyes  out  and  father  is  very  angry  with  you. 
There's going to be an awful row. 
"No,  there  isn't,"  he reassured  her.  "I  haven't  any  time  to  go  home,  honest  I  haven't.  I 
won't be coming tonight either. But I'm glad you've  come because I want to have a talk 
with you. Let's go inside." 
Valya could hardly recognise her brother. He was quite changed. He fairly bubbled with 
energy. As soon as she was seated Sergei went straight to the point. 
"Here's the situation, Valya. You've got to join the Komsomol. You don't know what that 
is?  The  Young  Communist  League.  I'm  running  things  here.  You don't  believe  me?  All 
right, look at this!" Valya read the paper and looked at her brother in bewilderment.  
"What will I do in the Komsomol?" 
 
Sergei spread out his hands. "My dear girl, there's heaps to do! Look at me, I'm so busy I 
don't sleep nights. We've got to make propaganda. Ignatieva says we're going to hold a 
meeting in the theatre soon and talk about the Soviet power. She says I'll have to make a 
speech. I think it's a mistake because I don't know how to make speeches. I'm bound to 
make a hash of it. Now, what about your joining the Komsomol?" 
"I don't know what to say. Mother would be wild with me if I did." 
 
"Never mind mother, Valya," Sergei urged. "She doesn't understand. All she cares about 
is to have her children beside her. But she has nothing against the Soviet power. On the 
contrary, she's all for it. But she would rather other people's sons d id the fighting. Now, is 
that  fair?  Remember  what  Zhukhrai  told  us?  And  look  at  Pavel,  he  didn't  stop to  think 
about his mother. The time has come when we young folk must fight for our right to make 
something  of  our  lives.  Surely  you  won't  refuse,  Valya?  T hink  how  fine  it  will  be.  You 
could work  with the girls, and I  would be  working with the fellows. That reminds me,  I'll 
tackle that red-headed devil Klimka this very day. Well, Valya, what do you say? Are you 
with us or not? I have a little booklet here that will tell you all about it." 
 
He took the booklet of Komsomol Rules out of his pocket and handed it to her. 
 
"But what if Petlyura comes back again?" Valya asked him in a low voice, her eyes glued 
to her brother's face. 
 
 
 
第 94 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
This thought had not yet occurred to Sergei and he pondered it for a moment.  
 
"I would have to leave with all the others, of course," he said. "But what would happen to 
you? Yes, it would make mother very unhappy." He lapsed into silence. 
"Seryozha, couldn't you enrol me without mother or anyone else knowing? Just you and 
me? I could help just the same. That would be the best way." 
"I believe you're right, Valya." Ignatieva 
entered the room at that point. 
 
"This  is  my  little  sister  Valya,  Comrade  Ignatieva.  I've  just  been  talking  to  her  about  joining  the 
Komsomol. She  would  make  a  suitable  member,  but you see,  our mother might  make  difficulties. 
Could we enrol Valya so that no one would know about it? You see, we might have to give up the 
town. I would leave with the army, of course, but Valya is afraid it would go hard with mother." 
 
Ignatieva, sitting on the edge of  a chair, listened 
gravely. "Yes," she agreed. "That is the best course."  
 
 
The packed theat re buzzed with the  excited chatter of the youth  who had come in response to 
notices  posted  all  over  town.  A  brass  band  of  workers  from  the  sugar  refinery  was  playing. 
The  audience,  consisting  mainly  of  students  of  the  local  secondary  school   and  Gymnasium, 
was less interested in the meeting than in the concert that was to follow it.  
 
At last the curtain rose and Comrade Razin, Secretary of the Uyezd Committee, who had 
just arrived, appeared on the platform. 
All  eyes  were  turned to this short, slenderly  built man  with the small, sharp  nose,  and  his speech 
was  listened  to  with  keen  attention.  He  told  them  about  the  struggle  that  had  swept  the  entire 
country  and  called  on youth  to  rally to  the  Communist Party.  He  spoke like  an  experienced  orator 
but made  excessive  use  of  terms  like "orthodox Marxists",  "social-chauvinists"  and  the  like,  which 
his  hearers  did  not  understand.  Nevertheless,  when  he  finished  they  applauded  him  warmly,  and 
after introducing the next speaker, who was Sergei, he left. 
 
It  was as he had feared: now that he was face to face with the audience, Sergei did not 
know  what to say. He fumbled painfully for a while until Ignatieva came to his rescue by 
whispering from her seat on the platform: "Tell them about organising a Komsomol cell." 
Sergei at once went straight to the point. 
 
"Well,  Comrades,  you've  heard all  there  is  to  be  said.  What  we've  got  to  do now  is  to 
form a cell. Who is in favour?" 
A hush fell on the gathering. Ustinovich stepped into the breach. She got up and told the audience 
how the youth were being organised in Moscow. Sergei in the meantime stood aside in confusion. 
He  raged  inwardly  at  the  meeting's  reaction to  the  question  of  organising  a cell  and  he scowled 
down  at  the  audience.  They  hardly  listened  to  Ustinovich.  Sergei  saw  Zalivanov  whisper 
something to  Liza Sukharko  with  a contemptuous look  at the speaker  on  the  platform.  In  the  front 
row  the  senior  Gymnasium  girls  with  powdered  faces  were casting  coy  glances  about  them  and 
whispering among themselves. Over in the corner near the door leading backstage was a group of 
young Red Army men. Among them Sergei saw the young machine gunner. He was sitting on the 
edge  of  the  stage  fidgeting  nervously  and  gazing  with  undisguised  hat red  at the  flashily  dressed 
Liza Sukharko and Anna Admovskaya who, totally unabashed, were carrying on a lively 
 
第 95 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
conversation with their escorts. 
 
Realising that no one was listening to her, Ustinovich quickly wound up her speech and sat down. 
Ignatieva took the floor next, and her calm compelling manner quelled the restless audience. 
"Comrades," she said, "I advise each of you to think over what has been said here tonight. I am 
sure that some of you will become active participants in the revolution and not merely spectators. 
The doors are open to receive you, the rest is up to you. We should like to hear you express your 
opinion. We invite anyone who has anything to say to step up to the platform." 
 
Once more silence reigned in the hall. Then a voice spoke up from 
the back. "I'd like to speak!" 
Misha Levchukov, a lad with a slight squint and the build of a young bear, made his way 
to the stage. 
"The  way  things  are,"  he  said,  "we've  got  to  help  the  Bolsheviks.  I'm  for  it.  Seryozhka 
knows me. I'm joining the Komsomol."  
Sergei beamed. He sprang forward to the centre of .the stage. 
 
"You  see,  Comrades!"  he  cried.  "I  always  said  Misha  was  one  of  us:  his  fat her  was  a 
switchman  and  he  was  crushed  by  a  train,  and  that's  why  Misha  couldn't  get  an  education. 
But he didn't need to go to Gymnasium to understand  what's wanted at a time like this."  
 
There was an uproar in the hall. A young man with carefully groomed hair asked for the 
floor.  It  was  Okushev,  a  Gymnasium  student  and  the  son  of  the  local  apothecary. 
Tugging at his tunic, he began: 
"I  beg  your  pardon,  Comrades.  I  don't  understand  what  is  wanted  of  us.  Are  we  expected  to 
go  in  for  politics?  If  so,  when  are  we  going  to  study?  We've  got  to  finish  the  Gymnasium.  If  it 
was  some  sports  society,  or  club that  was  being  organised  where  we  could  gather  and  read, 
that  would  be  another  matter.  But  to  go  in  for  politics  means  taking the  risk  of  getting  hanged 
afterwards. Sorry, but I don't think anybody will agree to that." 
 
There was laughter in the hall as Okushev jumped off the stage and resumed his seat. 
The  next  speaker  was  the  young  machine  gunner .  Pulling  his  cap  down  over  his 
forehead with a furious gesture and glaring down at the audience, he shouted: 
"What're you laughing at, you vermin!" 
 
His eyes were two burning coals and he trembled all over with fury. Taking a deep breath 
he began: 
"Ivan  Zharky  is  my  name.  I'm  an  orphan.  I  never  knew my mother  or  my  father  and  I  never  had  a 
home. I grew up on the street, begging for a crust of bread and starving most of the time. It was a 
dog's  life,  I can  tell you, something you  mama's  boys know  not hing  about.  Then the Soviet  power 
came  along  and  the  Red Army  men  picked  me  up  and  took care  of me.  A  whole  platoon  of  them 
adopted  me.  They  gave  me  clothes  and taught me to  read  and  write.  But  what's  most  important, 
they taught me what it was to be a human being. Because of them I became a Bolshevik and I'll be 
a Bolshevik till I die. I know damn well what we're fighting for, we're fighting for us poor folk, for the 
workers'  government. You sit there  cackling  but  you  don't know that  two  hundred comrades  were 
killed  fighting  for  this  town.  They  perished.  .  .  ."  Zharky's  voice  vibrated  like  a  taut  string.  "They 
gave  up  their  lives  gladly  for  our  happiness,  for  our  cause.  .  .  .  People  are  dying  all  over  the 
country,  on  all  the  fronts,  and  you're  playing  at  merry-go-rounds  here.  Comrades,"  he  went  on, 
turning suddenly to the presidium table, "you're wasting your time talking to them there," he 
 
第 96 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
jabbed a finger toward the hall. "Think they'll understand you? No! A full stomach is no 
comrade to an empty one. Only one man came forward here and that's because he's one 
of the poor, an orphan. Never mind," he roared furiously at the gathering, "we'll g et along 
without you. We're not going to beg you to join us, you can go to the devil, the lot of you! 
The only way to talk to the likes of you is with a machine gun!" And with this parting thrust 
he stepped off the stage and made straight for the exit, gla ncing neither to right nor left. 
 
None of those who had presided at the meeting stayed on for the concert. 
 
"What  a  mess!" said Sergei  with chagrin  as they  were  on  their  way  back to the  Revcom.  "Zharky 
was right. We couldn't do anything with that Gymnasium crowd. It just makes you wild!" 
 
"It's not surprising," Ignatieva interrupted him. "After all there were hardly any proletarian 
youth  there  at  all.  Most  of  them  were  either  sons  of  the  petty  bourgeois  or  local 
intellectuals―philistines all of them. You will have to work among the sawmill and sugar 
refinery workers. But that meeting was not altogether wasted. You'll find there are some 
very good comrades among the students." 
Ustinovich agreed with Ignatieva. 
 
"Our  task,  Seryozha,"  she  said,  "is  to bring  home  our  ideas,  our  slogans,  to  everyone. 
The Party will focus the attention of all working people on every new event. We shall hold 
many  meetings,  conferences  and  congresses.  The  Political  Department  is  opening  a 
summer theatre at the station. A propaganda train is due to arrive in a few days and then 
we'll get things going in real earnest. Remember what Lenin said ―we  won't win unless 
we draw the masses, the millions of working people into the struggle." 
 
Late that evening Sergei escorted Ustinovich to the station. On parting he clasped her 
hand firmly and held it a few seconds longer than absolutely necessary. A faint smile 
flitted across her face. On his way back Sergei dropped in to see his people. He listened 
in silence to his mother's scolding, but when his father chimed in, Sergei took up the 
offensive and soon had Zakhar Vasilievich at a disadvantage. 
"Now  listen,  dad,  when  you  went  on  strike  under  the  Germans  and  killed  t hat  sentry  on  the 
locomotive,  you  thought  of  your  family,  didn't  you?  Of  course  you  did.  But  you  went  through 
with  it  just  the  same  because  your  workingman's  conscience  told  you  to.  I've  also  thought  of 
the family. I know  very well that if we retreat you folks will be persecuted because of me. But  I 
couldn't  sit  at  home  anyway.  You  know  how  it  is  yourself,  dad,  so  why  all  this  fuss?  I'm 
working  for  a good cause and you ought to back me up instead of kicking up  a row. Come on, 
dad,  let's  make  it  up  and  then  ma  will  stop  scolding  me  too."  He  regarded  his  father  with  his 
clear blue eyes and smiled affectionat ely, confident that he  was in the right. 
 
Zakhar  Vasilievich  stirred  uneasily  on  the  bench  and  through  his  thick  bristling 
moustache and untidy little beard his yellowish teeth showed in a smile. 
"Dragging  class  consciousness  into  it,  eh,  you  young  rascal?  You  think  that  revolver 
you're sporting is going to stop me from giving you a good hiding?" 
But his voice held no hint of anger, and mastering his confusion, he held out his horny 
hand  to  his  son.  "Carry  on,  Seryozha.  Once  you've  started  up  the  gradient  I'll  not  be 
putting on the brakes. But you mustn't forget us altogether, drop in once in a while." 
 
 
 
 
 
第 97 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
It  was night. A shaft of light from a crack in the door lay on the steps. Behind the huge 
lawyer's  desk  in  the  large  room  with  its  upholstered  plush  furniture  sat  five  people: 
Dolinnik,  Ignatieva,  Cheka  chief  Timoshenko,  looking  like  a  Kirghiz  in  his  Cossa ck  fur 
cap,  the  giant railwayman  Shudik  and  flat-nosed  Ostapchuk  from  the  railway  yards.  A 
meeting of the Revcom was in progress. 
Dolinnik, lea'ning over the table and fixing Ignatieva with a stern look, hammered out hoarsely: 
"The front must have supplies. The workers have to eat. As soon as we came the shopkeepers 
and market profiteers raised their prices. They won't take Soviet money. Old tsarist money or 
Kerensky notes are the only kind in circulation here. Today we must sit down and work out fixed 
prices. We know very well that none of the profiteers are going to sell their goods at the fixed price. 
They'll hide what they've got. In that case we'll make searches and confiscate the bloodsuckers' 
goods. This is no time for niceties. We can't let the workers starve any longer. Comrade Ignatieva 
warns us not to go too far. That's the reaction of a fainthearted intellectual, if you ask me. Now 
don't take offence, Zoya, I know what I'm talking about. And in any case it isn't a matter of the petty 
traders. I have received information today that Boris Zon, the innkeeper, has a secret cellar in his 
house. Even before Petlyura came, the big shopown-ers had huge stocks of goods hidden away 
there." He paused to throw a sly, mocking glance at Timoshenko. 
 
"How  did  you  find  that out?" queried  Timoshenko,  surprised  and  annoyed  at  Dolinnik's 
having stolen a march on the Cheka. 
Dolinnik  chuckled.  "I  know  everything,  brother.  Besides  finding  out  about  the  cellar,  I 
happen  to  know  that  you  and  the  Division  Commander's  chauffeur  polished  off  half a 
bottle of samogon between you yesterday." 
Timoshenko fidgeted in his chair and a flush spread over his sallow features. 
 
"Good  for  you!"  he  exclaimed  in  unwilling  admiration.  But  catching  sight  of  Ignatieva's 
disapproving  frown,  he  went  no  further.  "That  blasted  joiner  has  his  own  Cheka!"  he 
thought to himself as he eyed the Chairman of the Revcom. 
"Sergei  B ruzzhak  told  me,"  Dolinnik  went  on.  "He  knows  someone  who  used  to  work  in  the 
refres hment  bar.  Well,  that  lad  heard  from  the  cooks  that  Zon  used  to  supply  them  with  all 
they needed in unlimited quantities. Yesterday Sergei  found  out defi nit ely about that cellar. All 
that  has  to  be  done  now  is  to  locate  it.  Get  the  boys  on  the  job,  Timoshenko,  at  once.  Take 
Sergei along. If we're lucky we'll be able to supply the workers and the division."  
 
Half an hour later eight armed men entered the innkeeper's home. Two remained outside 
to guard the entrance. 
The  proprietor, a  short  stout  man  as round  as  a  barrel,  with  a  wooden  leg  and a  face 
covered with a bristly growth of red hair, met the newcomers with obsequious politeness. 
"What do you wish at this late hour, Comrades?" he inquired in a husky bass. 
 
Behind Zon, stood his daughters in hastily donned dressing-gowns, blinking in the glare 
of Timoshenko's torch. From the next room came the sighs and groans of Zon's buxom 
wife who was hurriedly dressing. 
"We've come to search the house," Timoshenko explained curtly. 
 
Every square inch of the floor was thoroughly examined. A spacious barn piled high with 
sawn wood, several pantries, the kitchen and a roomy cellar ―all were inspected with the 
greatest care. But not a trace of the secret cellar was found. 
 
第 98 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
In a tiny room off the kitchen the servant girl lay fast asleep. She slept so soundly that 
she did not hear them come in. Sergei wakened her gently. 
"You work here?" he asked. The bewildered sleepy-eyed girl drew the blanket over her 
shoulders and shielded her eyes from the light. 
"Yes," she replied. "Who are you?" 
 
Sergei told her and, instructing her to get dressed, left the room. 
 
In the spacious dining room Timoshenko was questioning the innkeeper who spluttered 
and fumed in great agitation: 
"What  do you  want  of  me?  I  haven't  got  any more cellars. You're  just  wasting your time,  I  assure 
you. Yes,  I  did keep  a tavern  once  but  now  I'm  a  poor  man.  The  Petlyura  crowd cleaned me  out 
and very nearly killed me too. I am very glad the Soviets have come to power,  but all I own is here 
for you to see." And he spread out his short pudgy hands, the while his bloodshot eyes darted from 
the face of the Cheka chief to Sergei and from Sergei to the corner and the ceiling. 
 
Timoshenko bit his lips. 
 
"So you won't tell, eh? For the last time I order you to show us where that cellar is." 
 
"But, Comrade Officer, we've got nothing to eat ourselves," the innkeeper's wife wailed. 
"They've taken all we had." She tried to weep but nothing came of it. 
"You say you're starving, but you keep a servant," Sergei put in. 
 
"That's not a servant. She's just a poor girl we've taken in because she has nowhere to 
go. She'll tell you that herself." 
Timoshenko's patience snapped. "All right then," he shouted, "now we'll set to work in 
earnest!" Morning dawned and the search was still going on. Exasperated after thirteen 
hours of fruitless efforts, Timoshenko had already decided to abandon the quest wh en 
Sergei, on the point of leaving the servant girl's room he had been examining, heard the 
girl's faint whisper behind him: "Look inside the stove in the kitchen." 
Ten minutes later the dismantled Russian stove revealed an iron trapdoor. And within an 
hour  a  two-ton  truck  loaded  with  barrels  and  sacks  drove  away  from  the  innkeeper's 
house now surrounded by a crowd of gaping onlookers. 
 
 
Maria  Yakovlevna  Korchagina  came  home  one  hot  day carrying  her small  bundle  of  belongings. 
She  wept  bitterly  when Artem  told  her  what  had  happened  to Pavel.  Her  life  now  seemed  empty 
and dreary. She had to look for work, and after a time she began taking in washing from Red Army 
men who arranged for her to receive soldiers' rations by way of payment. 
 
One  evening  she  heard  Artem's  footsteps  outside  the  window sounding  more  hurried than  usual. 
He pushed the door open and announced from the threshold: "I've brought a letter from Pavka." 
 
"Dear  Brother Artem,"  wrote Pavel.  "This is to  let you  know  that  I  am  alive  although  not  altogether 
well. I got a bullet in my hip but I am getting better now. The doctor says the bone is uninjured. So 
don't  worry  about  me,  I'll  be  all  right.  I  may  get  leave  after  I'm  discharged  from  hospital  and  I'll 
come home for a while. I didn't manage to get to mother's. I joined the cavalry brigade commanded 
by  Comrade  Kotovsky,  whom  I'm  sure  you've  heard  about  because  he's  famous  for  his  bravery.  I 
have never seen anyone like him before and I have the greatest respect 
 
第 99 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
for him. Has mother come home yet? If she has, give her my best love. Forgive me for all 
the trouble I have caused you. Your brother Pavel. 
"Artem, please go to the forest warden's and tell them about this letter." 
 
Maria  Yakovlevna  shed  many  tears  over  Pavel's  letter.  The  scatterbrained  lad  had  not 
even given the address of his hospital. 
Sergei  had  become  a  frequent  visitor  at  the  green  railway  coach  down  at  the  station 
bearing the sign: "Agitprop Div. Pol. Dept." In one of the compartments of the Agitation 
and  Propaganda  Coach,  Ustinovich  and  Ignatieva  had  their  office. The  latter,  with  the 
inevitable cigarette between her lips, smiled knowingly whenever he appeared. 
The  Secretary  of  the  Komsomol  District  Committee  had  grown  quite  friendly  with  Rita 
Ustinovich, and besides the bundles of books and newspapers, he carried away with him 
from the station a vague sense of happiness after every brief encounter with her. 
Every day the open-air theatre of the Division Political Department drew big audiences of 
workers  and  Red  Army  men.  The  agit  train  of  the  Twelfth  Army,  swathed  in  bright 
coloured  posters,  stood  on  a  siding,  seething  with  activity  twenty-four  hours  a  day.  A 
printing  plant  had  been  installed  inside  and  newspapers,  leaflets  and  proclamations 
poured out in a steady stream. The front was near at hand. 
One evening Sergei chanced to drop in at the theatre and found Rita there with a group 
of Red Army men. Late that night, as he was seeing her home to the station where the 
Political  Department  staff  was  quartered,  he  blurted out:  "Why  do  I  always  want  to  be 
seeing you, Comrade Rita?" And added: "It's so nice to be with you! After seeing you I 
always feel I could go on working without stopping." 
Rita  halted.  "Now  look  here,  Comrade  Bruzzhak,"  she  said,  "let's  agree  here and  now 
that you won't ever wax lyrical any more. I don't like it." 
Sergei blushed like a reprimanded schoolboy. 
 
"I  didn't  mean  anything,"  he  said,  "I  thought  we  were  friends  . .  .  I  didn't  say anything 
counter-revolutionary, did I? Very well, Comrade Ustinovich, I shan't say another word!" 
And leaving her with a hasty handshake he all but ran back to town. 
 
Sergei did not go near the station for several days. When Ignatieva asked him to come 
he refused on the grounds that he was too busy. And indeed he had plenty to do. 
 
 
One  night  someone  fired  at  Comrade  Shudik  as  he  was  going  home  through  a  street 
inhabited  mainly  by  Poles  who  held  managerial  positions  at  the  sugar  refinery.  The 
searches that followed brought to light weapons and documents belonging to a Pilsudski 
organisation known as the Strelets. 
A meeting was held at the Revcom. Ustinovich, who was present, too k Sergei aside and 
said in a calm voice: "So your philistine vanity was hurt,  was it? You're letting personal 
matters interfere with your work? That won't do, Comrade." 
And so Sergei resumed his visits to the green railway coach. 
 
He  attended  a  district  conference  and  participated  in the  heated  debates that  lasted  for  two  days. 
On the third day he went off with the rest of the conference delegates to the forest beyond the river 
 
第 100 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
and spent a day and a night fighting bandits led by Zarudny, one of Petlyura's officers still at large. 
On his return he went to see Ignatieva and found Ustinovich there. Afterwards he saw her home to 
the station and on parting held her hand tightly. She drew it away angrily. Again Sergei kept away 
from  the  agitprop coach  for many  days  and  avoided seeing  Rita  even  on  business.  And  when  she 
would  demand  an  explanation  of  his  behaviour  he  would  reply  curtly:  "What's  the  use  of  talking  to 
you? You'll only accuse me of being a philistine or a traitor to the working class or something." 
 
Trains  carrying  the  Caucasian  Red  Banner  Division  pulled  in  at  the  station.  Three  swarthy -
complexioned  commanders  came  over  to  the  Revcom.  One  of  them,  a  tall  slim  man  wearing 
a  belt  of  chased  silver,  went  straight  up  to  Dolinnik  and  demanded  one  hundred  cartloads  of 
hay. "No argument now," he said shortly, "I've got to have that hay. My horses are  dying."  
 
And  so  Sergei  was  sent  with  two  Red  Army  men  to  get  hay.  In  one  village  they  were 
attacked  by  a  band  of  kulaks.  The  Red  Army  men  were  disarmed  and  beaten 
unmercifully.  Sergei  got  off  lightly  because  of  his  youth.  All  three  were  carted  back  to 
town by people from the Poor Peasants' Committee. 
An armed detachment was sent out to the village and the hay was delivered the following 
day. Not wishing to alarm his family, Sergei stayed at Ignatieva's place until he 
recovered. Rita Ustinovich came to visit him there and for the first time she pressed 
Sergei's hand with a warmth and tenderness he himself would never have dared to show. 
 
 
One hot afternoon Sergei dropped in at the agit coach to see Rita. He read her Pavel's 
letter and told her something about his friend. On his way out he threw over his shoulder: 
"I think I'll go to the woods and take a dip in the lake." 
Rita looked up from her work. "Wait for me. I'll come with you." 
 
The  lake  was  as  smooth  and placid as  a  mirror.  Its  warm  translucent  water exuded  an 
inviting freshness. 
"Wait for me over by the road. I'm going in," Rita ordered him. 
 
Sergei sat down on a boulder by the bridge and lifted his face to the sun. He could hear 
her splashing in the water behind him. 
Presently  through  the  trees  he  caught  sight  of  Tonya  Tumanova  a nd  Chuzhanin,  the 
Military Commissar of the agit train, coming down the road arm-in-arm. Chuzhanin, in his 
well-made officer's uniform with its smart leather belt and numberless straps and leather 
shiny top-boots, cut a dashing figure. He was in earnest conversation with Tonya. 
Sergei  recognised  Tonya  as  the  girl  who  had  brought  him  the  note  from  Pavel.  She  too 
looked  hard  at  him  as  they  approached.  She  seemed  to  be  trying  to  place  him.  When  they 
came abreast of him Sergei took Pavel's last letter out of his pocket and went up to her.  
 
"Just a moment, Comrade. I have a letter here which concerns you partly." 
 
Pulling her hand free Tonya took the letter. The slip of paper trembled slightly in her hand 
as she read. 
"Have you had any more news from him?" she asked, handing the letter back 
to Sergei. "No," he replied. 
At that moment the pebbles crunched under Rita's feet and Chuzhanin, who had been 
unaware of her presence, bent over and whispered to Tonya: "We'd better go." 
 
第 101 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
But Rita's mocking, scornful voice stopped him. 
 
"Comrade Chuzhanin! They've been looking for you over at the train 
all day." Chuzhanin eyed her with dislike. 
"Never mind," he said surlily. "They'll manage wit hout 
me. Rita watched  Tonya and the Military Commissar go. 
 
"It's high time that good-for-nothing was sent packing!" she observed dryly. 
 
The  forest  murmured  as  the  breeze  stirred the  mighty  crowns  of  the o aks.  A  delicious 
freshness was wafted from the lake. Sergei decided to go in. 
When he came back from his swim he found Rita sitting on a treetrunk not far from the 
road. They wandered, talking, into the depths of the woods. In a small glade with tall thick 
grass  they  paused  to  rest.  It  was  very  quiet  in  the  forest. The  oaks  whispered  to  one 
another.  Rita  threw  herself  down  on  the  soft  grass  and  clasped  her  hands  under  her 
head. Her shapely legs in their old patched boots were hidden in the tall grass. 
Sergei's eye chanced to fall on her feet. He noticed the neatly patched boots, then looked 
down at his own boot with the toe sticking out of a hole, and he laughed. 
"What are you laughing at?" she asked. 
 
Sergei pointed to his boot. "How are we going to fight in boots like these?" 
 
Rita did not reply. She was chewing a blade of grass and her thoughts were obviously 
elsewhere. "Chuzhanin is a poor Communist," she said at last. "All our political workers 
go about in rags but he thinks of nobody but himself. He does not belong in our Party. . . . 
As for the front, the situation there is really very serious. Our country has a long and bitter 
fight before it." She paused, then added, "We shall have to fight with  both words and 
rifles, Sergei. Have you heard about the Central Committee's decision to draft one -fourth 
of the Komsomol into the army? If you ask me, Sergei, we shan't be here long." 
 
Listening to her, Sergei was surprised to detect a new note in her voic e. With her black 
limpid eyes upon him, he was ready to throw discretion to the winds and tell her that her 
eyes were like mirrors, but he checked himself in time. 
Rita raised herself on her elbow. "Where's your revolver?" 
 
Sergei fingered his belt ruefully. "That kulak band took it away from me." 
 
Rita put her hand int o the pocket of her tunic and  brought out a gleaming automatic pistol.  
 
"See  that  oak,  Sergei?"  she  pointed  the  muzzle  at  a  furrowed  trunk  about  twenty -five 
paces  from  where  they  lay.  And raising  the  weapon  to  the  level  of  her  eyes  she  fired 
almost without taking aim. The splintered bark showered down. 
"See?" she said much pleased with herself and fired again. And again the bark splintered 
and fell in the grass. 
"Here," she handed him the weapon with a mocking smile. "Now let's see what you can 
do." Sergei muffed one out of three shots. Rita smiled condescendingly. "I thought you'd 
do worse." She put down the pistol and lay down on the grass. Her tunic stretched tightly 
over her firm breasts. 
"Sergei," she said softly. "Come 
here." He moved closer. 
"Look at the sky. See how blue it is. Your eyes are that colour. And that's bad. They 
ought to be grey, like steel. Blue is much too soft a colour." 
 
第 102 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
And suddenly clasping his blond head, she kissed him passionately on the lips. 
 
 
 
Two months passed. Autumn arrived. 
 
Night  crept  up  stealthily,  enveloping  the  trees  in  its  dark  shroud.  The  telegraphist  at 
Division  Headquarters  bent  over  his  apparatus  which  was  ticking  out  Morse  and, 
gathering up the long narrow ribbon that wound itself snakily beneath his fingers, rapidly 
translated the dots and dashes into words and phrases: 
 
"Chief of Staff First Division Copy to Chairman Revcom Shepetovka. Evacuate all official 
institutions in town within ten hours after receipt of this wire. Leave one battalion in town 
at  disposal  of  commander  of  X.  regiment  in  command  sector  of  front.  Division 
Headquarters,  Political  Department,  all  military  institutions  to  be  moved  to  Baranchev 
station. Report execution of order to Division Commander. 
"(Signed)" 
 
Ten minutes later a motorcycle was hurtling through the slumbering streets of the town, 
its  headlight  stabbing  the  darkness.  It  stopped,  spluttering,  outside  the  gates  of  the 
Revcom. The rider hurried inside and handed the telegram to the chairman Dolinnik. At 
once the place was seething with activity. The Special Duty Company lined up. An hour 
later carts loaded with Revcom property were rumbling through the town to the Podolsk 
Station where it was loaded into railway cars. 
 
When he learned the contents of the telegram Sergei ran out after the 
motorcyclist. "Can you give me a lift to the station, Comrade?" he asked the rider. 
 
"Climb on behind, but mind you hold on fast." 
 
A dozen paces from the agit  coach which had already been attached to the train Sergei 
saw  Rita.  He  seized  her  by  the  shoulders  and,  conscious  that  he  was  about  to  lose 
something  that  had  become  very  dear  to  him,  he  whispered:  "Good-bye,  Rita,  dear 
comrade! We'll meet again sometime. Don't forget me." 
To his horror he felt the tears choking him. He  must go at once. Not trusting himself to 
speak, he wrung her hand until it hurt. 
 
 
Morning found the town and station desolate and deserted. The last train had blown its 
whistle as if in farewell and pulled out, and now the rearguard battalion which had been 
left behind took up positions on either side of the tracks. 
Yellow leaves fluttered down from the trees leaving the branches bare. The wind caught 
the fallen leaves and sent them rustling along the paths. 
Sergei in a Red Army greatcoat, with canvas cartridge belts slung over his shoulders, occupied the 
crossing opposite the sugar refinery with a dozen Red Army men. The Poles were approaching. 
 
 
Avtonom Petrovich knocked at the door of his neighbour Gerasim Leontievich. The latter, not yet 
 
第 103 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
dressed, poked his head out of the 
door. "What's up?" 
Avtonom Petrovich pointed to the Red Army men  moving down the street, and winked: 
"They're clearing out." 
Gerasim Leontievich looked at him with a worried air: "What sort of emblem do the Poles 
have, do you know?" 
"A single-headed eagle, I believe." 
"Where the devil can you find one?" 
 
Avtonom Petrovich scratched his head in consternation. 
 
"It's all right for them," he said after a moment or two of reflection. "They just get up and 
go. But you have to worry your head about getting in right with the new authorities." 
 
 
The  rattle of  a  machine  gun  tore  into  the  silence.  An engine  whistle  sound ed  from  the 
station and a gun boomed from the same quarter. A heavy shell bored its way high into 
the  air  with  a  loud  whine  and  fell  on  the  road  beyond  the  refinery,  enveloping  the 
roadside  shrubs  in  a  cloud  of  blue  smoke.  Silent  and  grim,  the  retreating  R ed  Army 
troops marched through the street, turning frequently to look back as they went. 
A  tear  rolled  down  Sergei's  cheek.  Quickly  he  wiped  it  away,  glancing  furtively  at  his 
comrades  to  make  sure  that  no  one  had  seen  it.  Beside  Sergei  marched  Antek 
Klopotowski,  a  lanky  sawmill  worker.  His  finger  rested  on  the  trigger  of  his  rifle.  Antek 
was gloomy and preoccupied. His eyes met Sergei's, and he burst out: 
"They'll come down hard on our folks, especially mine because we're Poles. You, a Pole, 
they'll  say,  opposing  the  Polish  Legion.  They're  sure  to  kick  my  old  man  out  of  the 
sawmill and flog him. I told him to come with us, but he didn't have the heart to leave the 
family.  Hell,  I  can't  wait  to  get  my  hands  on  those  accursed  swine!"  And  Antek  angrily 
pushed back the helmet that had slipped down over his eyes. 
. . .Farewell, dear old town, unsightly and dirty though you are with your ugly little houses 
and your crooked roads. Farewell, dear ones, farewell. Farewell, Valya and the comrades 
who  have  remained  to  work  in  the  underground.  The  Polish  Whiteguard  legions, brutal 
and merciless, are approaching. 
Sadly the railway workers in their oil-stained shirts watched the Red Army 
men go. "We'll be back, Comrades!" Sergei cried out with aching heart. 
 
 
Chapter Eight 
 
The  river  gleams  dully  through  the  early  morning  haze;  softly  its  waters  gurgle  against  the 
smooth pebbles of the  banks. In the shallows by the banks the river is calm, its silvery surface 
almost  unruffled;  but  out  in  midstream  it  is  dark  and  restless,  hurrying  swiftly  onward.  The 
majestic  Dnieper,  the  river  immortalised  by  Gogol.  The  tall  right  bank  drops  steeply  down  to 
the wat er, like a mountain halted in its advanc e by the broad sweep  of the waters. The  flat left 
bank below is covered with sandy spots left when the wat er receded after the spring floods.  
 
第 104 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Five  men  lay  beside  a  snub-nosed  Maxim  gun  in  a  tiny  trench  dug  into the river  bank. 
This was a forward outpost of the Seventh Rifle Division. Nearest the gun and facing the 
river lay Sergei Bruzzhak.  
The  day  before,  worn  out  by  the  endless  battles  and  swept  back  by  a  hurricane  of  P olish 
artillery fire, they had given  up Kiev,  withdrawn to the left bank of the  river, and dug in there.  
 
The retreat, the heavy losses and finally the surrender of Kiev to the enemy had been a bitter blow 
to  the  men.  The Seventh  Division  had  heroically  fought  its  way through  enemy  encirclement  and, 
advancing  through  the  forests,  had  emerged  on  the  railway  line  at  Malin  Station,  and  with  one 
furious blow had hurled back the Polish forces and cleared the road to Kiev. 
 
But the lovely city had been given up and the Red Army men were downcast.  
 
The Poles, having driven the Red units out of Darnitsa, now occupied a small bridgehead 
on  the  left  bank  of  the  river beside  the railway  bridge.  But  furious  counterattacks  had 
frustrated all their efforts to advance beyond that point. 
As he watched the river flowing past, Sergei thought of what had happened the previous 
day. Yesterday, at noon, his unit had given battle to the Poles; yesterday he had had his 
first hand-to-hand engagement with the enemy. A young Polish legionary had come 
swooping down upon him, his rifle with its long, sabre-like French bayonet thrust forward; 
he bounded towards Sergei like a hare, shouting something unintelligible. For a fraction 
of a second Sergei saw his eyes dilated with frenzy. The next instant Sergei's bayonet 
clashed with the Pole's, and the shining French blade was thrust aside. The Pole fell. . . . 
 
Sergei's hand  did not falter. He knew that he would have to  go  on killing, he, Sergei, who  was 
capable of such tender love, such steadfast  friendship. He was not  vicious o r cruel by nature, 
but  he  knew  that  he  must  fight  these  misguided  soldiers  whom  the  world's  parasites  had 
whipped  up  into  a  frenzy  of  bestial  hatred  and  sent  against  his  native  land.  And  he,  Sergei, 
would kill in order to hasten the day when men  would kill one another no longer.  
 
Paramonov tapped him on the shoulder. "We'd better be moving on, Sergei, or they'll spot us." 
 
 
 
For  a  year  now  Pavel  Korchagin had  travelled  up  and  down  his  native  land, riding  on 
machine-gun carriages and gun caissons or astride a small grey mare with a nick in her 
ear.  He  was  a  grown  man  now,  matured  and  hardened  by  suffering  and  privation.  The 
tender  skin  chafed  to the raw  by  the  heavy  cartridge  belt  had  long  since  healed  and a 
hard callus had formed under the rifle strap on his shoulder. 
Pavel had seen much that was terrible in that year. Together with thousands of other fighting men 
as  ragged  and  ill-clad  as  himself  but  afire  with the  indomitable  determination  to  fight  for  the  power 
of  their  class,  he  had marched  over  the  length  and  breadth  of  his  native  land  and  only  twice  had 
the storm  swept  on  without  him: the  first time  when  he  was  wounded  in  the  hip,  and  the  second, 
when in the bitterly cold February of 1920 he sweltered in the sticky heat of typhus. 
 
The  typhus  took  a  more  fearful  t oll  of  the  regiments  and  divisions  of  t he  Twelfth  A rmy  than 
Polish  machine  guns.  By  that  time  the  Twelfth  Army  was  operating  over  a  vast  territory 
stretching across nearly the whole of the Northern  Ukraine blocking the advance of the Poles.  
 
Pavel  had  barely  recovered  from  his  illness  when  he  returned  to  his  unit  which  was  now  holding 
the station of Frontovka, on the Kazatin-Uman branch line. Frontovka stood in the forest and 
 
第 105 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
consisted of a small station building with a few wrecked and abandoned cottages around 
it.  Three  years  of  intermittent  battles  had  made  civilian  life  in  these  parts  impossible. 
Frontovka had changed hands times without number. 
Big  events  were  brewing  again.  At  the  time  when  the  Twelfth  Army,  its  ranks  fearfully 
depleted  and  partly  disorganised,  was  falling  back  to  Kiev  under  the  pressure  of  the 
Polish armies, the proletarian republic was mustering its forces to strike a cr ushing blow 
at the victory-drunk Polish Whites. 
The  battle-seasoned  divisions  of  the  First  Cavalry  Army  were  being  transferred  to  the 
Ukraine  all  the  way  from  the  North  Caucasus  in  a  campaign  unparalleled  in  military 
history. The Fourth, Sixth, Eleventh and Fourteenth Cavalry divisions moved up one after 
another to the Uman area, concentrating in the rear of the front and sweeping away the 
Makhno bandits on their way to the scene of decisive battles. 
Sixteen and a half thousand sabres, sixteen and a half thousand fighting men scorched 
by the blazing steppe sun. 
To  prevent  this  decisive  blow  from  being  thwart ed  by  the  enemy  was  the  primary  concern  of 
the Supreme Command of the  Red Army and the Command  of the Southwestern Front at this 
juncture.  E verything  was  done  to  ens ure  the  successful  concentration  of  this  huge  mounted 
force. Active operations  were suspended on the  Uman sector.  The direct telegraph lines  from 
Moscow  to  the  front  headquarters  in  Kharkov  and  thence  to  the  headquarters  of  the 
Fourt eent h  and  Twelfth  armies  hummed  incessantly.  Telegraph  operators  tapped  out  coded 
orders:  "Divert  attention  Poles  from  concentration  cavalry  army."  The  enemy  was  actively 
engaged only when the Polish advance threatened to involve the Budyonny cavalry divisions.  
 
The campfire shot up red tongues of flame. Dark spirals of smoke curled up from the fire, 
driving off the swarms of restless buzzing midges. The men lay in a semicircle around the 
fire whose reflection cast a coppery glow on their faces. The water bubbled in messtins 
set in the bluish-grey ashes. 
A  stray  tongue  of  flame  leaped  out  suddenly  from  beneath  a burning  log  and  licked  at 
someone's  tousled  head. The  head  was  jerked  away  with  a growl:  "Damnation!"  And a 
gust of laughter rose from the men grouped around the fire. 
"The lad's so full of book-learning he don't feel the heat of the fire," boomed a middle-aged soldier 
with  a clipped moustache,  who  had  just  been  examining the  barrel  of  his  rifle  against  the  firelight. 
"You might tell the rest of us what you're reading there, Korchagin?" someone suggested. 
 
The young Red Army man fingered his singed locks and smiled. 
 
"A real good book, Comrade Androshchuk. Just can't tear myself away from it." 
 
"What's  it  about?"  inquired  a  snub-nosed  lad  sitting  next  to  Korchagin,  laboriously 
repairing the strap of his pouch. He bit off the coarse thread, wound the remainder round 
the needle and stuck it inside his helmet. "If it's about love I'm your man." 
A  loud  guffaw  greeted this  remark.  Matveichuk  raised  his close-cropped  head  and  winked slyly  at 
the  snub-nosed  lad:  "Love's  a  fine  thing, Sereda,"  he said.  "And  you're  such  a  handsome  lad, a 
regular  picture. Wherever  we  go  the  girls  fairly  wear their shoes  out  running  after  you.  Too  bad a 
handsome  phiz  like  yours  should  be  spoiled  by  one  little  defect:  you've  got  a  five-kopek  piece 
instead  of  a  nose.  But  that's  easily  remedied.  Just  hang  a  Novitsky  10-pounder  (  The  Novitsky 
grenade weighing about four kilograms and used to demolish barbed-wire entanglements.) on the 
 
第 106 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
end of it overnight and in the morning it'll be all right." 
 
The roar of laughter that followed this sally caused the horses tethered to the machine -
gun carriers to whinny in fright. 
Sereda glanced nonchalantly over his shoulder. "It's not your face but what you've got in 
here that counts." He tapped himself on the forehead expressively. "Take you, you've got 
a tongue like a stinging nettle but you're no better than a donkey, and your ears are cold." 
"Now then, lads,  what's the sense in getting riled?" Tatarinov, the Section Commander, 
admonished the two who were about to fly at each other. "Better let Korchagin read to us 
if he's got something worth listening to." 
"That's right. Go to it, Pavlushka!" the men urged from all sides. 
 
Pavel moved a saddle closer to the fire, settled himself on it and opened the small thi ck 
volume resting on his knees. 
"It's  called  The  Gadfly,  Comrades.  The  Battalion  Commissar  gave  it  to  me.  Wonderful 
book, Comrades. If you'll sit quietly I'll read it to you." 
"Fire away! We're all listening." 
 
When  some  time  later  Comrade  Puzyrevsky,  the  Regimental  Commander,  rode  up 
unnoticed to the campfire with his Commissar he saw eleven pairs of eyes glued to the 
reader. He turned to the Commissar: 
"There  you  have  half  of  the  regiment's  scouts,"  he  said,  pointing  to  the  group  of  men.  "Four  of 
them  are  raw young Komsomols,  but they're  good  soldiers  all  of  them.  The  one  who's  reading  is 
Korchagin,  and  that  one  there  with  eyes  like  a  wolfcub  is  Zharky.  They're  friends,  but  they're 
always competing with each other on the quiet. Korchagin used to be my best  scout. Now he has a 
very  serious  rival. What  they're  doing  just  now  is  political  work,  and  very  effective  it  is too.  I  hear 
these youngsters are called 'the young guard'. Most appropriate, in my opinion." 
 
"Is that the political instructor reading?" the Commissar asked. 
 
"No. Kramer is the political instructor." Puzyrevsky spurred his horse 
forward. "Greetings, Comrades!" he called. 
All heads turned toward the commander as he sprang lightly from the saddle and went up 
to the group. 
"Warming yourselves, friends?" he said with a broad smile and his strong face with the 
narrow,  slightly  Mongolian  eyes  lost  its  severity.  The  men  greeted  their  commander 
warmly as they would a good comrade and friend. The Commissar did not dismount. 
Pushing aside his pistol in its holster, Puzyre vsky sat down next to Korchagin. 
"Shall we have a smoke?" he suggested. "I have some first-rate tobacco here." 
 
He rolled a cigarette, lit it and turned to the Commissar: "You go ahead, Doronin. I'll stay 
here for a while. If I'm needed at headquarters you can let me know." 
"Go on reading, I'll listen too," Puzyrevsky said to Korchagin when Doronin had gone. 
 
Pavel read to the end, laid the book down on his knees and gazed pensively at the fire. 
For  a  few  moments  no  one  spoke.  All  brooded  on  the  tragic  fate  of  the  Gadfly. 
Puzyrevsky puffed on his cigarette, waiting for the discussion to begin. 
"A  grim  story  that," said  Sereda,  breaking the silence.  "I  suppose there  are  people  like  that  in  the 
world.  It's  not many  who could  stand  what  he  did.  But  when  a man  has  an  idea  to  fight  for  he  can 
stand anything," Sereda was-visibly moved. The book had made a deep impression on him. 
 
第 107 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
"If I could lay my hands on that priest who tried to shove a cross down his throat I'd finish 
the swine off on the spot!" Andryusha Fomichev, a shoemaker's apprentice from Belaya 
Tserkov, cried wrathfully. 
"A  man  doesn't  mind  dying  if  he  has  something  to  die  for,"  Androshchuk,  pushing  one  of  the 
messtins  closer  to  the,  fire  with  a  stick, said  in  a tone  of  conviction.  "That's  what  gives  a  man 
strength.  You  can  die  without  regrets  if  you  know  you're  in  the  right.  That's  how  heroes  are 
made.  I  knew  a  lad  once,  Poraika  was  his  name.  When  the  Whites  cornered  him  in  Odessa, 
he tackled a  whole  platoon singlehanded  and  before they could get at him  with their bayonets 
he blew himself  and the whole lot of them up with  a grenade. And he was n't anything much to 
look  at.  Not  the  kind  of  a  fellow  you  read  about  in  books,  though  he'd  be  well  worth  writing 
about. There's plenty of fine lads to be found among our kind." 
 
He stirred the contents of the messtin with a spoon, tasted it with pursed-up lips and continued: 
"There are some who die a dog's death, a mean, dishonourable death. I'll tell you something that 
happened during the fighting at Izyaslav. That's an old town on the Goryn River built back in the 
time of the princes. There was a Polish church there, built like a fortress. Well, we entered that 
town and advanced single file along the crooked alleys. A company of Letts were holding our right 
flank. When we get to the highway what do we see but three saddled horses tied to the fence of 
one of the houses. Aha, we think, here's where we bag some Poles! About ten of us rushed into 
the yard. In front of us ran the commander of that Lettish company, waving his Mauser. 
 
"The front door was open and  we  ran in. But instead  of P oles we found our own men in there. 
A  mounted  patrol  it  was.  They'd  got  in  ahead  of  us.  It  wasn't  a  pretty  sight  we  laid  eyes  on 
there.  They  were  abusing  a  woman,  the  wife  of  the  Polish  officer  who  lived  there.  When  the 
Lett saw what was going on  he shouted something in his own language. His men  grabbed th e 
three  and  dragged  them  outside.  There  were  only  two  of  us  Russians,  the  rest  were  Letts. 
Their  commander  was  a  man  by  the  name  of  Bredis.  I  don't  understand  their  language  but  I 
could  see  he'd  given  orders  to  finish  those  fellows  off.  They're  a  t ough  lot   those  Letts, 
unflinching.  They dragged those three  out to the stables. I could see their goose  was cooked. 
One  of  them,  a  great  hulking  fellow  wit h  a  mug  that  just  asked  for  a  brick,  was  kicking  and 
struggling  for  all  he  was  worth.  They  couldn't  put  him  up  against  the  wall  just  because  of  a 
wenc h, he yelped. The others were begging for mercy too. 
 
"I  broke  out  into  a  cold  sweat.  I  ran  over  to  Bredis  and said:  'Comrade  Company  Commander,'  I 
said,  'let  the  tribunal  try  them.  What  do  you  want  to  dirty  your  hands  with  their  blood  for?  The 
fighting isn't over in the town and here we are wasting time with this here scum.' He turned on me 
with eyes blazing like a tiger's. Believe me, I was sorry I spoke. He points his gun at me. I've been 
fighting for seven years but I admit I was properly scared that minute. I see he's ready to shoot first 
and ask questions afterwards. He yells at me in bad Russian so I could hardly understand what he 
was saying:  'Our  banner  is  dyed  with  our  blood,'  he says.  'These  men  are  a  disgrace  to the  whole 
army. The penalty for banditry is death.' 
 
"I couldn't stand it any more and I ran out of that yard into the street as fast as I could and 
behind me I heard them shooting. I knew those three were done for. By the time we got 
back to the others the town was already ours. 
"That's what I mean by a dog's death, the  way those fellows died.  The pat rol was one  of those 
that'd joined us at Melitopol.  They'd been with Makhno at one time. Riffraff, that's what they  
 
 
第 108 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
were." 
 
Androshchuk drew his messtin toward him and proceeded to untie his bread bag. 
 
"Yes, you  find  scum  like  that  on  our  side  too  sometimes.  You can't  account  for  everyone.  On 
the  face  of  it  they're  all  for  the  revolution.  And  through  them  we  all  get  a  bad  name.  But  that 
was a nasty business, I tell you. I shan't forget it so soon," he wound up, sipping his tea.  
 
Night  was  well  advanced  by  the  time  the  camp  was  asleep.  Sereda's  whistlin g  snores 
could  be  heard  in  the  silence.  Puzyrevsky  slept  with  his  head  resting  on  the  saddle. 
Kramer, the political instructor, sat scribbling in his notebook. 
Returning  the  next  day  from  a  scouting  detail,  Pavel  tethered  his  horse  to  a  tree  and 
called over Kramer, who had just finished drinking tea. 
"Look, Kramer, what would you say if I switched over to the First Cavalry Army? There's 
going to be big doings there by the looks of it. They're not being massed in such numbers 
just for fun, are they? And we here won't be seeing much of it." 
Kramer looked at him in surprise. 
 
"Switch over? Do you think you can change units in the army the way you change seats 
in a cinema?" 
"But  what  difference  does  it  make  where  a  man  fights?"  Pavel  interposed.  "I'm  not 
deserting to the rear, am I?" 
But Kramer was categorically opposed to the idea. 
 
"What  about  discipline?  You're  not  a  bad  youngster,  Pavel,  on  the  whole,  but  in  some  things 
you're a bit of  an  anarchist. You think you can do as you  please? Y ou  forget, my lad, that the 
Party and the K omsomol  are  founded  on iron discipline.  The P arty must come  first. And each 
one  of  us  must  be  where  he  is  most  needed  and  not  where  he  wants  to  be.   Puzyrevsky 
turned down your application for a transfer, didn't he? Well, there's your answer."  
 
Kramer  spoke  with  such  agitation  that  he  was  seized  with  a  fit  of  coughing.  This  tall, 
gaunt  man  was  a  printer  by  profession  and  the  lead  dust  had  lodged  itself  firmly  in his 
lungs and often a hectic flush would appear on his waxen cheeks. 
When he had calmed down, Pavel said in a low but firm voice: 
 
"All that is quite correct but I'm going over to the Budyonny army just the 
same." The next evening Pavel was missing at the campfire. 
 
 
In  the  neighbouring  village  a  group  of  Budyonny  cavalrymen  had  formed  a  wide  circle  on  a  hill 
outside  the schoolhouse.  One  giant  of  a  fellow,  seated  on the  back  of  a machine-gun  carrier,  his 
cap  pushed to the  back  of  his  head,  was  playing  an  accordion.  The  instrument  wailed  and  blared 
under  his  inept  fingers like  a  thing  in torment, confusing  the  dashing cavalryman  in  unbelievably 
wide red riding breeches who was dancing a mad hopak in the centre of the ring. 
 
Eager-eyed village lads and lasses clambered onto the gun carrier and fences to watch 
the antics of these troopers whose brigade had just entered their village. 
"Go it, Toptalo! Kick up the earth! Ekh, that's the stuff, brother! Come on there, you with 
the accordion, make it hot!" 
But  the  player's  huge  fingers  that  could  bend  an  iron horseshoe  with  the  utmost  ease 
sprawled clumsily over the keys. 
 
第 109 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
"Too bad Makhno got A fanasi Kulyabko," remarked one bronzed cavalryman  regret fully. "That 
lad  was  a  first-class  hand  at  the  accordion.  He  rode  on  the  right  flank  of  our  squadron.  Too 
bad he was killed. A good soldier, and the best accordion  player  we ever  had!" 
 
Pavel,  who  was  standing  in  the  circle,  overheard  this  last  remark.  He  pushed  his  way  over  to 
the machine-gun carrier and laid his hand  on the accordion bellows.  The music subsided.  
 
"What d'you want?" the accordionist demanded with a scowl. 
 
Toptalo stopped short and an angry murmur rose from the crowd: "What's the 
trouble there?" Pavel reached out for the instrument. "Let's have a try," he said. 
The  Budyonny  cavalryman  looked  at  the  Red  infantryman  with  some  mistrust  and 
reluctantly slipped the accordion strap off his shoulder. 
With an accustomed gesture Pavel laid the instrument on his knee, spread the sinuous 
bellows out fanwise and let go with  a rollicking melody that poured forth with all the lusty 
vigour of which the accordion is capable: 
 
Ekh, little apple, 
 
Whither away? 
 
Get copped by the Cheka 
 
And that's where you stay! 
 
Toptalo  caught  up  the  familiar  tune  and  swinging  his  arms  like  some  great  bird  he  swept  into 
the  ring,  executing  the  most  incredible  t wists  and  turns,  and  slapping  himself  smartly  on  the 
thighs, knees, head, forehead, the shoe soles, and finally on the mouth in time  with the music.  
 
Faster and faster played the accordion in a mad intoxicating rhythm, and Toptalo, kicking 
his legs out wildly, spun around the circle like a top until he was quite out of breath. 
 
 
On June 5, 1920, after a few brief but furious encounters Budyonny's First Cavalry Army 
broke through the Polish front between the Third and Fourth Polish armies, smashed a 
cavalry brigade under General Sawicki en route and swept on toward Ruzhiny.  
The  Polish  command  hastily  formed  a  striking  force  and  threw  it  into  the  breach.  Five  tanks 
were  rushed  from  Pogrebishche  Station  to  the  scene  of  the  fighting.  But  the  Cavalry  Army 
bypassed  Zarudnitsy from  where the Poles planned to strike and came out in the Pol ish rear. 
 
General Kornicki's Cavalry Division was dispatched in pursuit of the First Cavalry Army with orders 
to strike at the rear of the force, which the Polish command believed to be headed for Kazatin, one 
of  the most  important strategic  points  in the Polish  rear.  This  move,  however,  did  not improve  the 
position  of the  Poles.  Although  they succeeded  in closing  the  breach  and cutting  off  the  Cavalry 
Army,  the  presence  of  a strong  mounted  force  behind  their  lines  which threatened to  destroy their 
rear  bases  and  swoop  down  on  their  army  group  at  Kiev,  was  far  from  reassuring.  As  they 
advanced,  the  Red  cavalry  divisions  destroyed  small  railway  bridges  and tore  up  railway track  to 
hamper  the Polish  retreat.  On  learning  from  prisoners that  the Poles  had  an  army  headquarters  in 
Zhitomir  (actually the  headquarters  of  the  whole  front  was  located there),  the commander  of  the 
First  Cavalry  Army  decided to  take  Zhitomir  and Berdichev,  both  important  railway junctions  and 
administrative centres. At dawn on June 7 the Fourth Cavalry Division was 
 
第 110 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
already on its way at full speed to Zhitomir. 
 
Korchagin now rode on the right flank of one of the squadrons in place of Kulyabko, the 
lamented accordionist. He had been enrolled in the squadron on the collective request of 
the men, who had refused to part with such an excellent accordion player. 
Without  checking  their  foam-flecked  horses  they  fanned  out at  Zhitomir  and bore  down 
on the city with naked steel flashing in the sun. 
The  earth  groaned  under  the  pounding  hoofs,  the  mounts  breathed  hoarsely,  and  the 
men rose in their stirrups. 
Underfoot the ground sped past and ahead the large city with its gardens and parks hurried to 
meet the  division.  The mounted avalanche  flashed  by the  gardens and poured into the centre 
of the city, and the air was rent by a fear -inspiring  battle-cry as inexorable as death itself.  
 
The Poles were so stunned that they offered little resistance. The local garrison was crushed. 
Bending low over the neck of his mount, Pavel Korchagin sped along side by side with 
Toptalo  astride his thin-shanked black. Pavel saw the  dashing cavalryman cut down with an 
unerring blow a Polish legionary before the man had time to raise his rifle to his shoulder.  
 
The  iron-shod  hoofs  grated  on  the  paving  stones  as  they  careered  down  the  street.  Then  at  an 
intersection  they  found themselves  face to  face  with  a machine  gun  planted in the  very  middle  of 
the  road  and three  men  in  blue  uniforms  and  rectangular Polish caps  bending  over  it.  There  was 
also a fourth, with coils of gold braid on his collar, who levelled a Mauser at the mounted men. 
 
Neither  Toptalo  nor  Pavel  could  check  their  horses  and  they  galloped  toward  the  machine  gun, 
straight into the jaws of death. The officer fired at Korchagin, but missed. The bullet whanged past 
Pavel's cheek, and the next moment the Lieutenant had struck his head against the paving stones 
and was lying limp on his back, thrown off his feet by the horse's onrush. 
 
That  very  moment  the  machine gun  spat  out  in  savage  frenzy,  and  stung  by a  dozen 
bullets, Toptalo and his black crumpled to the ground. 
Pavel's mount reared up on its hind legs, snorting with terror, and leapt with its rider over 
the prone bodies to the men at the machine gun. His sabre described a flashing arc in 
the air and sank into the blue rectangle of one of the army caps. 
Again the sabre flashed upwards ready to descend upon a second head, but the frantic 
horse leapt aside. 
Like a mountain torrent the squadron poured into the streets and scores of sabres flashed in the air. 
 
 
 
The long narrow corridors of the prison echoed with cries. 
 
The cells packed with gaunt, hollow-eyed men and women were in a turmoil. They could 
hear the battle raging in the town―could this mean liberation? Could it be that this force 
that had swept suddenly into the town had come to set them free? 
The shooting reached the prison yard. Men came running down the corridors. And then 
the cherished, long-awaited words: "You are free, Comrades!" 
Pavel ran to a locked door with a tiny window, from which stared dozens of pairs of eyes, 
and brought his rifle butt down fiercely against the lock again and again. 
"Wait, let me crack it with a bomb," cried Mironov. He pushed Pavel aside and produced 
a hand grenade from a pocket. 
 
第 111 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Platoon commander Tsygarchenko tore the grenade from his hands. 
 
"Stop, you fool, are you mad! They'll bring the keys in a jiffy. What we can't break down 
we'll open with keys." 
The  prison  guards  were  already  being  led  down  the  corridor,  prodded  along  with  revolvers, 
when the ragged  and unwashed prisoners, wild with joy, poured out of their cells.  
 
Throwing a cell door wide open, Pavel ran inside. 
 
"Comrades, you're free! We're Budyonny's men―our division's taken the town!" A 
woman ran weeping to Pavel and throwing her arms around him broke into sobs. 
 
The  liberation  of  five  t housand  and  seventy-one  Bolsheviks  and  of  two  thousand  Red  A rmy 
political  workers,  whom  the  Polish  Whites  had  driven  into  these  stone  dungeons  to  await 
shooting  or the  gallows, was more import ant to the division's fighting men than all the trophies 
they had capt ured, a greater reward than  victory itself. For seven thousand revolutionaries the 
impenetrable gloom of night had been supplant ed by the bright sun of a hot June day.  
 
One of the prisoners, with skin as yellow as a lemon, rushed at Pavel in a transport of 
joy. It was Samuel Lekher, one of the compositors from the Shepetovka printshop. 
 
 
Pavel's  face  turned  grey  as  he  listened  to  Samuel's  account  of  the  bloody  tragedy 
enacted in his native town and the words seared his heart like drops of molten metal. 
"They took us at night, all of us at once. Some scoundrel had betrayed us to the military 
gendarmes. And once they had us in their clutches they showed no mercy. They beat us 
terribly,  Pavel.  I  suffered  less  than  the  others  because  after  the  first  blows  I  lost 
consciousness. But the others were stronger than me. 
"We  had  nothing  to  hide.  The  gendarmes  knew  everything  better  than  we  did.  They  knew 
every  step  we  had  taken,  and  no  wonder,  for  there  had  been  a  traitor  among  us.  I  can't  talk 
about  those  days,  Pavel.  You  know  many  of  those  who  were  taken.  Valya  B ruzzhak,  and 
Rosa  Gritsman,  a  fine  girl  just  turned  seventeen―such  trusting  eyes  she  had,  Pavel!  Then 
there  was Sasha Bunshaft, you know him, one of our typesetters, a merry lad, always drawing 
caricatures  of  the  boss.  They  took  him  and  two  Gymnasium  students,  Novoselsky  and 
Tuzhits―you  remember  them  too  most  likely.  The  others  too  were  local  people  or  from  the 
district  centre.  Altogether  twenty-nine  were  arrested,  six  of  them  women.  They  were  all 
brutally  tortured.  Valya  and  Rosa  were  raped  the  first  day.  Those  swine  outraged  the  poor 
things  in  every  possible  way,  then  dragged  them  back  to  the  cell  more  dead  than  alive.  Soon 
after that Rosa  began to rave and a few days later she was completely out of her mind.  
 
"They  didn't  believe  that  she  was  insane,  they  said  she  was  shamming  and  beat  her 
unmercifully  every  time  they  questioned  her.  She  was  a  terrible  sight  when  they  finally  shot 
her. Her  face was black with bruises, her eyes were wild, she looked like an old woman.  
 
"Valya  Bruzzhak  was  splendid  to  the  very  end.  They  all  died  like  real  fighters.  I  don't 
know how they had the strength to endure it all. Ah, Pavel, how can I describe their death 
to you? It was too horrible. 
"Val ya had been doing the most dangerous kind of work: she was the one who had contact with the 
wireless operators at the Polish headquarters and with our people in the district centre, besides which 
they found two grenades and a pistol when they searched her place. The grenades had been 
 
第 112 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
given to her by the provocateur. Everything had been framed so as to charge them with 
intending to blow up the headquarters. 
"Ah, Pavel, it is painful  for me to speak of those last days, but since you insist I shall tell you. 
The  military  court  sentenced  Valy a  and  two  others  to  be  hanged,  the  rest  to  be  shot.  The 
Polish  soldiers  who  had  worked  with  us  were  tried  two  days  earlier.  Corporal  Snegurko,  a 
young  wireless  operator  who  had  worked  in  Lodz  as  an  electrician  before  the  war,  was 
charged  with  treason  and  with  conducting  Communist  propaganda  among  the  soldiers  and 
sentenced to be shot. He did not appeal, and was shot twenty -four hours aft er the sent ence.  
 
"Valya  was  called  in  to  give  evidence  at  his  trial.  She  told  us  afterwards  that  Snegurko 
pleaded guilty to the charge of conducting  Communist propaganda  but  vigorously denied that 
he  had  betrayed  his  country.  'My  fatherland,'  he  said,  'is  the  Polish  Soviet  Socialist  Republic. 
Yes,  I  am  a  member  of  the  Communist  Party  of  Poland.  I  was  drafted  into  the  army  against 
my will, and once there  I did my best to open the eyes of ot her men like myself who had been 
driven  off  to  the  front.  You  may  hang  me  for  that,  but  not  for  being  a  traitor  to  my  fatherland, 
for  that  I  never  was  and  never  will  be.  Your  fatherland  is  not  my  fatherland.  Yours  is  the 
fatherland  of  the  gentry,  mine  is  the  workers'  and  peasants'  fat herland.  And  in  my  fatherland, 
which will come―of that I  am deeply convinced―no one will ever call me a traitor. ' 
 
"After the trial we were all kept together. Just before the execution we were transferred to 
the jail. During the night they set up the gallows opposite the prison besi de the hospital. 
For the shooting they chose a place near a big ditch over by the forest not far from the 
road. A common grave was dug for us. 
"The sentence was posted up all over town so that everyone should know of it. The Poles 
decided  to  hold a  public  execution  to  frighten  the  population.  From  early  morning  they 
began driving the townsfolk to the place of execution. Some went out of curiosity, terrible 
though it was. Before long they had a big crowd collected outside the prison wall. From 
our cell we could hear the hum of voices. They had stationed machine guns on the street 
behind  the  crowd,  and  brought  up  mounted  and  foot  gendarmes  from  all  parts  of  the 
area. A whole battalion of them surrounded the streets and vegetable fields beyond. A pit 
had been dug beside the gallows for those who were to be hanged. 
 
"We  waited  silently  for  the  end,  now  and  then  exchanging  a  few  words.  We  had  talked 
everything  over  the  night  before  and  said  our  good-byes.  Only  Rosa  kept  whispering  to 
herself  over  in  one  corner  of  the  cell.  Valya,  after  all  the  beatings  and  outrages  she  had 
endured,  was  too  weak  to  move  and  lay  still  most  of  the  time.  Two  local  Communist  girls, 
sisters  they  were,  could  not  keep  back  the  tears  as  they  clung  to  one  another  in  their  last 
farewell.  Stepanov,  a  young  man  from  the  country,  a  strapping  lad  who  had  knocked  out  two 
gendarmes  when  they  came  to  arrest  him,  told  them  to  stop.  'No  tears,  Comrades !  You  may 
weep  here,  but  not  out  there.  We  don't  want  to  give  those  bloody  swine  a  chance  to  gloat. 
There  won't  be  any  mercy  anyway.  We've  got  to  die,  so  we  might  as  well  die  decently.  We 
won't crawl on our knees. Remember, Comrades, we must meet death bravely.'  
 
"Then they came for us. In the lead was Szwarkowski, the Intelligence Chief, a mad dog of a sadist 
if there ever was one. When he didn't do the raping himself he enjoyed watching his gendarmes do 
it. We were marched to the gallows across the road between two rows of gendarmes, 'canaries' we 
called them on account of their yellow shoulder-knots. They stood there 
 
第 113 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
with their sabres bared. 
 
"They  hurried  us  through  the  prison  yard  with  their  rifle  butts  and  made  us  form  fours.  Then 
they  opened  the  gates  and  led  us  out  into  the  street  and  stood  us  up  facing  t he  gallows  so 
that  we  should  see  our  comrades  die  as  we  waited  for  our  turn  to  come.  It  was  a tall  gallows 
made  of  thick  logs.  Three  nooses  of  heavy  rope  hung  down  from  the  c rosspiece  and  under 
each  noose  was  a  plat form  with  steps  supported  by  a  block  of  wood  that  could  be  kicked 
aside.  A  faint  murmur  rose  from  the  sea  of  people  which  rocked  and  swayed.  All  eyes  were 
fixed on us. We recognised some of our people in the crowd.  
 
"On  a  porch  some  distance  away  stood  a  group  of  Polish  gentry  and  officers  with 
binoculars. They had come to see the Bolsheviks hanged. 
"The snow was soft underfoot. The forest was white with it, and it lay thick on the trees 
like cotton fluff. The whirling snowflakes fell slowly, melting on our burning faces, and the 
steps of the gallows were carpeted with snow. We were scantily dressed but none of us 
felt the cold. Stepanov did not even notice that he was walking in his stockinged feet. 
"Beside  the  gallows  stood  the  military  prosecutor  and  senior  officers.  At  last  Valya  and  the 
two  other  comrades  who  were  to  be  hanged  were  led  out  of  the  jail.  They  walked  all  three 
arm-in-arm,  Valya  was  in  the  middle  supported  by  the  other  t wo  for  she  had  no  strength  t o 
walk  alone.  But  she  did  her  best  to  hold  herself  erect,  remembering  Stepanov's  words:  'We 
must meet death bravely, Comrades !' She wore a  woollen jacket but no coat.  
 
"Szwarkowski  evidently  didn't  like  the  idea  of  them  walking  arm-in-arm  for  he  pushed  them  from 
behind. Valya said something and one of the mounted gendarmes slashed her full force across the 
face with his whip. A woman in the crowd let out a frightful shriek and began struggling madly in an 
effort to break through the cordon and reach the prisoners, but she was seized and dragged away. 
It  must  have  been  Valya's  mother.  When  they  were  close  to  the  gallows  Valya  began  to  sing. 
Never have I heard a  voice like that―only a person going to his death could sing with such feeling. 
She  sang  the  Warszawianka,  and  the  other  two  joined  in.  The  mounted  guards  lashed  out  in  a 
blind  fury  with  their  whips,  but the three  did  not  seem to  feel  the  blows.  They  were knocked  down 
and  dragged  to  the  gallows  like  sacks.  The  sentence  was  quickly  read  and  the  nooses  were 
slipped over their heads. At that point we began to sing: 
 
Arise, ye prisoners of starvation. . . . 
 
"Guards  rushed  at  us  from  all  sides  and  I  just had  time  to  see  th e  blocks  knocked  out 
from under the platforms with rifle butts and the three bodies jerking in the nooses. .. . 
"The  rest  of  us  had  already  been  put  to  the  wall  when  it  was  announced  that  ten  of  us  had 
had our sent ences commuted to 20 years' imprisonment.  The other sixteen  were shot." 
 
Samuel clutched convulsively at the collar of his shirt as if he were choking. 
 
"For three days the bodies hung there in the nooses. The gallows were guarded day and 
night. After that a new batch of prisoners was brought to jail and they told us that on the 
fourth day the rope that held the corpse of Comrade Toboldin, the heaviest of the three, 
had given way. After that they removed the other two and buried them all.  
"But the gallows was not taken down. It was still standing when we  were brought to this 
place. It stood there with the nooses waiting for fresh victims." 
Samuel fell silent staring with unseeing eyes before him, but Pavel was unaware that the story had 
ended. The three bodies with the heads twisted horribly to one side swayed silently before his 
 
第 114 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
eyes. 
 
The bugle sounding the assembly outside brought Pavel to himself with 
a start. "Let's go, Samuel," he said in a barely audible voice. 
A column of Polish prisoners was being marched down the street lined with cavalry. At 
the prison gates stood the Regimental Commissar writing an order on his notepad. 
"Comrade  Antipov,"  he  said,  handing  the  slip  of  paper  to  a  stalwart  squadron 
commander,  "take  this,  and  have  all  the  prisoners  taken  under  cavalry  escort  to 
Novograd-Volynsky.  See  that  the  wounded  are  given  medical attention. Then  put  them 
on carts, drive them about twenty versts from the town and let them go. We have no time 
to bother with them. But there must be no maltreatment of prisoners." 
Mounting  his  horse, Pavel  turned to  Samuel. "Hear that?"  he said. "They  hang  our  people,  but  we 
have to escort them back to their own side and treat them nicely besides. How can we do it?" 
 
The  Regimental  Commissar  turned  and  looked  sternly  at  the  speaker.  "Cruelty  to 
unarmed prisoners," Pavel heard him say as if speaking to himself, "will be punished by 
death. We are not Whites!" 
As  he  rode  off,  Pavel  recalled the final  words of  the  order  of  the  Revolutionary  Military 
Council which had been read out to the regiment: 
"The land of the workers and peasants loves its Red Army.  It is proud of it. And on that 
Army's banners there shall not be a single stain." 
"Not a single stain," Pavel whispered. 
 
 
 
At  the  time  the  Fourth  Cavalry  Division  took  Zhitomir,  the  20th  Brigade of  the  Seventh 
Rifle  Division  forming  part  of  a  shock  corps under  Comrade  Golikov  was  crossing  the 
Dnieper River in the area of Okuninovo village. 
Another corps, which consisted of the 25th Rifle Division and a Bashkir Cavalry brigade, 
had orders to cross the Dnieper and straddle the Kiev-Korosten railway  at Irsha Station. 
This manoeuvre would cut off the Poles' last avenue of retreat from Kiev. 
It  was  during  the  crossing  of  the  river  that  Misha  Levchukov  of  the  Shepetovka  Komsomol 
organisation  perished.  They  were  running  over  the  shaky  pontoon  bridge  when  a  shell  fired  from 
somewhere  beyond  the  steep  bank  opposite  whined  viciously  overhead  and  plunged  into  the 
water,  ripping  it to shreds.  The  same  instant  Misha  disappeared  under  one  of  the  pontoons.  The 
river  swallowed  him  up  and  did  not  give  him  back.  Yakimenko,  a  fair-haired  soldier  in  a  battered 
cap, cried out: "Mishka! Hell, that was Mishka! Went down like a stone, poor lad!" For a moment he 
stared  horrified  into  the  dark  water,  but the men  running  up  from  behind  pushed  him  on: "What're 
you  gaping  there  for,  you  fool.  Get  on  with  you!"  There  was  no  time  to  stop  for  anyone.  The 
brigade had fallen behind the others who had already occupied the right bank of the river.  
 
It  was  not  until  four  days  later  that  Sergei  learned  of  Misha's  death.  By  that  time  the 
brigade had captured Bucha Station, and turning in the direction of Kiev, was repulsing 
furious attacks by the Poles who were attempting to break through to Korosten. 
Yakimenko threw himself  down  beside Sergei in the firing line.  He  had been firing steadily   for 
some  time  and  now  he  had  diffic ulty  forcing  back  the  bolt  of  his  overheated  rifle.  Keeping  his 
head carefully lowered  he turned to Sergei and said: "Got to give  her  a rest. She's red hot !"  
 
第 115 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Sergei barely heard him above the din of the shooting. 
 
When  the  noise  subsided  somewhat,  Yakimenko  remarked  as  if  casually: "Your  comrade  got 
drowned  in  the  Dnieper.  He  was  gone  before  I  could  do  anything."  That  was  all  he  said.  He 
tried the bolt of his rifle, took out another clip and applied  himself to the t ask of  reloading.  
 
 
The  Eleventh  Division  sent  to  take  Berdichev  encountered  fierce  resistance  from  the 
Poles. A bloody battle was fought in the streets of the town. The Red Cavalry advanced 
through  a  squall  of  machine-gun  fire.  The  town  was  captured  and  the remnants  of  the 
routed  Polish  forces  fled. Trains  were  seized  intact  in  the railway  yards.  But  the  most 
terrible disaster for the Poles was the exploding of an ammunition dump which served the 
whole  front.  A  million  shells  went  up  in  the  air. The  explosion  shattered  window  panes 
into tiny fragments and caused the houses to tremble as if they were made of cardboard. 
 
The capture of  Zhitomir and Berdichev took the Poles in the  rear and they came pouring out 
of Kiev in two streams, fighting des perately to make their  way out of the steel ring encircling 
them. Swept along  by the maelstrom of battle, Pavel lost all sense of self these days. His 
individuality merged with the mass and  for  him, as for every fighting man, the word "I" was 
forgotten; only the word "we" remained: our regiment, our squadron, our brigade.  
 
Events developed with the speed of a hurricane. Each day brought something new.  
 
Budyonny's Cavalry Army swept forward like an avalanche, striking blow after blow until 
the entire Polish rear was smashed to pieces. Drunk with the excitement of their victories, 
the mounted divisions hurled themselves with passionate fury at Novograd -Volynsky, the 
heart of the Polish rear. As the ocean wave dashes itself against the rockbound shore, 
recedes and rushes  on  again,  so  they  fell  back  only  to  press  on again and again  with 
awesome shouts of "Forward! Forward!" 
 
Nothing could save the Poles―neither the barbed-wire entanglements, nor the desperate 
resistance put up by the garrison entrenched in the city. And on the morning of June 27 
Budyonny's  cavalry  forded  the  Sluch  River  without  dismounting,  entered  Novograd -
Volynsky and drove the Poles out of the city in the direction of Korets. At the same time 
the  Forty-Fifth  Division  crossed  the  Sluch  at  Novy  Miropol,  and  the  Kotovsky  Cavalry 
Brigade swooped down upon the settlement of Lyubar. 
 
The  radio  station  of  the  First  Cavalry  Army  received  an  order  from  the  commander-in-chief  of 
the  front  to  concentrate  the  entire  cavalry  force  for  the  capture  of  Rovno.  The  irresistib le 
onslaught of the Red divisions sent the Poles scattering in demoralised panic -stricken groups. 
 
It  was in these hectic days that Pavel Korchagin had a most unexpected encounter. He 
had been sent by the Brigade Commander to the station where an armoured train was 
standing. Pavel took the steep railway embankment at a canter and reined in at the steel -
grey  head  carriage.  With  the  black  muzzles  of  guns  protruding  from  the  turrets,  the 
armoured  train  looked  grim  and  formidable.  Several  men  in  oil-stained  clothes  were  at 
work beside it raising the heavy steel armour plating that protected the wheels.  
 
"Where can I find the commander of the train?" Pavel inquired of a leather-jacketed Red 
Army man carrying a pail of water. 
"Over there," the man replied pointing to the engine. 
 
第 116 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Pavel  rode  up  to  the  engine.  "I  want  to  see  the  commander!"  he  said.  A  man  with  a 
pockmarked face, clad in leather from head to foot, turned. "I'm the commander." 
Pavel pulled an envelope from his pocket. 
 
"Here is an order from the Brigade Commander. Sign on the envelope." 
 
The  commander  rested  the  envelope  on  his  knee  and  scribbled  his  signature  on  it.  Down  on 
the  tracks  a  man  with  an  oil  can  was  working  on  the  middle  wheel  of  the  engine.  Pavel  could 
only see his broad back and the pistol -butt sticking out of the  pocket of his leather trousers. 
 
The  commander  handed  the  envelope  back  to  Pavel  who  picked  up  the  reins  and  was  about 
to  set  off  when  the  man  with  the  oil  can  straightened  up  and  turned  round.  The  next  moment 
Pavel had leapt off his horse as though swept down by a  violent gust of wind.  
 
"Artem!" 
 
The man dropped his oil can and caught the young Red Army man in a bear's 
embrace. "Pavka! You rascal! It's you!" he cried unable to believe his eyes. 
The commander of the armoured train looked puzzled, and several gunners standing by 
smiled broadly at the joy of the two brothers in this chance meeting. 
 
 
It happened on August 19 during a battle in the Lvov area. Pavel had lost his cap in the 
fighting  and  had  reined  in  his  horse.  The  squadrons  ahead  had  already  cut  into  the 
Polish positions. At that moment Demidov came galloping through the bushes on his wa y 
down to the river. As he flew past Pavel he shouted: 
"The Division Commander's been killed!" 
 
Pavel  started.  Letunov,  his  heroic  commander,  that  man  of  sterling  courage,  dead!  A 
savage fury seized Pavel. 
With the blunt edge of his sabre he urged on his exhausted Gnedko, whose bit dripped 
with a bloody foam, and tore into the thick of the battle. 
"Kill  the  vermin,  kill  'em!  Cut  down  the  Polish  szlachtal  They've  killed  Letunov!"  And 
blindly he slashed at a figure in a green uniform. Enraged at the death of their Division 
Commander, the cavalrymen wiped out a whole platoon of Polish legionaries. 
They  galloped  headlong  over  the  battlefield  in  pursuit  of  the enemy,  but  now  a  Polish 
battery went into action. Shrapnel rent the air spattering death on all sides. 
Suddenly there was a blinding green flash before Pavel's eyes, thunder smote his ears 
and  red-hot  iron  seared  into  his  skull. The earth  spun  strangely  and  horribly  about  him 
and began to turn slowly upside down. 
Pavel was thrown from the saddle like a straw. He flew right over Gnedko's head and fell 
heavily to the ground. 
Instantly black night descended. 
 
 
 
Chapter Nine 
 
The  octopus  has  a  bulging  eye the size  of  a cat's  head,  a  glazed  reddish  eye  green  in  the  centre 
with a pulsating phosphorescent glow. The octopus is a loathsome mass of tentacles, which writhe 
 
第 117 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
and squirm like a tangled knot of snakes, the scaly skin rustling hideously as they move. 
The octopus stirs. He sees it next to his very eyes. And now the tentacles creep over his 
body;  they  are  cold  and  they  sting  like  nettles. The  octopus  shoots  out  its  sting, and  it 
bites into his head like a leech, and, wriggling convulsively, it sucks at his blood. He feels 
the  blood  draining out of  his  body  into  the  swelling  body  of  the  octopus.  And  the  sti ng 
goes on sucking and the pain of its sucking is unbearable. 
 
Somewhere far far away he can hear human 
voices: "How is his pulse now?"  
And another voice, a woman's, replies softly: 
 
"His pulse is a hundred and thirty-eight. His temperature 103.1. He is delirious all the time." 
 
The octopus  disappears,  but  the  pain  lingers.  Pavel  feels  someone  touch  his  wrist.  He 
tries to open his eyes, but his lids are so heavy he has no strength to lift them. Why is it 
so hot? Mother must have heated the stove. And again he hears those voices: 
"His pulse is one hundred and twenty-two now."  He tries to open his eyelids. But a fire 
burns within him. He is suffocating. 
He is terribly thirsty, he must get up at once and get a drink. But why does he not get up? 
He tries to move but his limbs refuse to obey him, his body is a stranger to him. Mother 
will bring him some  water at once. He  will say to her: "I  want to drink." Something stirs 
beside him. Is it the octopus about to crawl over him again? There it comes, he sees its 
red eyes. . . . From afar comes that soft voice: "Frosya, bring some water!" 
"Whose  name  is  that?"  But  the  effort  to  remember  is  too  much  for  him  and  da rkness 
engulfs him once more. Emerging presently from the gloom he recalls: "I am thirsty." 
And hears voices saying: "He seems to be regaining consciousness." Closer and more 
distinct now, that gentle voice: "Do you want to drink, Comrade?" 
"Can it be me they are addressing? Am I ill? Oh yes, I've got the typhus, that's it." And for 
the  third  time  he  tries  to  lift  his  eyelids.  And  at  last  he  succeeds.  The  first  thing  that 
reaches his consciousness through the narrowed vision of his slightly opened eyes is a 
red ball hanging above his head. But the red ball is blotted out by something dark which 
bends  towards  him,  and  his  lips feel  the  hard edge  of a  glass  and  moisture,  life -giving 
moisture. The fire within him subsides. Satisfied, he whispers: "That's better." 
 
"Can you see me, Comrade?" 
 
The dark shape standing over him has spoken, and just before drowsiness overpowers 
him he manages to say: "I can't see, but I can hear. . . ." 
"Now,  who  would  have  believed  he  would  pull  through?  Yet  see  how  he  has  clambered  back  to 
life! A remarkably strong constitution. You may be proud of yourself, Nina Vladimirovna. You have 
literally saved his life." And the woman's voice, trembling slightly , answers: "I am so glad!" 
 
After  thirteen  days  of  oblivion,  consciousness  returned  to  Pavel  Korchagin.  His  young 
body had not wanted to die, and slowly he recovered his strength. It was like being born 
again.  Everything  seemed  new  and  miraculous.  Only  his  head  lay  motionless  and 
unbearably heavy in its plaster cast, and he had not the strength to move it. But feeling 
returned to the rest of his body and soon he was able to bend his fingers. 
 
 
 
第 118 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Nina Vladimirovna, junior doctor of the military clinical hospital, sat at a small table in her 
room turning the leaves of a thick lilac-covered notebook filled with brief entries made in 
a neat slanting handwriting. 
 
 
August 26, 1920 
 
Some serious cases were brought in today by ambulance train. One of them has a very 
ugly head wound. We put him in the corner by the window. He is only seventeen. They 
gave  me  an  envelope  with  the  papers  found  in  his  pockets  and  the  case  h istory.  His 
name is Korchagin, Pavel Andreyevich. Among his papers were a well-worn membership 
card  (No.  967)  of  the  Young  Communist  League  of  the  Ukraine,  a  torn  Red  Army 
identification  book  and  a  copy  of  a  regimental  order  stating  that  Red  Army  man 
Korchagin was coinmended for exemplary fulfilment of a reconnaissance rnission. There 
was  also  a  note,  evidently  written  by  himself,  which  said:  "In  the  event  of  my  death 
please write to my relatives: Shepetov-ka, Railway Junction, Mechanic Artem Korchagin." 
 
He  has  been  unconscious  ever  since  he  was  hit  by  a  shell  fragment  on  August  19. 
Tomorrow Anatoli Stepanovich will examine him.  
 
August 27 
 
Today  we  examined Korchagin's  wound.  It  is  very  deep,  the  skull  is  fractured  and the  entire  right 
side of the head is paralysed. A blood vessel burst in the right eye which is badly swollen. 
 
Anatoli  Stepanovich  wanted  to  remove  the  eye  to  prevent  inflammation,  but  I  dissuaded  him, 
since  there  is  still  hope  that  the  swelling  might  go  down.  In  doing  this  I  was  prompted  sol ely 
by aesthetic considerations. The lad may recover; it would be a pity if he were dis figured.  
 
He  is  delirious  all  the time  and  terribly restless.  One  of  us  is  constantly on  duty  at his 
bedside. I spend much of my time with him. He is too young to die and I am determined 
to tear his young life out of Death's clutches. I must succeed. 
Yesterday  I  spent  several  hours in  his  ward  after my shift  was  over.  His  is the  worst  case  there.  I 
sat listening to his ravings. Sometimes they sound like a story, and I learn quite a lot about his life. 
But  at  times  he  curses  horribly.  He  uses  frightful  language.  Somehow  it  hurts  me  to  hear  such 
awful  cursing  from  him.  Anatoli  Stepanovich  does  not  believe  that  he  will  recover.  "I  can't 
understand what the army wants with such children," the old man growls. "It's a disgrace." 
 
 
August 30 
 
Korchagin  is still  unconscious.  He  has  been  removed  to the  ward  for  hopeless cases.  The  nurse 
Frosya  is  almost  constantly  at  his  side.  It  appears  she  knows  him.  They  worked  together  once. 
How gentle she is with him! Now I too am beginning to fear that his condition is hopeless. 
 
 
 
 
 
第 119 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
September 2, 11 p.m. 
 
This  has  been  a  wonderful  day for  me.  My  patient  Korchagin regained  consciousness. 
The crisis is over. I spent the past two days at the hospital without going home. 
I cannot describe my joy at the kn owledge that one more life  has been saved. One death less 
in  our  ward.  The  recovery  of  a  patient  is  the  most  wonderful  thing  about  this  exhausting  work 
of mine.  They bec ome like children.  Their  affection is simple and sincere, and  I too grow fond 
of them so that when they leave  I often weep. I know it is foolish of me, but I cannot help it.  
 
September 10 
 
Today I wrote Korchagin's first letter to his family. He writes his wound is not serious and 
he'll soon recover and come home. He has lost a great deal of blood and is as pale as a 
ghost, and still very weak. 
 
 
September 14 
 
Korchagin smiled today for the first time. He has a very nice smile. Usually he is grave beyond his 
years. He is making a remarkably rapid recovery. He and Frosya are great friends. I often see her 
at his bedside. She must have been talking to him about me, and evidently singing my praises, for 
now the patient greets me with a faint smile. Yesterday he asked: 
 
"What are those black marks on your arms, doctor?" I did not tell him that those bruises 
had been made by his fingers clutching my arm convulsively when he was delirious. 
 
 
September 17 
 
The  wound  on  Korchagin's  forehead  is  healing  nicely. We  doctors  are  amazed  at  the  remarkable 
fortitude with which this young man endures the painful business of dressing his wound. 
 
Usually  in  such  cases  the  patient  groans  a  great  deal  and  is  generally  troublesome.  But  this 
one  lies  quietly  and  when  the  open  wound  is  daubed  with  iodine  he  draws  himself  taut  like  a 
violin string. Often he loses consciousness, but not once have we heard  a groan escape him.  
 
We know now that  when Korchagin groans he is unconscious. Where does he get that 
tremendous endurance, I wonder? 
 
 
September 21 
 
We wheeled Korchagin out onto the big balcony today for the first time. How his face lit 
up  when  he  saw  the  garden,  how  greedily  he  breathed  in  the  fresh  air!  His  head  is 
swathed in bandages and only one eye is open. And that live, shining eye looked out on 
the world as if seeing it for the first time. 
 
第 120 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 26 
 
Today  two  young  women  came  to  the  hospital  asking  to  see  Korchagin.  I  went  downstairs  to 
the  waiting  room  to  speak  to  them.  One  of  them  was  very  beautiful.  They  introduced 
themselves as Tonya  Tumanova and  Tatiana Buranovskaya.  I had heard  of  Tonya, Korchagin 
had mentioned the name when he was delirious. I gave them permission to see him.  
 
 
October 8 
 
Korchagin  now  walks  unaided  in  the  garden.  He  keeps  asking  me  when  he  can  leave 
hospital. I tell him―soon. The two girls come to see him every visiting day. I know now 
why he never groans. I asked him, and he replied: "Read The Gadfly and you'll know."  
 
 
October 14 
 
Korchagin  has  been  discharged.  He  took  leave  of  me  very  warmly.  The  bandage  has 
been removed from his eye and now only his head is bound. The eye is blind, but looks 
quite  normal.  It  was  very  sad  to part  with  this  fine  young  comrade.  But that's  how  it  is: 
once they've recovered they leave us and rarely do we ever see them again. 
As he left he said: "Pity it wasn't the left eye. How will I be able to shoot 
now?" He still thinks of the front. 
 
 
After his discharge from hospital Pavel lived for a time at the Buranovskys where Tonya 
was staying. 
Pavel sought at once to draw Tonya into Komsomol activities. He began by inviting her to attend a 
meeting  of  the  town's  Komsomol.  Tonya  agreed  to  go,  but  when  she  emerged  from  her  room 
where she had been dressing for the meeting Pavel bit his lip. She was very smartly attired, with a 
studied elegance which Pavel felt would be entirely out of place at a Komsomol gathering. 
 
This was the cause of their first quarrel. When he asked her why she had dressed up like 
that she took offence. 
"I don't see why I must look like everyone else. But if my clothes don't suit you, I can stay 
at home." 
At  the club  Tonya's  fine  clothes  were  so  conspicuous  among  all  the  faded  tunics  and  shabby 
blouses  that  Pavel  was  deeply  embarrassed.  The  young  people  treated  her  as  an  outsider, 
and  Tonya, conscious of their disapproval, assumed a contemptuous, defiant air.  
 
Pankratov, the secretary of the Komsomol organisation at the shipping wharves, a broad-
shouldered docker in a coarse linen shirt, called Pavel aside, and indicating Tonya with 
his eyes, said with a scowl: 
 
第 121 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
"Was it you who brought that doll 
here?" "Yes," Pavel replied curtly. 
"Mm," observed Pankratov. "She doesn't belong here by the looks of her. Too bourgeois 
by half. How did she get in?" 
Pavel's temples pounded. 
 
"She  is  a  friend  of  mine.  I  brought  her  here.  Understand?  She  isn't  hostile  to  us  at  all,  even  if 
she does think too much about clothes. You can't always judge people  by the way they dress. 
I know as well as you do whom to bring here so you  needn't be so o fficious, Comrade." 
 
He wanted to say something sharp and insulting but realising that Pankratov was voicing 
the general opinion he checked himself, and that only increased his anger at Tonya. 
"I told her what to expect! Why the devil must she put on such airs?" 
 
That  evening  marked  the beginning  of  the  end  of  their  friendship.  With  bitterness  and 
dismay Pavel watched the break-up of a relationship that had seemed so enduring. 
Several  more  days  passed,  and  with  every  meeting,  every  conversation  they  drifted 
further and further apart. Tonya's cheap individualism became unbearable to Pavel. 
Both realised that a break was inevitable. 
 
Today they had met in the K upechesky Gardens  for t he last time.  The  paths were strewn  with 
decaying  leaves.  They  stood  by  the  balustrade  at  the  top  of  the  cliff  and  look ed  down  at  the 
grey  waters  of  the  Dnieper.  From  behind  the  towering  hulk  of  the  bridge  a  tug  came  crawling 
wearily  down  the  river  wit h  two  heavy  barges  in  tow.  The  setting  sun  painted  the  Trukhanov 
Island with daubs of gold and set the windows of the  hous es on fire.  
 
Tonya looked at the golden shafts of sunlight and said with deep 
sadness: "Is our friendship going to fade like that dying sun?" 
Pavel, who had been gazing at her face, knitted his brows sternly and answered in a low 
voice: "Tonya, we have gone over this before. You know, of course, that I loved you, and 
even now my love might return, but for that you must be with us. I am not the Pavlusha I 
was before. And I would be a poor husband to you if you expect me to put you before the 
Party. For I shall always put the Party first, and you and my other loved ones second." 
Tonya stared miserably down at the dark-blue water and her eyes filled with tears. 
 
Pavel gazed at the profile he had come to know so  well, her thick chestnut hair, and a 
wave of pity for this girl who had once been so dear to him swept over him.  
Gently he laid his hand on her shoulder. 
 
"Tonya, cut yourself loose and come to us. Let's work together to finish with the bosses. 
There  are  many  splendid  girls  among  us  who  are  sharing  the  burden  of  this  bitter 
struggle, enduring all the hardships and privation. They may not be so well educated as 
you are, but why, oh why, don't you want to join us? You say Chuzhanin tried to seduce 
you, but he is a degenerate, not a fighter. You say the comrades were unfriendly toward 
you.  Then  why  did  you  have  to dress  up as  if  you  were  going  to a  bourgeois  ball?  It's 
your  silly  pride  that's  to blame:  why  should  I  wear  a  dirty  old  army  tunic  just because 
everybody else does? You had the courage to love a workingman, but you cannot love 
an idea. I am sorry to have to part with you, and I should like to cherish your memory."  
 
He said no more. 
 
The next day he saw an order posted up in the street signed by Zhukhrai, chairman of the regional 
 
 
 
第 122 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
Cheka. His heart leapt. It was with great difficulty that he gained admission to the sailor's 
office. The sentries would not let him in and he raised such a fuss that he was very nearly 
arrested, but in the end he had his way. 
Fyodor gave him a very warm welcome. The sailor had lost an arm; it had been torn off 
by a shell. The conversation turned at once to work. "You can help me crush the counter -
revolution here until you're fit for the front again. Start tomorrow," said Zhukhrai. 
 
 
The  struggle  with  the  Polish  Whites  came  to  an  end.  The  Red  armies  pursued  the  enemy 
almost  to  the  very  walls  of  Warsaw,  but  with  their  material  and  physical  strength  expended 
and  their  supply  bases  left  far  behind,  they  were  unable  to  take  this  final  stronghold  and  so 
fell  back.  Thus  the  "miracle  on  the  Vistula",  as  the  Poles  called  the  withdrawal  of  the  Red 
forces from Wars aw, came t o pass, and the P oland of the  gentry received a  new lease of life. 
The dream of the Polish Soviet Socialist Republic was not yet to be fulfilled.  
 
The blood-drenched land demanded a respite. 
 
Pavel was unable to see his people, for Shepetovka was again in Polish hands and had 
become a temporary frontier outpost. Peace talks were in progress. 
Pavel  spent  days  and  nights  in  the  Cheka  carrying  out  diver se  assignments.  He  was 
much upset when he learned that his hometown was occupied by the Poles. 
"Does  that  mean  my  mother  will  be  on  the  other  side  of  the  border  if  the  armistice  is 
signed now?" he asked Zhukhrai. 
But Fyodor calmed his fears. 
 
"Most  likely  the  frontier  will  pass  through  Goryn along  the  river,  which  means that  your 
town will be on our side," he said. "In any case we'll know soon enough." 
Divisions were being transferred from the Polish front to the South. For while the republic 
had been straining every effort on the Polish front, Wrangel had taken advantage of the 
respite  to  crawl  out  of  his  Crimean  lair  and  advance northward  along  the  Dnieper  with 
Yekaterinoslav Gubernia as his immediate objective. 
Now that the war with the Poles was over, the republic rushed its armies to the Crimea to 
wipe out the last hotbed of counter-revolution. 
Trainloads  of  troops,  carts,  field  kitchens  and  guns  passed  through  Kiev  en  route  to  the  South.  The 
Cheka of the regional transport services worked at fever pitch these days coping with the bottlenecks 
caused by the huge flood of traffic. Stations were jammed with trains and frequently traffic would be held 
up for lack of free tracks. Telegraph operators tapped out countless messages ordering the line cleared 
for this or that division. The tickers spilled out endless ribbons of tape covered with dots and dashes and 
each of them demanding priority: "Precedence above all else . ..  
 
this is a military order . . . clear line immediately. . . ." And nearly every message included 
a reminder that failure to carry out the order would entail prosecution by a revoluti onary 
military tribunal. 
The local transport Cheka was responsible for keeping traffic moving without interruption. 
Commanders of army units would burst into its headquarters brandishing revolvers and demanding 
that their trains be dispatched at once in accordance with telegram number so-and-so signed by 
the commander of the army. And none of them would accept the explanation that this 
 
第 123 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
was  impossible.  "You'll  get  that  train off  if  you  croak  doing  it!"  And  a  string  of  frightful 
curses  would  follow.  In  particularly  serious  cases  Zhukhrai  would  be  urgently  sent  for, 
and then the excited men who  were ready to shoot each other on the spot would calm 
down  at  once.  At  the  sight  of  this  man  of  iron  with  his  quiet  icy  voice that brooked  no 
argument revolvers were thrust back into their holsters. 
 
At times Pavel would stagger out of his office onto the platform with a stabbing pain in his 
head. Work in the Cheka was having a devastating effect on his nerves. 
One day he caught sight of Sergei Bruzzhak on a truck loaded  with ammunition crates. Sergei 
jumped down, nearly knocking Pavel off his feet, and  flung his arms round his friend.  
 
"Pavka, you devil! I knew it was you the minute I laid eyes on you." 
 
The  two  young  men  had  so much  news to  exchange  that  they  did  not  know  where  to  begin.  So 
much had happened to both of them since they had last met. They plied each other with questions, 
and  talked  on  without  waiting  for  answers.  They  did  not  hear  the  engine  whistle  and it  was  only 
when the train began to move out of the station that they became aware of their surroundings. 
 
They still had much to say to each other, but the train was already gathering speed and 
Sergei, shouting something to his friend, raced along the platform and caught on to the 
open door of one of the box cars. Several hands snatched h im up and drew him inside. 
As  Pavel  stood  watching  him  go  he  suddenly  remembered  that  Sergei  knew  nothing 
about  Valya's  death.  For  he  had  not  visited  Shepetovka  since  he  left  it,  and  in  the 
unexpectedness of this encounter Pavel had forgotten to tell him. 
 
"It's a good thing he does not know, his mind will be at ease," thought Pavel. He did not 
know that he was never to see his friend again. Nor did Sergei, standing on the roof of 
the box car, his chest exposed to the autumn wind, know that he was going to  his death. 
"Get down from there, Seryozha," urged Doroshenko, a Red Army man  wearing a coat 
with a hole burnt in the back. 
"That's all right," said Sergei laughing. "The wind and I are good friends." 
 
A  week  later  he  was  struck  by  a  stray  bullet  in  his  fir st  engagement.  He  staggered 
forward, his chest rent by a tearing pain, clutched at the air, and pressing his arms tightly 
against his chest, he swayed and dropped heavily to the ground and his sightless blue 
eyes stared out over the boundless Ukrainian steppe. 
 
 
His nerve-wracking work in the Cheka began to tell on Pavel's weakened condition. His 
violent  headaches  became  more  frequent,  but  it  was  not  until  he fainted  one  day after 
two sleepless nights that he finally decided to take the matter up with Zhukhrai. 
"Don't you think I ought to try some other sort of work, Fyodor? I would like best of all to 
work at my own trade at the railway shops. I'm afraid there's something wrong wit h  my 
head. They told me in the medical commission that I was unfit for army service. But this 
sort  of  work  is  worse  than  the  front. The  two  days  we  spent rounding  up  Sutyr's  band 
have  knocked  me  out  completely.  I  must  have  a  rest  from  all  this  shooting.  Yo u  see, 
Fyodor, I shan't be much good to you if I can barely stand on my feet." 
 
Zhukhrai studied Pavel's face with concern. 
 
 
 
第 124 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
"Yes, you don't look so good. It's all my fault. I ought to have let you go long before this. 
But I've been too busy to notice." 
Shortly after the above conversation Pavel presented himself at the Regional Committee 
of  the  Komsomol  with  a  paper  certifying  that  he  was  being  placed  at  the  Committee's 
disposal. An officious youngster with his cap perched jauntily over his nose ran his eyes 
rapidly over the paper and winked to Pavel: 
"From the Cheka, eh? A jolly organisation that. We'll find work for you here i n a jiffy. We 
need everybody we can get. Where would you like to go? Commissary department? No? 
All right. What about the agitation section down at the waterfront? No? Too bad. Nice soft 
job that, special rations too." 
Pavel interrupted him. 
 
"I  would prefer the railway repair shops," he said. The lad gaped. "Mm. . . . I don't think 
we need anybody there. But go to Ustinovich. She'll fit you in somewhere." 
After a brief interview with the dark-eyed girl it was decided to assign Pavel as secretary 
of the Komsomol organisation in the railway shops where he was to work. 
 
 
Meanwhile  the  Whites  had  been  fortifying  the  gates  of  the  Crimea,  and  now  on  this 
narrow neck of land that once had been the frontier between the Crimean Tatars and the 
Zaporozhye Cossack settlements stood the modernised fortified line of Perekop. 
And behind Perekop in the Crimea, the old, doomed world  which had been driven here 
from all corners of the land, feeling quite secure, lived in wine -fuddled revelry. 
One chill dank autumn night tens of thousands of sons of the toiling people plunged into 
the icy waters of the Sivash to cross the bay under the cover of darkness and strike from 
behind at the enemy entrenched in their forts. Among the thousands waded Ivan Zharky, 
carrying his machine gun on his head to prevent it from getting wet. 
And when dawn found Perekop seething in a wild turmoil, its fortifications attacked in a 
frontal assault, the first columns of men that had crossed the Sivash climbed ashore on 
Litovsky Peninsula to  take the Whites from the rear. And among the first to clamber onto 
that rock coast was Ivan Zharky. 
A battle of unprecedented ferocity ensued. The White cavalry bore down savagely on the 
Red Army  men as they emerged from the  water. Zharky's machine gun spe wed death, 
never  ceasing  its  lethal  tattoo.  Men  and  horses  fell  in  heaps  under  the  leaden  spray. 
Zharky fed new magazines into the gun with feverish speed. 
Perekop  thundered  back  through  the  throats  of  hundreds  of  guns.  The  very  earth  seemed  to 
have  dropped  int o  a  bottomless  abyss,  and  deat h  carried  by  thousands  of  shells  pierced  the 
heavens  with  ear-splitting  screams  and  exploded,  scattering  myriads  of  minute  fragments  far 
and  wide.  The torn  and lacerat ed earth spouted up in black clouds that blotted out t he sun. 
 
The monster's head was crushed, and into the Crimea swept the Red flood of the First 
Cavalry  Army  to  deliver  the  final,  smashing  blow.  Frantic  with  terror,  the  White -guards 
rushed in a panic to board the ships leaving the ports. 
And  the  Republic  pinned  the  golden  badge  of  the  Order  of  the  Red  Banner  to  many  a  faded 
Red A rmy tunic, and one of these tunics was Ivan  Zharky's, the Komsomol mac hine  gunner.  
 
 
第 125 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Peace was signed with the Poles and, as Zhukhrai had predicted, Shepetovka remained 
in Soviet Ukraine. A river thirty-five kilometres outside the town now marked the frontier. 
One memorable morning in December 1920 Pavel arrived in his native town. He step ped 
onto the snowy platform, glanced up at the sign Shepetovka I, then turned left, and went 
straight to the railway yards and asked for Artem. But his brother was not there. Drawing 
his army coat tighter about him, Pavel strode off through the woods to th e town. 
Maria Yakovlevna turned when the knock came at the door and said, "Come in." A snow-
covered figure pushed into the house and she saw the dear face of her son. Her hand 
flew to her heart, joy robbed her of speech. 
She fell on her son's breast and smothered his face with kisses, and tears of happiness 
streamed  down  her  cheeks.  And  Pavel,  pressing  the  spare  little  body  close,  gazed 
silently  down  at  the  careworn  face  of  his  mother furrowed  with  deep  lines  of  pain  and 
anxiety, and waited for her to grow calmer. 
Once again the light of happiness shone in the eyes of this woman who had suffered so 
much. It seemed she would never have her fill of gazing at this son whom she had lost all 
hope  of  ever  seeing  again.  Her  joy  knew  no  bounds  when  three  days  later  Artem  too 
burst into the tiny room late at night with his kit-bag over his shoulders. 
Now  the  Korchagin  family  was  reunited.  Both  brothers  had  escaped  death,  and  after 
harrowing ordeals and trials they had met again. 
"What are you going to do now?" the mother asked her sons. 
 
"It's back to the repair shops for me, Mother!" replied Artem gaily. 
 
As for Pavel, aft er two  weeks at home he  went back to Kiev where his work was awaiting  him.  
 
Printed in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
 
 
 
PART TWO 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter One 
 
Midnight. The last tramcar has long since dragged its battered carcass back to the depot. 
The  moon  lays  its  cold  light  on  the  windowsill  and  spreads  a  luminous  coverlet  on  the 
bed,  leaving  the rest  of  the room  in  semi-darkness.  At  the  table  in  the  corner  under a 
circle of light shed by the desk lamp sits Rita bent over a thick notebook, her diary. The 
sharp point of her pencil traces the words: 
 
May 24 
 
 
 
 
第 126 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
"I am  making another attempt to jot down my impressions. Again there is a big gap. Six 
weeks have passed since I made the last entry. But it cannot be helped. 
"How  can  I  find  time  for  my  diary?  It  is  past  midnight  now,  and  here  I  am  still  writing.  Sleep 
eludes  me.  Comrade  Segal  is  leaving  us:  he  is  going  to  work  in  the  Central  Committee.  We 
were  all  very  much  upset  by  the  news.  He  is  a  wonderful  person,  our  Lazar  Alexandrovich.  I 
did  not  realise  until  now  how  muc h  his  friendship  has  meant  to  us  all.  The  dia lectical 
materialism class is bound to  go t o pieces when he leaves. Yesterday we stayed  at his place 
until  the  wee  hours  verifying  the  progress  made  by  our  'pupils'.  Akim,  the  Secretary  of  the 
Komsomol  Gubernia  Committee,  came  and  that  horrid  Tufta  as  well.  I  can't  stand  that  Mr. 
Know-All!  Segal  was  delighted  when  his  pupil  Korchagin  brilliantly  defeated  Tuft a  in  an 
argument on Party history. Yes, these two months have not been wasted. You don't begrudge 
your  efforts  when  you  see  such  splendid  results.  It  is  rumoured  that  Zhukhrai  is  being 
transferred to the Special Department of the Military Region.  I wonder why.  
 
"Lazar Alexandrovich turned his pupil over to me. 'You will have to complete what I have 
begun,' he said. 'Don't stop halfway. You and he, Rita,  can learn a great deal from each 
other.  The  lad  is  still  rather disorganised.  His  is  a  turbulent  nature  and  he  is apt  to  be 
carried away by his emotions. I feel that you will be a most suitable guide for him, Rita. I 
wish you success. Don't forget to write me in Moscow.'  
"Today a new secretary for the Solomensky District Committee was sent down from the 
Central Committee. His name is Zharky. I knew him in the army. 
"Tomorrow  Dmitri  Dubava  will  bring  Korchagin.  Let  me  try  to  describe  Dubava.  Medium  height, 
strong, muscular.  Joined  the  Komsomol  in  1918,  and  has  been  a Party  member  since  1920.  He 
was  one  of  the  three  who  were  expelled  from  the  Komsomol  Gubernia  Committee  for  having 
belonged  to  the  'Workers'  Opposition'.  Instructing  him  has  not  been  easy.  Every  day  he  upset  the 
programme  by  asking  innumerable  questions  and  making  us  digress  from  the  subject.  He  and 
Olga Yureneva, my other pupil, did not get along at all. At their very first meeting he looked her up 
and down and remarked: 'Your get-up is all wrong, old girl. You ought to have trousers with leather 
seats, spurs, a Budyonny hat and a sabre. This way you're neither fish nor fowl.' 
 
"Olga  wouldn't  stand  for  that,  of  course,  and  I  had  to  interfere.  I  believe  Dubava  is  a 
friend of Korchagin's. Well enough for tonight. It's time for bed." 
 
 
The  earth  wilted  under  the  scorching  sun.  The  iron  railing  of  the  footbridge  over  the 
railway  platforms  was  burning  to  the  touch.  People,  limp  and  exhausted  from  the  heat, 
climbed the bridge wearily; most of them were not travellers, but residents of the railway 
district who used the bridge to get to the town proper. 
As  he  came  down  the  steps  Pavel  caught  sight  of  Rita.  She  had  reached  the  station 
before him and was watching the people coming off the bridge. 
Pavel  paused  some  three  paces  away  from  her.  She  did  not  notice  him,  and  he studied  her  with 
new-found  interest.  She  was  wearing  a  striped  blouse  and  a  short  dark -blue skirt  of  some cheap 
material. A soft leather jacket  was slung  over  her  shoulder.  Her sun-tanned  face  was  framed  in a 
shock  of  unruly  hair  and  as  she  stood  there  with  her  head  thrown  slightly  back  and  her  eyes 
narrowed against the sun's glare, it struck Korchagin for the first time that Rita, his friend and 
 
第 127 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
teacher,  was not only a member of the bureau of the Komsomol Gubernia Committee, but....  
 
Annoyed with himself for entertaining such "sinful" thoughts, he called to her. 
 
"I've been staring at you for a whole hour, but you didn't notice me," he laughed. "Come 
along, our train is already in." 
They went over to the service door leading to the platform. 
 
The  previous  day  the  Gubernia  Committee  had  appointed  Rita  as  its  representative  at  a  district 
conference of the Komsomol, and Korchagin was to go as her assistant. Their immediate problem 
was  to  board the  train,  which  was  by  no  means  a simple  task.  The  railway  station  on  those  rare 
occasions  when the  trains  ran  was  taken  over  by  an  all-powerful  Committee  of  Five  in  charge  of 
boarding  and  without  a  permit  from  this  body  no  one  was  allowed  on  the  platform.  All  exits  and 
approaches to  the  platform  were  guarded  by  the  Committee's  men.  The  overcrowded  train  could 
take on only a fraction of the crowd anxious to leave, but no one wanted to be left behind to spend 
days  waiting  for  a chance train to  come through.  And so thousands stormed  the  platform  doors  in 
an  effort  to  break  through  to  the  unattainable  carriages.  In  those  days  the  station  was  literally 
besieged and sometimes pitched battles were fought. 
 
After  vainly  attempting  to  push  through  the  crowd  collected  at  the  plat form  entrance,  Pavel, 
who k new all the ins and outs at the station, led  Rita through the luggage room. With difficulty 
they made their way to coach  No. 4. At the carriage  door a  Cheka m an, sweating  profusely in 
the heat, was trying to hold  back the crowd, and repeated over and over again:  
 
"The carriage's full, and it's against the rules to ride on the buffers or the roof." 
 
Irate people bore down on him, waving tickets issued by the Committee under his nose. 
There were angry curses, shouts and violent jostling at every carriage. Pavel saw that it 
would  be  impossible  to  board  the  train  in  the  conventional  manner.  Yet  board  it  they 
must, otherwise the conference would have to be called off. 
Taking Rita aside, he outlined his plan of action: he would push his way inside, open a 
window and help her to climb in. There was no other way. 
"Let me have that jacket of yours. It's better than any credential." 
 
He slipped on the jacket and stuck his  revolver into the pocket so that the grip and cord 
showed.  Leaving  the bag  with  Rita,  he  went  over  to  the  carriage,  elbowed  through  the 
knot of excited passengers at the entrance and gripped the handrail. 
"Hey, Comrade, where you going?" 
 
Pavel glanced nonchalantly over his shoulder at the stocky Cheka man. 
 
"I'm  from  the  Special  Department.  I  want  to  see  whether  all  the  passengers  in  this  carriage 
have tickets issued by the Committee," he said in a tone that left no doubt as to his authority.  
 
The Cheka man glanced at Pavel's pocket, wiped his perspiring brow with his sleeve and 
said wearily: 
"Go ahead if you can shove yourself in." 
 
Working  with  his hands,  shoulders,  and  here  and  there  with  his  fists,  holding  on  to  the 
ledges of the upper berths to climb over the passengers who had planted themselves on 
their belongings in the middle of the passage, Pavel made his way through to the centre 
of the carriage, ignoring the torrent of abuse that rained down on him from all sides. 
"Can't you look where you're going, curse you!" screamed a stout woman when Pavel accidentally 
brushed her knee with his foot, as he lowered himself to the floor. She had contrived to wedge her 
 
第 128 页 共 259 页  
 
 
 
18-stone  bulk  onto  the  edge  of  a  seat  and  had  a  large  vegetable  oil  can between  her 
knees. All the shelves were stuffed with similar cans, hampers, sacks and baskets. The 
air in the carriage was suffocating. 
Paying no heed to the abuse, Pavel demanded: "Your ticket, please!" 
"My what!" the woman snapped back at the unwelcome ticket-collector. 
 
A  head  appeared  from  the  uppermost  berth  and  an  ugly  voice  boomed  out:  "Vaska, 
what's this 'ere mug want. Give 'im a ticket to kingdom come, will ya?"  
The  huge  frame  and  hairy  chest  of  what  was  obviously  Vaska  swung  into  view  right 
above Pavel's head and a pair of bloodshot eyes fixed him with a bovine stare. 
"Leave the lady alone, can't ya? What d'ye want tickets for?" 
 
Four  pairs  of  legs  dangled  from  an  upper  side berth;  their  owners  sat  with  their  arms 
around  one  another's  shoulders  noisily  cracking  sunflower  seeds.  One  glance  at  their 
faces told Pavel who they were: a gang of food sharks, hardened crooks who travelled up 
and down the country buying up food and selling it at speculative prices. Pavel had no 
time to waste with them. He had to get Rita inside somehow. 
"Whose  box  is  this?"  he  inquired  of  an  elderly  man  in  railway  uniform,  indicating  a 
wooden chest standing under the window.  
"Hers," replied the other, pointing to a pair of thick legs in brown stockings. 
 
The window had to be opened and the box was in the way. Since there was nowhere to 
move it Pavel picked it up and handed it to its owner who was seated on an upper berth. 
"Hold it a moment, please, I'm going to open the window."  
 
"Keep your hands off my things!" screamed the flat-nosed wench when he placed the box 
on her knees. 
"Motka, what's this feller think he's doin'?" she said to the man seated beside her. The 
latter gave Pavel a kick in the back with his sandalled foot. 
"Lissen 'ere, you! Clear out of here before I punch your nose!" 
 
Pavel endured the kick in silence. He was too busy unfastening the 
window. "Move aside, please," he said to the railwayman.  
Shifting  another can  out  of the  way  Pavel  cleared  a space  in  front  of the  window.  Rita  was  on  the 
platform  below. Quickly she  handed  him the  bag.  Throwing  it  onto the knees  of  the stout  woman 
with the vegetable oil can, Pavel bent down, seized Rita's hands and drew her in. Before the guard 
had  time  to  notice  this  infringement  of  the  rules,  Rita  was  inside  the carriage,  leaving  the  guard 
swearing  belatedly  outside.  The  gang  of  toughs met  Rita's  appearance  with  such  an  uproar  that 
she  was  taken  aback. Since  there  was  not  even standing  room  on  the  floor, she  found  a  place  for 
her  feet  on  the  very  edge  of  the  lower  berth  and  stood  there  holding  on  to  the  upper  berth  for 
support. Foul curses sounded on all sides. From above the ugly bass voice croaked: 
 
"Look at the swine, gets in himself and drags his broad in after 'im!" 
 
A voice from above squeaked: "Motka, poke him one between the eyes!" 
 
The  woman  was  doing  her  best  to  stand  her  wooden  box  on  Pavel's  head.  The  two 
newcomers  were  surrounded  by  a ring  of  evil,  brutish faces.  Pavel  was  sorry  that  Rita 
had to be exposed to this but there was nothing to be done but to make the best of it. 
"Move  your  sacks  and  make  room  for the comrade,"  he said  to  the  one they called  Motka,  but  the 
answer was a curse so foul that he boiled with rage. The pulse over his right eyebrow began to 
 
第 129 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
throb painfully. "Just wait, you scoundrel, you'll answer for this," he said  to the ruffian, but 
received a kick on the head from above. 
"Good for you, Vaska, fetch 'im another!" came approving cries from all sides. 
 
Pavel's self-control gave way at last, and as always in such moments his actions became 
swift and sure. 
"You speculating bastards, you think you can get away with it?" he shouted, and hoisting 
himself  agilely  on  to  the  upper  berth, he  sent  his  fist  smashing  against  Motka's  leering 
face. The speculator went tumbling onto the heads of the other passengers. 
"Clear  out  of  here,  you  swine,  or  I'll  shoot  down  the  whole  lot  of  you!"  Pavel  yelled, 
waving his revolver under the noses of the four. 
The  tables  were  t urned.  Rita  watched  clos ely,  ready  to  shoot  if  any one  attacked  Korchagin. 
The upper berth-quickly cleared. The gang  hastily withdrew to the neighbouring compartment. 
 
As he helped Rita up to the empty berth, Pavel whispered: 
"You stay here, I'm going to see about those fellows." 
 
Rita tried to stop him. "You're not going to fight them, are 
you?" "No," he reassured her. "I'll be back soon." 
He  opened  the  window  again  and  climbed  out  onto  the  platform.  A  few  minutes  later  he  was 
talking  to  Burmeister  of  the  Transport  Cheka,  his  former  chief.  The  Lett  heard  him  out  and 
then gave orders to have the entire carriage cleared and the  passengers ' papers checked. 
 
"It's just as I said," growled Burmeister. "The trains are full of speculators before they get 
here." A detail of ten Cheka men cleared the carriage. Pavel, assuming his old duties, 
helped to examine the documents of the passengers. He had not broken all ties with his 
former Cheka comrades and in his capacity as secretary of the Komsomol he had sent 
some of the best Komsomol members to work there. When the screening was over, 
Pavel returned to Rita. The carriage was now occupied by a vastly different type of 
passenger: Red Army men and factory and office workers travelling on business. 
 
Rita  and  Pavel had  the  top  berth  in  one  corner  of  the  carriage, but  so  much  of  it  was 
taken up with bundles of newspapers that there was only room for Rita to lie down. 
"Never mind," she said, "we'll manage somehow." 
 
The train  began to  move  at last. As it slid slowly out of the station they caught  a brief glimpse 
of the  fat woman seated  on a bundle of sacks on the platform and h eard her yelling:  
 
"Hey Manka, where's my oil can gone?" 
 
Sitting  in  their  cramped  quarters  with  the  bundles  of  newspapers  shielding  them  from 
their neighbours, Pavel and Rita munched bread and apples and laughingly recalled the 
far from laughable episode with which their journey had begun. 
The train crawled along. The old, battered and overloaded carriage creaked and groaned 
and trembled violently at every joint in the track. The deep blue twilight looked in at the 
windows. Then night came, folding the carriage in darkness. 
Rita was tired and she dozed with her head resting on the bag. Pavel sat on the edge of 
the  berth  and  smoked.  He  too  was  tired but there  was  no room  to  lie  down.  The  fresh 
night breeze blew through the open window.  
Rita, awakened by a sudden jolt, saw the glow of Pavel's cigarette in the darkne ss. It was 
just like him to sit up all night rather than cause her discomfort. 
 
第 130 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
"Comrade Korchagin! Drop those bourgeois conventions and lie down," she said 
lightly. Pavel obediently lay down beside her and stretched his stiff legs luxuriously.  
 
"We have heaps of work tomorrow. So try and get some sleep, you rowdy." She put her 
arm trustingly around his neck and he felt her hair touching his cheek. 
To Pavel, Rita was sacred. She was his friend and comrade, his political guide. Yet she 
was a woman as well. He had first become aware of this over there at the footbridge, and 
that  was  why  her  embrace  stirred  him  so  much  now.  He  felt  her  deep  even  breathing; 
somewhere quite close to him were her lips. Proximity awoke in him a powerful desire to 
find those lips, and it was only with a great effort of will that he suppressed the impulse.  
Rita, as if divining his feelings, smiled in the darkness. She had already known the joy of 
passion  and  the  pain  of  loss.  She  had  given  her  love  to  two  Bolsheviks.  Whitegu ard 
bullets  had  robbed  her  of  both.  One  had  been  a  splendid  giant  of  a  man,  a  Brigade 
Commander; the other, a lad with clear blue eyes. 
Soon the regular rhythm of the wheels rocked Pavel to sleep and he did not wake until 
the engine whistled shrilly the next morning. 
 
 
Work kept Rita occupied every day until late at night and she had little time for her diary. 
After an interval a few more brief entries appeared: 
 
 
August 11 
 
"The  gubernia  conference  is  over.  Akim,  Mikhailo  and  several  others  have  gone  to  Kharkov 
for the all-Ukraine conference, leaving all the paper work to me. Dubava  and Pavel have been 
sent  to  work  at  the  Gubernia  Committee.  Ever  since  Dmitri  was  made  secretary  of  the 
Pechorsk District Committee  he  has stopped coming t o lessons. He is up to his neck in work. 
Pavel t ries to do some studying, but we don't get much done  because eit her  I  am too  busy or 
else  he  is  sent  off  on  some  assignment.  With  the  present  tense  situation  on  the  railways  the 
Komsomols  are  constantly  being  mobilised  for  work.  Zharky  came  to  see  me  yesterday.  He 
complained about the boys being taken away from him, says he needs them badly himself."  
 
 
August 23 
 
"I  was  going  down  the  corridor  today  when  I  saw  Korchagin  standing  outside  the 
manager's office with Pankratov and another man. As I came closer I heard Pavel say: 
"  'Those  fellows  sitting  there  ought  to  be  shot.  "You've  no  right  to  countermand  our  orders,"  he 
says. "The Railway Firewood Committee is the boss here and you Komsomols had better keep out 
of  it."  You  ought  to  have  seen  his  mug....  And  the  place  is  infested  with  parasites  like  him!'  He 
followed  this  up  with  some  shocking  language.  Pankratov  caught  sight  of  me  and  nudged  him. 
Pavel swung round and when he saw me he turned pale and walked off without meeting my eyes. 
He won't be coming around for a long while now. He knows I will not tolerate bad language." 
 
第 131 页 共 259 页  
 
 
 
 
 
August 27 
 
"We  had  a  closed  meeting  of  the  bureau. The  situation  is  becoming  serious.  I  cannot 
write about it in detail just yet. Akim came back from the regional conference looking very 
worried. Yesterday another  supply train was derailed. I don't think I shall try to keep this 
diary any more. It is much too haphazard anyway. I am expecting Korchagin. I saw him 
the other day and he told me he and Zharky are organising a commune of five." 
 
 
One  day  while  at  work  in  the  railway  shops  Pavel  was  called  to  the  telephone.  It  was  Rita.  She 
happened to be free that evening and suggested that they finish the chapter they had been studying 
 
― the reasons for the fall of the Paris Commune. 
 
As  he  approached  Rita's  hous e  on  University  Street  that  evening,  Pavel  glanced  up  and  saw 
a light in her window. He ran upstairs, gave his usual  brief knock on the  door and went in.  
 
There on the bed, where none of the young comrades were allowed even to s it for  a moment, 
lay  a  man  in  uniform.  A  revolver,  knapsack  and  cap  with  the  red  star  lay  on  the  table.  Rita 
was  sitting  beside  the  stranger  with  her  arms  clasped  tightly  around  him.  The  two  were 
engaged in earnest conversation and as Pavel  entered  Rita looked up  with a radiant face.  
 
The man freed himself from her embrace and rose. 
"Pavel," said Rita shaking hands with him, "this is ...." 
 
"David Ustinovich," the man said, clasping Korchagin's hand warmly. 
"He turned up quite unexpectedly," Rita explained with a happy laugh. 
 
Pavel  shook  hands  coldly  with  the  newcomer  and  a  gleam  of  resentment  flashed  in  his  eyes. 
He noticed the four squares of a Company Commander on the sleeve of the man's uniform.  
 
Rita was about to say something but Pavel interrupted her . "I just dropped in to tell you 
that  I  shall  be  busy  loading  wood  down  at  the  wharves  this  evening,"  he  said.  "And 
anyhow you have a visitor. Well, I'll be off, the boys are waiting for me downstairs." 
And  he  disappeared  through  the door  as  suddenly _  as  he  had  come.  They  heard  him 
hurrying down the stairs. Then the outside door slammed and all was quiet.  
"There's something the matter with him," Rita faltered in answer to David's questioning 
look. Down below under the bridge an engine heaved a deep sigh, e xhaling a shower of 
golden sparks from its mighty lungs. They soared upward executing a fantastic dance 
and were lost in the smoke. Pavel leaned against the railing and stared at the coloured 
signal lights winking on the switches. He screwed up his eyes. 
"What  I  don't  understand,  Comrade  Korchagin,  is  why  it should  hurt so much to  discover  that  Rita 
has  a  husband?  Has she  ever  told you she  hadn't? And  even  if  she  has,  what  of  it? Why  should 
you take it like that? You thought, Comrade, it was all platonic friendship and nothing else. ... How 
could  you  have  let  this  happen?"  he  asked  himself  with  bitter  irony.  "But  what  if  he  isn't  her 
husband?  David  Ustinovich  might  be  her  brother  or  her  uncle....  In  which  case  you've  done  the 
chap  an  injustice,  you  fool.  You're  no  better  than  any  other  swine.  It's  easy  enough  to  find  out 
whether he's her brother or not. Suppose he turns out to be a brother or an uncle, how are you 
 
第 132 页 共 259 页  
 
 
 
going to face her after the way you've behaved? No, you've got to stop 
seeing her!" The scream of an engine whistle interrupted his reflections. 
"It's getting late. Time to be going home. Enough of this nonsense." 
 
 
 
At Solomenka, as the district where the railway  workers lived was called, five young men 
set  up  a  miniature  commune.  They  were  Zharky,  Pavel,  Klavicek,  a  jolly  fair -haired 
Czech, Nikolai Okunev, secretary of the railway-yards Komsomol, and Stepan Artyukhin, 
a boiler repairman who was now working for the railway Cheka. 
They  found  a  room  and  for  three  days  spent  all  their  free  time  cleaning,  painting  and 
whitewashing. They dashed back and forth with pails so many times that the neighbours 
thought the house was on fire. They made themselves bunks, and mattresses filled wit h 
maple  leaves  gathered  in  the  park,  and  on  the  fourth  day  the  room,  with  a  portrait  of 
Petrovsky and a huge map on the wall, literally shone with cleanliness. 
Between  the  windows  was  a  shelf  piled  high  with  books.  Two  crates  covered  with 
cardboard served for chairs, another larger crate did duty as a cupboard. In the middle of 
the  room  stood  a  huge  billiard  table,  minus  the  cloth,  which  the  room's  inmates  had 
carried on their shoulders from the warehouse. By day it was used as a table and at night 
Klavicek slept on it. The five lads fetched all their belongings, and the practical -minded 
Klavicek made an inventory of the commune's possessions. He wanted to hang it up on 
the wall but the others objected. Everything in the room was declared common property. 
Earnings,  rations  and occasional  parcels  from  home  were  all  divided  equally;  the  sole 
items  of  personal  property  were  their  weapons.  It  was  unanimously  decided  that  any 
member of the commune who violated the law of communal ownership or who betrayed 
his comrades' trust would be expelled from the commune. Okunev and Klavicek insisted 
that expulsion should be followed by eviction from the room, and the motion was carried. 
 
All the active members of the District Komsomol came to the commune's house -warming 
party.  A  gigantic  samovar  was  borrowed  from  the  next-door  neighbour.  The  tea  party 
consumed the commune's entire stock of saccharine. After tea, they sang in chorus and 
their lusty young voices rocked the rafters: 
 
The whole wide world is drenched with tears, 
 
In bitter toil our days are passed, 
 
But, wait, the radiant dawn appears.... 
 
Talya Lagutina, the girl from the tobacco factory, led the singing. Her crimson kerchief  had slipped 
to  one  side  of  her  head  and  her  eyes,  whose  depths  none  as  yet  had  fathomed,  danced  with 
mischief. Talya had a most infectious laugh and she looked at the world from the radiant height of 
her eighteen years. Now her arm swept up and the singing poured forth like a fanfare of trumpets: 
 
Spread, our song, o'er the world like a flood, 
 
Proudly our flag waves unfurled. 
 
It burns and glows throughout the world, 
 
 
 
第 133 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
On fire from our heart's blood. 
 
The party broke up late and the silent streets awoke to the echo of their 
young voices. The telephone rang and Zharky reached for the receiver. 
"Keep  quiet,  I  can't  hear  anything!"  he  shouted  to  the  noisy  Komsomols  who  had 
crowded in the Secretary's office. 
The hubbub subsided somewhat. 
 
"Hullo!  Ah,  it's  you.  Yes,  right  away.  What's  on  the  agenda?  Oh,  the  same  old  thing, 
hauling firewood from the wharves. What's that? No, he's not been sent anywhere. He's 
here. Want to speak to him? Just a minute." 
Zharky beckoned to Pavel. 
 
"Comrade Ustinovich wants to speak to you," he said and handed him the receiver. 
 
"I thought you were out of town," Pavel heard Rita's voice say. "I happen to be free this 
evening. Why don't you come over? My brother has gone. He was just passing through 
town and decided to look me up. We haven't seen each other for two years." 
Her brother! 
 
Pavel  did  not  hear  any  more.  He  was  recalling  that  unfortunate  evening  and  the  resolve  he 
had  taken  that  night  down  on  the  bridge.  Yes,  he  must  go  to  her  this  evening  and  put  an  end 
to this. Love brought too much  pain  and anxiety with it. Was this the time for such things? 
 
The voice in his ear said: "Can't you hear me?" 
 
"Yes, yes. I hear you. Very well. I'll come over after the Bureau meeting." And he hung up.  
 
 
 
He looked her straight in the eyes and, gripping the edge of the oak table, he said: "I don't  think I'll 
be able to come and see you any more." He saw her thick eyelashes sweep upward at his words. 
Her pencil paused in its flight over the page and then lay motionless on the open pad. 
 
"Why not?" 
 
"It's very hard for me to find the time. You know yourself we're not having it so easy just 
now. I' m sorry, but I'm afraid we'll have to call it off...." 
He was conscious that the last few words sounded none too firm. 
 
"What are you beating about the bush for?" he raged inwardly. "You haven't the courage 
to strike out with both fists." 
Aloud  he  went  on:  "Besides,  I've  been  wanting  to  tell  you  for  some  time  ―  I  have 
difficulty  in  grasping  your  explanations.  When  we  studie d  with  Segal  what  I  learned 
stayed  in  my  head  somehow,  but  with  you  it  doesn't.  I've  always  had to  go  to  Tokarev 
after our lessons and get him to explain things properly. It's my fault  ―  my noodle just 
can't take it. You'll have to find some pupil with a bit more brains." 
He turned away from her searching gaze, and, deliberately burning all his bridges, added 
doggedly: "So you see it would just be a waste of time for us to continue." 
Then  he  got  up,  moved  the  chair  aside  carefully  with  his  foot  and  looked  a t  the  bowed 
head and the face that turned pale in the light of the lamp. He put on his cap. 
"Well, good-bye, Comrade Rita. Sorry I've wasted so much of your time. I ought to have 
told you long before this. That's where I'm to blame." 
 
第 134 页 共 259 页  
 
 
 
Rita mechanically gave him her hand, but she was too stunned by his sudden coldness 
to say more than a few words. 
"I  don't blame  you,  Pavel.  If  I  haven't  succeeded  in  finding  some  way  of  makin g  things 
clear to you I deserve this." 
Pavel walked heavily to the door. He closed it after him softly. Downstairs he paused for 
a  moment  ―  it  was  not too  late  to  go  back and explain....  But  what  was  the use? For 
what? To hear her scornful response and find himself outside again? No.  
 
 
Graveyards of dilapidated railway carriages and abandoned engines grew on the sidings. 
The wind whirled and scattered the dry sawdust in the deserted woodyards. 
And all around the town in the forest thickets and deep ravines lurked Orlik's band. By day they  lay 
low  in surrounding  hamlets  or  in  wooded  tracts,  but  at  night  they  crept  out  onto  the  railway  tracks, 
tore them up ruthlessly and, their evil work done, crawled back again into their lair. 
 
And  many  an  iron  steed  went  crashing  down  the  railway  embankmen t.  Boxcars  were 
smashed  to  smithereens,  sleepy  humans  were  flattened  like  pancakes  beneath  the 
wreckage, and precious grain mingled with blood and earth. 
The  band  would  swoop  down  suddenly  on  some  small  town  scattering  the  frightened, 
clucking hens in all directions. A few shots would be fired at random. Outside the building 
of the Volost Soviet there would be a brief crackle of rifle fire, like the sound of bracken 
underfoot, and the bandits would dash about the village on their well -fed horses cutting 
down everyone who crossed their path. They hacked at their victims as calmly as if they 
were splitting logs. Rarely did they shoot, for bullets were scarce. 
 
The band would be gone as swiftly as it had come. It had its eyes and ears everywhere. 
Those  eyes  saw  through  the  walls  of  the  small  white  building  that  housed  the  Volost 
Soviet,  for  invisible  threads  led  from  the  priest's house and  the  kulaks'  cottages  to  the 
forest  thickets.  Cases  of  ammunition,  chunks  of  fresh  pork,  bottles  of bluish  raw  spirit 
went the same  way, also news that  was  whispered into the ears of the lesser atamans 
and then passed on by devious routes to Orlik himself. 
 
Though  it consisted  of  no  more  than  two  or  three  hundred  cutthroats, the  band  had so  far  eluded 
capture.  It  would  split  up  into  several  small  units  and  operate  in  two  or  three  districts 
simultaneously.  It  was  impossible  to  catch  all  of them.  Last  night's  bandit  would  next  day  appear 
as  a  peaceful  peasant  pottering  in  his  garden,  feeding  his  horse  or  standing  at  his  gate  puffing 
smugly at his pipe and watching the cavalry patrols ride by with a sly look in his eyes. 
 
Alexander  Puzyrevsky  with  his  regiment  chased  the  bandits  up  and  down  the  three 
districts with dogged persistence. Occasionally he did succeed in treading on their  tail; a 
month later Orlik was obliged to withdraw his gangs from two of the districts, and now he 
was hemmed in on a narrow strip of territory. 
 
 
Life  in the town  jogged  along  at its  customary  pace.  Noisy crowds swarmed  its  five  markets.  Two 
impulses dominated the milling throngs ― to grab as much as possible, and to give as little as 
 
第 135 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
possible.  This  environment  offered  unlimited  scope  for  the  energy  and  abilities  of  all  manner 
of sharks and swindlers. Hundreds of slippery individuals with  eyes that expressed everything 
but  honesty  snooped  about  among  the  crowds.  All  the  scum  of  the  town  gathered  here  like 
flies  on  a  dunghill,  moved  by  a  single  purpose:  to  hoodwink  the  gullible.  The  few  trains  that 
came this way spewed out gobs of sack-laden people who made at once for the markets. 
 
At night the market places were deserted, and the dark rows of booths and stalls looked 
sinister and menacing. 
It  was the  bold  man  who  would  venture  after  dark  into this  desolate  quarter  where  danger  lurked 
behind every stall. And often by night a shot would ring out like the clang of a hammer on iron, and 
some  throat  would  choke  on  its  own  blood.  And  by  the  time  the  handful  of  militiamen  from  the 
nearest beats would reach the spot (they did not venture out alone) they would find nothing but the 
mutilated corpse.  The  killers  had  taken  to  their  heels  and the commotion  had swept  away  the  few 
nocturnal habitués of the market square like a gust of wind. 
 
Opposite  the  market  place  was  the  "Orion"  cinema.  The  street  and  pavement  were  flooded 
with electric light and people crowded  around the entrance. Inside the  hall the movie projector 
clicked,  flashing  melodramatic  love  scenes  onto  the  screen;  now  and  then  the  film  s napped 
and the operator stopped the projector amid roars of  disapproval  from the audience.  
 
In the centre of the town and on the outskirts life appeared to be taking its usual course. 
Even in the Gubernia Committee of the Party, the nerve centre of revolutionary authority, 
everything was quiet. But this was merely an outward calm. 
A storm was brewing in the town. Many of those who came there from  various directions, with 
their  army  rifles  plainly  visible  under  their  long  peasant  overcoats,  were  aware  of  its  coming. 
So  did  those  who  under  the  guise  of  food  speculators  arrived  on  the  roofs  of  trains ,  but 
instead of carrying their sacks to the market took them to carefully memorised addresses.  
 
These  knew.  But  the  workers'  districts,  and  even  Bolsheviks,  had  no  inkling  of  the 
approaching storm. 
Only five Bolsheviks in town knew what was being plotted. 
 
Closely co-operating with foreign missions in Warsaw, the remnants of Petlyura's bands 
which  the  Red  Army  had  driven  into  White  Poland  were  preparing  to  take  part  in  the 
uprising. A raiding force was being formed of what remained of Petlyura's regiments. 
The central committee of the insurgents had an organisation in Shepetovka; it consisted 
of  forty-seven  members,  most  of  them  former  active  counter-revolutionaries  whom  the 
local Cheka had trustingly left at liberty. 
Father  Vasili,  Ensign  Vinnik,  and  Kuzmenko,  a  Petlyura  officer,  were  the  leaders  of  the 
organisation.  The  priest's  daughters,  Vinnik's  father  and  brother,  and  a  man  named  Samotinya 
who had wormed his way into the office of the Executive Committee did the spying. 
 
The  plan  was  to  attack  the  frontier  Special  Department  by  night  with  hand  grenades, 
release the prisoners and, if possible, seize the railway station. 
Meanwhile  officers  were  being  secretly  concentrated  in  the  city  which  was  to  be  the  hub  of 
the  uprising,  and  bandit  gangs  were  being  moved  into  t he  neighbouring  forests.  From  here, 
contact with Rumania and  with Petlyura himself was maintained through trusted agents.  
 
 
 
 
 
第 136 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
Fyodor Zhukhrai, in his office at the Special Department, had not slept for six nights. He 
was one of the five Bolsheviks who were aware of what was brewing. The ex-sailor was 
now experiencing the sensation of the big game hunter who has tracked down his p rey 
and is now waiting for the beast to spring. 
He dare not shout or raise the alarm. The bloodthirsty monster must be slain. Then and 
then only would it be possible to work in peace, without having to glance fearfully behind 
every bush. The beast must not be scared away. In a life and death struggle such as this 
it is endurance and firmness that win the day. 
The  crucial  moment  was  at  hand.  Somewhere  in  the  town  amidst  the  labyrinth  of 
conspiratorial hide-outs the time had been set: tomorrow night. 
But the five Bolsheviks who knew decided to strike first. The time was tonight. 
 
The same evening an armoured train slid quietly out of the railway yards and the massive 
gates closed as quietly behind it. 
Coded telegrams flew over the wires and in response to their urgent summons the alert 
and  watchful  men  to  whom  the  republic's  security had  been  entrusted took  immediate 
steps to stamp out the hornet's nests. 
Akim telephoned to Zharky. 
 
"Cell meetings in order? Good. Come over here at once for a conference and brin g the 
Party District Committee Secretary with you. The fuel problem is worse than we thought. 
We'll discuss the details when you get here." Akim spoke in a firm, hurried voice. 
 
"This firewood business is driving us all potty," Zharky growled back into the  receiver. 
 
Litke  drove  the  two  secretaries  over  to  headquarters  at  breakneck  speed.  As  they 
ascended the stairs to the first floor they saw at once that they had not been summoned 
here to talk about firewood. 
On  the  office  manager's  desk  stood  a  machine-gun  and  gunners  from  the  Special  Task  Unit 
were  busy  beside  it.  Silent  guards  from  the  town's  Party  and  Komsomol  organisations  stood 
in  the  corridors.  Behind  the  wide  doors  of  the  Secretary's  office  an  emergency   session  of  the 
Bureau of the Party Gubernia Committee was drawing to a close. 
 
Through a fanlight giving onto the street wires led to two field telephones. There was a 
subdued hum of conversation in the room. Akim, Rita and Mikhailo were there, Rita in a 
Red Army helmet, khaki skirt, leather jacket with a heavy Mauser strapped on to it  ― the 
uniform she used to wear at the front when she had been Company Political Instructor. 
"What's all this about?" Zharky asked her in surprise. 
 
"Alert  drill,  Vanya.  We're  going  to  your  district  right  away.  We  are  to  meet  at  the  Fifth 
Infantry  School.  The  Komsomols  are  going  there  straight  from  their  cell  meetings.  The 
main thing is to get there without attracting attention." 
The  grounds  of  the  old  military  school  with  its   giant  old  oaks,  its  stagnant  pond  overgrown 
with burdock and nettles and its broad uns wept paths were wrapped in silence.  
 
In the centre of the grounds behind a high white wall stood the school building, now the premises of the 
Fifth Infantry School for Red Army commanders. It was late at night. The upper floor of the building was 
dark. Outwardly all was serene, and the chance passerby would have thought that the school's inmates 
were asleep. Why, then, were the iron gates open, and what were those two dark 
 
 
第 137 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
shapes  like  monster  toads  standing  by  the  entrance?  The  people  who  gathered  here  from  all 
parts  of  the  railway  district  knew  that  the  school's  inmates  could  not  be  asleep,  once  a  night 
alert  had  been  given.  They  were  coming  straight  from  their  Komsomol  and  P arty  cell 
meetings  where  the  brief  announcement  had  been  made;  they  came  quietly,  individually,  in 
pairs,  never  more  than  three  together,  and  each  of  them  carried  the  Communist  Party  or 
Komsomol membership card, without which no one could pass through the iron  gates.  
 
The  assembly  hall,  where  a  large  crowd  had  already  gathered,  was  flooded  with  light.  The 
windows  were  heavily  curtained  with  thick  canvas  tenting.  The  Bolsheviks  who  had  been 
summoned here stood about calmly smoking their homemade cigarettes and cracking jokes about 
the  precautions  taken  for  a  drill.  No  one  felt  this  was  a  real  alert;  it  was  being  done  to maintain 
discipline in the special task detachments. The seasoned soldier, however, recognised the signs of 
a genuine alert as soon as he entered the schoolyard. Far too much caution was being dis played. 
Platoons  of  students  were  lining  up  outside  to  whispered  commands.  Machine-guns  were  being 
carried  quietly  into  the  yard  and  not  a chink  of  light showed in  any  of  the  windows  of the  building. 
"Something serious in the wind, Mityai?" Pavel Korchagin inquired of Dubava, who was sitting on a 
windowsill  next  to  a  girl  Pavel  remembered  seeing  a  couple  of  days  before  at  Zharky's  place. 
Dubava clapped Pavel good-humouredly on the shoulder. 
 
"Getting cold feet, eh? Never mind, we'll teach you fellows how to  fight. You don't know 
each  other,  do  you?"  he nodded  toward  the girl.  "This  is  Anna,  don't  know  her  second 
name, she's in charge of the agitation and propaganda centre." 
The girl thus introduced regarded Korchagin with interest and pushed back a wisp of hair that had 
escaped  from  under  her  violet  kerchief.  Korchagin's  eyes  met  hers  and  for  a  moment  or  two  a 
silent  contest  ensued.  Her  sparking  jet-black  eyes  under  their  sweeping  lashes  challenged  his. 
Pavel shifted his gaze to Dubava. Conscious that he was blushing, he scowled. 
 
"Which of you does the agitating?" he inquired forcing a smile. 
 
At that moment there was a stir in the hall. A Company Commander climbed onto a chair 
and shouted: "Members of the first company, line up. Hurry, Comrades, hurry!" 
Zhukhrai  entered  wit h  the  Chairman  of  the  Gubernia  Executive  Committee  and  Akim.  They 
had just arrived.  The hall was now filled from end to end with  people lined up in formation.  
 
The  Chairman  of  the  Gubernia  Executive  Committee  stepped  onto  the  mounting  o f  a 
training machine-gun and raised his hand. 
"Comrades," he said, "you have been summoned here on an extremely serious and urgent matter. 
What  I  am  going  to  tell  you  now  could  not  have  been  told  even  yesterday  for  security  reasons. 
Tomorrow  night  a counterrevolutionary  uprising  is scheduled  to  break  out  in  this  and  other  towns 
of  the  Ukraine.  The  town  is  full  of  Whiteguard  officers.  Bandit  units  have  been  concentrated  all 
around  the town.  Part  of the conspirators  have  penetrated  into the  armoured car  detac hment  and 
are  working  there  as  drivers.  But  the  Cheka  has  uncovered  the  plot  in  good  time  and  we  are 
putting the entire Party and Komsomol organisations under arms. The first and second Communist 
battalions  will  operate  together  with  the military school  units  and  Cheka  detachments.  The  military 
school  units  have  already  gone  into  action.  It  is  now  your  turn,  Comrades.  You  have  fifteen 
minutes to get your weapons and line up. Comrade Zhukhrai will be in command of the operation. 
The  unit  commanders  will  take  their  orders  from  him.  I  need  hardly  stress  the  gravity  of  the 
situation. Tomorrow's insurrection must be averted today." 
 
第 138 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
A quarter of an hour later the armed battalion was lined up in the schoolyard. 
 
Zhukhrai ran his eye over the motionless ranks. Three paces in front of them stood two men girded 
with  leather  belts:  Battalion  Commander  Menyailo,  a  foundry  worker,  a  giant  of  a  man  from  the 
Urals,  and  beside  him  Commissar  Akim.  To  the  left  were the  platoons  of  the  first  company,  with 
the  company  commander  and  political  instructor two  paces in  front.  Behind them  stood the silent 
ranks of the Communist battalion, three hundred strong. Fyodor gave the signal. "Time to begin." 
 
 
The three hundred men marched through the deserted 
streets. The city slept. 
On Lvovskaya Street, opposite Dikaya, the battalion broke ranks. 
 
Noiselessly they surrounded the buildings. Headquarters was set up on the steps of a shop.  
 
An automobile came speeding down Lvovskaya Street from the direction of the centre, its 
headlights  cutting  a  bright  path  before  it.  It  pulled  up  sharply  in  front  of  the  battalion 
command post. 
Hugo  Litke  had  brought  his  father  this  time.  The  commandant  sprang  out  of  the  car, 
throwing  a  few  clipped  Lettish  sentences  over  his  shoulder  to  his  son.  The  car  leapt 
forward and disappeared in a flash around the bend of the road. Litke, his hands gripping 
the steering wheel as though part of it, his eyes glued to the road, drove like a devil. 
Yes, there was need of Litke's wild driving tonight. He was hardly likely to get two nights 
in the guardhouse for speeding now! 
And Hugo flew down the streets like a meteor. 
 
Zhukhrai, whom young Litke drove from one end of town to the other in the twinkling of 
an eye, remarked approvingly: "If you don't knock anyone down tonight you'll get a gold 
watch tomorrow." 
Hugo was jubilant. "I thought I'd get ten days in jail for that corner... ." 
 
The  first  blows  were  struck  at  the  conspirators'  headquarters.  Before  long  groups  of 
prisoners and batches of documents were being delivered to the Special Department. 
In  house  No.  11  on  Dikaya  Street  lived  one  Zurbert  who,  according  to  information  in 
possession of the Cheka, had played no small part in the Whiteguard plot. The lists of the 
officers' units that were to operate in the Podol area were in his keeping. 
Litke senior himself came to Dikaya Street to make the arrest. The windows of Zurbert's 
apartment  looked out onto a  garden  which  was  separated  from  a  former  nunnery  by a 
high wall. Zurbert was not at home. The neighbours said that he had not been seen at a ll 
that day. A search was made and, the lists of names and addresses were found, together 
with a case of hand grenades. Litke, having ordered an ambush to be set, lingered for a 
moment in the room to examine the papers. 
 
The  young  military  school  student  on  s entry  duty  in  the  garden  below  could  see  the  lighted 
window  from  the  corner  of  the  garden  where  he  was  stationed.  It  was  a  little  frightening  to 
stand  there  alone  in  the  dark.  He  had  been  told  to  keep  an  eye  on  the  wall.  The  comforting 
light  seemed  very  far  from  his  post.  And  to  make  matters  wors e,  the  moon  kept  darting 
behind  the  clouds.  In  the  night  the  bushes  seemed  to  be  invested  with  a  sinister  life  of  their 
own.  The young soldier stabbed at the darkness around him  with his bayonet. Nothingness.  
 
第 139 页 共 259 页  
 
 
 
"Why  did  they  put me  here?  No  one  could climb  that  wall  anyhow,  it's  far  too  high.  I  think  I'll  go 
over to the window and peep in." Glancing up again at the wall, he emerged from his dank, fungus -
smelling corner. As  he  came  up  to  the  window,  Litke  picked  up the  papers  from the table.  At  that 
moment a shadow appeared on top of the wall whence both the sentry by the window and the man 
inside  the  room  were  clearly  visible. With  catlike  agility  the shadow  swung  itself  onto  a tree  and 
dropped  down  to  the  ground. Stealthily  it crept  up to  its  victim.  A single  blow  and the sentry  was 
sprawled on the ground with a naval dirk driven up to the hilt into his neck. 
 
A shot rang out in the garden galvanising the men surrounding the block. Six of them ran 
toward the house, their steps ringing loudly in the night. Litke sat slumped forward over 
the table, the blood pouring from the wound in his head. He was dead. The window pane 
was shattered. But the assassin had not had time to seize the documents. 
Several more shots were heard behind the nunnery wall. The murderer had climbed over 
the wall to the street and was now shooting his way out, trying to escape by way of the 
Lukyanov vacant lot. But a bullet cut short his flight. 
All  night  long  the  searches  continued.  Hundreds  of  people  not  registered  in  the  books  of  the 
house  committees  and  found  in  possession  of  suspicious  documents  and  carrying  weapons 
were dispatched to the  Cheka,  where a commission  was at work screening the suspects. 
 
Here  and  there  the  conspirators  fought  back.  During  the  search  in  a  house  on 
Zhilyanskaya Street Anton Lebedev was killed by a shot fired point-blank. 
The  Solomenka  battalion  lost  five  men  that  night,  and  the  Cheka  lost  Jan  Litke,  that 
staunch Bolshevik and faithful guardian of the republic. 
But the Whiteguard uprising was nipped in the bud. 
 
That same night Father Vasili with his daughters and the rest of the gang were arrested 
in Shepetovka. 
The  tension  relaxed.  But  soon  a  new  enemy  threatened  the  town:  paralysis  of  the 
railways, which meant starvation and cold in the coming winter. 
Everything now depended on grain and firewood. 
 
 
 
Chapter Two 
 
Fyodor took his short-stemmed pipe out of his mouth and poked reflectively at the ash in 
the bowl with a cautious finger; the pipe was out. 
A dense cloud of grey smoke from a dozen cigarettes hovered below the ceiling and over the chair 
where  sat  the  Chairman  of  the  Gubernia Executive  Committee.  From  the  corners  of the  room  the 
faces of the people seated around the table were only dimly visible through the haze. 
 
Tokarev, sitting next to the Chairman, leaned forward and plucked irritably at his sparse 
beard, glancing now and again out of the corner of h is eye at a short, bald-headed man 
whose  high-pitched  voice  went  on  endlessly  stringing  out  phrases  that  were  as  empty 
and meaningless as a sucked egg. 
Akim caught the look in the old worker's eye and was reminded of a fighting cock back in 
his childhood days in the village who had had the same wicked look in his eye just before 
pouncing on his adversary. 
 
第 140 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
The Gubernia Party Committee had been in conference for more than an hour. The bald 
man was Chairman of the Railway Firewood Committee.  
Leafing with nimble  fingers through the heap of papers before  him, the bald man rattled on: "..  
 
.Under  these  circumstances  it  is  clearly  impossible  to  carry  out  the  decision  of  the  Gubernia 
Committee and the railway management. I repeat, even a month from now we shall not be able to 
give  more  than  four  hundred  cubic  metres  of  firewood.  As  for  the  one  hundred  and  eighty 
thousand cubic metres required, well, that's sheer..." the speaker fumbled for the right word, "er... 
 
sheer utopia!" he wound up and his small mouth pursed itself up into an expression 
of injury. There was a long silence. 
Fyodor tapped his pipe with his fingernail and knocked out the ashes. It was Tokarev who 
finally broke the silence. 
"There's no use wasting our breath," he began in his rumbling bass. "The Railway 
Firewood Committee hasn't any firewood, never had any, and doesn't expect any in the 
future.... Right?" The bald man shrugged a shoulder. 
"Excuse  me, Comrade, we did stock up firewood, but the shortage of road transport...." 
He swallowed, wiped his polished pate with a checkered handkerchief; he made several 
fruitless  attempts  to  stuff  the  handkerchief  back  into  his  pocket,  and  finally  shoved  it 
nervously under his portfolio. 
"What  have  you  done  about  delivering  the  wood?  After  all,  a  good  many  days  have 
passed since the leading specialists mixed up in the conspiracy were arrested," Denekko 
observed from his corner. 
The bald man turned to him. "I  wrote the railway administration three times stating that 
unless we had the proper transport facilities it would be impossible...." 
Tokarev  stopped  him.  "We've  heard that already,"  he  said  coldly,  eyeing  the  bald  man 
with hostility. "Do you take us for a pack of fools?" 
The bald man felt a chill run down his spine at these words. 
 
"I cannot answer for the actions of counter-revolutionaries," he replied in a low voice. 
 
"But  you  knew,  didn't  you,  that  the  timber  was  being  felled  a  long  distance  from  the 
railway  line?"  "I  heard  about  it,  but  I  could  not  bring  the  attention  of  my  superiors  to 
irregularities on a sector outside my province." 
"How many men have you on the job?" the chairman of the trade union council 
demanded. "About two hundred," the bald man replied. 
"That makes a cubic metre a year for every parasite!" fumed Tokarev. 
 
"The  Railway  Firewood  Committee  has  been  allotted  special  rations,  food  the  workers 
ought to be getting, and look what you're doing? What happened to those two carriages 
of flour you received for the workers?" the trade union chairman persisted. 
Similar pointed questions rained down on the bald man from all sides and he answered 
them in the harassed manner of a man trying to ward off annoying creditors. He twisted 
and turned like an eel to avoid direct answers, but his eyes darted nervously about him. 
He sensed danger and his cowardly soul craved but one thing: to get away from here as 
quickly as possible and slink off to his cosy nest, to his supper and his still youthful wife 
who was probably cosily whiling away the time with a Paul de Kock novel. 
 
Lending an attentive ear to the bald man's replies, Fyodor scribbled in his notebook: "I believe this 
 
第 141 页 共 259 页  
 
 
 
man ought to be checked up on properly. This is more than mere incompetence. I know one or two 
things about him.... Stop the discussion and let him go so we can get down to business." 
 
The Chairman read the note and nodded to Fyodor. 
 
Zhukhrai rose and went out into the corridor to make a telephone call. When he returned 
the Chairman was reading the resolution: 
".  .  .to  remove  the  management  of  the  Railway  Firewood  Committee  for  downright  sabotage, 
the matter of the timber workings to be turned over to the investigation authorities." 
 
The  bald  man  had  expected  worse.  True,  to  be  removed  from  his  post  for  downright 
sabotage would raise the question of his reliability in general, but that was a mere trifle. 
As for the Boyarka business, he  was not worried, that was not his province after all. "A 
close shave, though," he said to himself, "I thought they had really dug up something. ..." 
Now almost reassured, he remarked  as he  put his papers back into  his port folio: "Of course,  I 
am a non-Party specialist and you are  at liberty to distrust me. But my conscience is clear. If  I 
have failed to do what was required of me that was because it was impossible."  
 
No one made any comment. The bald man went out, hurried downstairs, and opened the 
street door with a feeling of intense relief. 
"Your name, please?" a man in an army coat accosted him. 
 
With a sinking heart the baldhead stammered: "Cher. . . vinsky...." 
 
Upstairs  as  soon  as  the  outsider  was  gone,  thirteen  heads bent  closer  over  the  large 
conference table. 
"See  here,"  Zhukhrai's  finger  jabbed  the  unfolded  map.  "That's  Boyarka  station.  The  timber 
felling  is  six  versts  away.  There  are  two  hundred  and  ten  thousand  cubic  metres  of  wood 
stacked up  at this point: a whole army of men  worked hard  for eig ht months to pile up all that 
wood,  and  what's  the  result?  Treachery.  The  railway  and  the  town  are  without  firewood.  To 
haul  that  timber  six  versts  to  the  station  would  take  five  thousand  carts  no  less  than  one 
month,  and  that  only  if  they  made  two  trips  a  day.  The  nearest  village  is  fifteen  versts  away. 
What's  more,  Orlik  and  his  band  are  prowling  about  in  thos e  parts.  You  realise  what  this 
means?  Look,  according  to  the  plan  the  felling  was  to  have  been  started  right  here  and 
continued in the direction  of the station, and those scoundrels carried it right into the depths of 
the  forest.  The  purpose  was  to  mak e  sure  we  would  not  be  able  to  haul  the  firewood  to  the 
railway line. And they weren't  far  wrong ― we can't even  get a hundred carts for the job. It 's a 
foul blow they've struck us. The uprising was no more serious than this." 
 
Zhukhrai's clenched fist dropped heavily onto the waxed paper of the map. Each of the 
thirteen  clearly  visualised  the  grimmer  aspects  of  the  situation  which  Zhukhrai  had 
omitted  to  mention.  Winter  was  in  the  offing.  They  saw  hospitals,  schools,  offices  and 
hundreds of thousands of people caught in the icy grip of the frost; the railway stations 
swarming with people and only one train a week to handle the traffic. 
There was deep silence as each man pondered the 
situation. At length Fyodor relaxed his fist. 
"There is one way out, Comrades," he said. 
 
"We  must  build  a  seven-verst  narrow-gauge  line  from  the  station  to  the  timber  tract  in  three 
months. The first section leading to the beginning of the tract must be ready in six weeks. I've been 
working on this for the past week. We'll need," Zhukhrai's voice cracked in his dry throat, 
 
第 142 页 共 259 页  
 
 
 
"three  hundred  and  fifty workers and t wo engineers.  There is enough  rails and seven engines 
at Pushcha-Voditsa.  The Komsomols dug them up in the warehouses. There  was a  project to 
lay  a  narrow-gauge  line  from  Pushcha-V oditsa  to  the  town  before  the  war.  The  trouble  is 
there  are  no  accommodations  in  Boyarka  for  the  workers,  the  place  is  in  ruins.  We'l l  have  to 
send  the  men  in  small  groups  for  a  fortnight  at  a  time,  they  won't  be  able  to  hold  out  any 
longer than that. Shall we send the K omsomols, Akim?" And without waiting for an answer, he 
went  on:  " The  K omsomol  will  rush  as  many  of  its  members  to  the  spot  as  possible.  There's 
the  Solomenka  organisation  to  begin  with,  and  some  from  the  town.  The -task  is  hard,  very 
hard, but if the youngsters are told  what is at stake I'm certain they'll do it."  
 
The chief of the railway shook his head dubiously. 
 
"I'm  afraid  it's  no  use.  To  lay  seven  versts  of  track  in  the  woods  under  such  conditions,  with 
the autumn rains due and the frosts coming..." he began wearily. But Zhukhrai cut him short.  
 
"You ought to have paid more attention to the firewood problem, Andrei Va silievich. That 
line has got to be built and we're going to build it. We're not going to fold our hands and 
freeze to death, are we?" 
 
 
The last crates of tools were loaded onto the train. The train crew took their places. A fine 
drizzle was falling. Crystal raindrops rolled down Rita's glistening leather jacket. 
Rita shook hands warmly with Tokarev. "We wish you luck," she said softly. The 
old man regarded her affectionately from beneath his bushy grey eyebrows. 
 
"Yes,  they've  given  us  a  peck of  trouble,  blast 'em,"  he  growled  in  answer  to  his  own 
thoughts. "You here had better look to things, so that if there's any hitch over there you 
can  put a  bit of  pressure  on  where  it's  needed.  These  good -for-nothings  here  can't  do 
anything without a lot of red tape. Well, time I was getting aboard, daughter." 
The  old  man  buttoned  up  his  jacket.  At  the  last  moment  Rita  inquired  casually:  "Isn't 
Korchagin going along? I didn't notice him among the boys." 
"No, he and the job superintendent went out there yesterday by handcar to prepare for 
our coming." 
At  that  moment  Zharky,  Dubava,  and  Anna  Borhart  with  her  jacket  thrown  carelessly 
across her shoulders  and a cigarette between her slender fingers, came hurrying down 
the platform toward them. 
Rita had time to ask Tokarev one more question before the others 
joined them. "How are your studies with Korchagin getting along?" 
The old man looked at her in surprise. 
 
"What studies? The lad's under your wing, isn't he? He's told me a lot about you. Thinks 
the world of you." 
Rita looked sceptical. "Are you quite sure, Comrade Tokarev? Didn't he always go to you 
for a proper explanation after his lessons with me?" 
The old man burst out laughing. "To me? Why, I never saw hide or hair of 
him." The engine shrieked. Klavicek shouted from one of the carriages:  
 
"Hey, Comrade Ustinovich, give us our daddy back! What'd we do without him?" 
 
The Czech was about to say something else, but catching sight of the three late-comers he checked 
 
 
 
第 143 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
himself. He noticed the anxious look in Anna's eyes, caught with a pang her parting smile 
to Dubava and turned quickly away from the window.  
 
 
The  aut umn  rain  lashed  the  face.  Low  clouds,  leaden-hued  and  swollen  with  moisture, 
crawled  over  the  earth.  Late  autumn  had  stripped  the  woods  bare;  and  the  old  hornbeams 
looked gaunt and  downcast, their wrinkled trunks hidden  under the brown moss. Remorseless 
autumn  had  robbed them of their luxuriant garments, and they stood there naked and pitiful.  
 
The little station building huddled forlornly in the midst of the forest. A strip of freshly dug earth ran 
from the stone freight platform into the woods. Around this strip men swarmed like ants. 
 
The  clayey  mud  squelched  unpleasantly  underfoot.  There  was  a  ringing  of  crowbars  and  a 
grating of spades on stone over by the embankment where the men were  furiously digging.  
 
The rain came down as if through a fine sieve and the chill drops penetrated the men's 
clothing. The rain threatened to wash away  what their labour had accomplished, for the 
clay slid down the embankment in a soggy mass. 
Soaked to the skin, their clothing chill and sodden, the men worked on until long after dark. 
And with every day the strip of upturned earth penetrated farther and farther into the forest. 
 
Not far from the station loomed the grim skeleton of what had once been a brick building. 
Everything that could be removed bodily, torn out or blaste d loose had long since been 
carried off by marauders. There were gaping holes in place of windows and doors; black 
gashes  where  stove  doors  had  once  been. Through  the  holes  in  the  tattered roof  the 
rafters showed like the ribs of a skeleton. 
Only  the  concrete  floor  in  the  four  large  rooms  remained  intact.  At  night  four  hundred  men 
slept  on  this  floor  in  their  damp,  mud-caked  clothing.  Muddy  water  streamed  from  their 
clothes  when  they  wrung  them  out  at  the  doorway.  And  the  men  heaped  bitter  curses  on  the 
rain  and  the  boggy  soil.  They  lay  in  compact  rows  on  the  concret e  floor  with  its  thin  covering 
of  straw,  huddling  together  for  warmth.  The  steam  rose  from  their  clothing  but  it  did  not  dry. 
And  the  rain  seeped  through  the  sacks  that  were  nailed  over  the  empty   window  frames  and 
trickled  down  onto  the  floor.  It  drummed  loudly  on  the  remnants  of  sheet  metal  roofing,  and 
the wind whistled through the great cracks in the door.  
 
In the morning they drank tea in the t umbledown  barracks that served  for a kitchen,  and  went 
off  to  their  work.  Dinner,  day  after  day  with  sickening  monotony,  consisted  of  plain  boiled 
lentils, and there was a daily allowance of  a pound and a  half of bread as black as coal. 
 
That  was  all  the  town could  provide.  The  job superintendent, Valerian  Nikodimovich Patoshkin, a 
tall spare old man with two deep lines at his mouth, and technician Vakulenko, a thickset man with 
a coarse-featured face and a fleshy nose, had put up at the station master's house. 
 
Tokarev shared the tiny room occupied by the station Cheka agent, a small, volatile man 
named Kholyava. 
The  men  endured  the  hardships  with  dogged  fortitude,  and  the  railway  embankment 
reached farther into the forest from day to day. 
True, there had been some desertions: at first nine, and a few days later, another five. 
 
The first major calamity occurred a week after the work started, when the bread supply 
failed to arrive with the night train. 
 
第 144 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Dubava  woke Tokarev  and told him  the  news.  The  secretary  of  the  Party  group  swung 
his hairy legs over the side of the bed and scratched himself furiously under the armpit. 
"The fun's beginning!" he growled and began hastily to 
dress. Kholyava waddled in on his short legs. 
"Run  down  to  the  telephone  and  call  the  Special  Department," Tokarev  instructed  him, 
and turning to Dubava added, "and not a word to anybody about the brea d, mind." 
After  berating  the  railway  telephone  operators  for  a  full  half  hour,  the  irrepressible 
Kholyava succeeded in getting Zhukhrai, the assistant chief of the Special Department, 
on the line, while Tokarev stood by fidgeting with impatience. 
"What!  Bread  not  delivered?  I'll  find  out  who's  responsible  for  that!"  Zhukhrai's  voice 
coming over the wire had an ominous ring. 
"What are we going to give the men to eat tomorrow?" Tokarev shouted back angrily. 
 
There was a long pause; Zhukhrai was evidently considering some plan of action. "You'll 
get the bread tonight," he said at last. "I'll send young Litke with the car. He knows the 
way. You'll have the bread by morning." 
At dawn a  mud-spattered car loaded with sacks of bread drove up to the station. Litke, 
his face white and strained after a sleepless night at the wheel, climbed out wearily. 
Work  on  the  railway  line  became  a  struggle  against  increasing  odds.  The  railway 
administration  announced  that  there  were  no  sleepers to  be  had. The town  authorities 
could find no means of shipping the rails and engines to the railway job, and the engines 
themselves turned out to be in need of substantial repairs. No workers were forthcoming 
to replace the first batch who had done their share and were now so completely worn  out 
that there could be no question of detaining them. 
 
The leading Party members met in the tumbledown shed dimly lit by a wick lamp and sat 
up late into the night discussing the situation. 
The  following  morning  Tokarev,  Dubava  and  Klavicek  went to  town,  taking six  men  with  them  to 
repair  the  engines  and  speed  up the  shipment  of  the  rails. Klavicek,  who  was  a  baker  by  trade, 
was sent as inspector to the supply department, while the rest went on to Pushcha-Voditsa. 
 
The rain poured down without ceasing. 
 
 
 
Pavel K orchagin pulled his foot out of the sticky slime with an effort. A sharp sensation  of cold 
told  him  that  the  worn  sole  of  his  boot  had  finally  parted  from  the  uppers.  His  torn  boots  had 
been  a  source  of  keen  discomfort  to  Pavel  ever  since  he  had  come  to  the  job.  They  were 
never  dry  and  the  mud  t hat  filtered  in  squelched  when  he  walked.  Now  one  sole  was  gone 
altogether  and  the  icy  mire  cut  into  his  bare  foot.  Pavel  pulled  the  sole  out  of  the  mud  and 
regarded  it  with  despair  and  broke  the  vow  he  had  gi ven  himself  not  to  swear.  He  could  not 
go  on  working  with  one  foot  exposed,  so  he  hobbled  back  to  the  barracks,  sat  down  beside 
the field kitchen, took off his muddy footcloth and stretched out his numb  foot to the  fire.  
 
Odarka, the lineman's wife who worked as cook's helper, was busy cutting up beetroots 
at the kitchen table. A woman of generous proportions, still youthful, with broad  almost 
masculine shoulders, an ample bosom and massive hips, she wielded the kitchen knife 
with vigour and the mountain of sliced vegetables grew rapidly under her nimble fingers. 
 
第 145 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Odarka threw a careless glance at Pavel and snapped at him: 
 
"If  it's  dinner  you're  hankering  after  you're a  bit  early,  my  lad.  Ought  to  be  ashamed  of 
yourself  sneaking  away  from  work  like  that!  Take  your  feet  off  that  stove.  This  is  a 
kitchen, not a bathhouse!" 
The cook came in at that point. 
 
"My blasted boot has gone to pieces," Pavel said, explaining his untimely presence in the 
kitchen.  The  elderly  cook  looked  at  the  battered  boot  and  nodding  toward  Odarka  he 
said: "Her husband might be able to do something with it, he's a bit of a cobbler. Better 
see to it or you'll be in a bad way. You can't get along without boots." 
When she heard this, Odarka took another look at 
Pavel. "I took you for a loafer," she admitted. 
Pavel smiled to show that there were no hard feelings. Odarka examined the boot with 
the eye of an expert. 
"There's no use trying to patch it," she concluded. 
 
"But I'll tell you what I can do. I'll bring you an old galosh we've got lying around at home 
and you can wear it on top of the boot. You can't go around like that, you'll kill yourself! 
The frosts will start any day now!" 
And Odarka, now all sympathy, laid down her knife and hurried out, returning shortly with 
a deep galosh and a strip of stout linen. 
As he wrapped his foot, now  warm and dry, in the thick linen and put it into the galosh, 
Pavel rewarded Odarka with a grateful look. 
 
 
Tokarev came back from town fuming. He called a meeting of the leading Communists in 
Kholyava's room and told them the unpleasant news. 
"Nothing but obstacles all along the line. Wherever you go the wheels seem to be turning but they 
don't get anywhere. Far too many of those White rats about, and it looks as if there'll be enough to 
last our lifetime anyway. I tell you, boys, things look bad. There are no replacements for us yet and 
no  one knows  how  many  there  will  be.  The  frosts  are  due  any  day  now,  and  we  must  get through 
the  marsh  before  then  at  all  costs,  because  when  the  ground  freezes  it'll  be  too  late.  So  while 
they're shaking  up those  fellows  in  town  who're  making  a  mess  of things,  we  here  have  to  double 
our  speed.  That line  has  got  to  be  built  and  we're  going to  build  it  if  we  die  doing  it. Otherwise  it 
isn't Bolsheviks we'll be but jelly-fish." There was a steely note in Tokarev's hoarse bass voice, and 
his eyes under their bushy brows had a stubborn gleam. 
 
"We'll call a closed meeting today and pass on the news to our Party members and tomorrow we'll 
all  get  down  to  work.  In  the  morning  we'll  let  the  non-Party  fellows  go;  the  rest  of  us  will  stay. 
Here's the Gubernia Committee decision," he said, handing Pankratov a folded sheet of paper. 
 
Pavel Korchagin, peering over Pankratov's shoulder, read: "In view of the emergency all 
members of the Komsomol are to remain on the job and are not to be relieved until the 
first  consignment  of  firewood  is  forthcoming.  Signed  R.  Ustinovich,  on  behalf  of  the 
Secretary of the Gubernia Committee." 
The  kitchen  barracks  was  packed.  One  hundred  and  twenty  men  had squeezed  themselves  into  its 
narrow confines. They stood against the walls, climbed on the tables and some were even perched 
 
第 146 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
on top of the field kitchen. 
 
Pankratov opened the meeting. Then Tokarev made a brief speech winding up with an 
announcement that had the effect of a bombshell: 
"The Communists and Komsomols will not leave the job tomorrow." 
 
The old man accompanied his statement with a gesture that stressed the finality of the "decision. It 
swept away all cherished hopes of returning to town, going home, getting away from this hole. 
 
A  roar  of  angry  voices  drowned  out  everything  else  for  a  few  moments.  The  swaying  bodies 
caused  the  feeble  oil  light  to  flicker  fitfully.  In  the  semidarkness  the  commotion  inc reased. 
They  wanted  to  go  "home";  they  protested  indignantly  that  they  had  had  as  much  as  they 
could stand. Some  received the news in silence. And only one man spoke of deserting. 
 
"To hell with it all!" he shouted angrily from his corner, loosing an ugly stream of invective. "I'm not 
going to stay here another day. It's all right to do hard labour if you've committed a crime. But what 
have we done? We're fools to stand for it. We've had two weeks of it, and that's enough. Let those 
who  made  the  decision  come  out  and  do  the  work  themselves.  Maybe  some  folks  like  poking 
around in this muck, but I've only one life to live. I'm leaving tomorrow." 
 
The voice came from behind Okunev and he lit a match to see who it was. For an instant 
the speaker's rage-distorted face and open mouth were snatched out of the darkness by 
the  match's  flame.  But  that  instant  was  enough  for  Okunev  to recognise  the  son  of a 
gubernia food commissariat bookkeeper. 
"Checking up, eh?" he snarled. "Well, I'm not afraid, I'm no thief." 
 
The match flickered out. Pankratov rose and drew himself up to his full height. 
 
"What  kind  of  talk  is  that?  Who  dares  to  compare  a  Party  task  to  a  hard -labour 
sentence?"  he  thundered,  running  his  eyes  menacingly  over  the  front  rows.  "No, 
Comrades, there's no going to town for us, our place is here. If we clear out now folks will 
freeze  to  death.  The  sooner  we  finish  the  job  the  sooner  we  get  back home.  Running 
away like that whiner back there suggests doesn't fit in with our ideas or our discipline." 
Pankratov, a stevedore, was not fond of long speeches but even this brief statement wa s 
interrupted by the same irate voice. 
"The non-Party fellows are leaving, aren't 
they?" "Yes." 
A lad in a short overcoat came elbowing his way to the front. A Komsomol card flew up, 
struck against Pankratov's chest, dropped onto the table and stood on edge. 
"There, take your card. I'm not going to risk my health for a bit of 
cardboard!" His last words were drowned out by a roar of angry  voices:  
 
"What do you think you're throwing 
around!" "Treacherous bastard!" 
"Got into the Komsomol because he thought he'd have it 
easy." "Chuck him out!" 
"Let me get at the louse!" 
 
The deserter, his head lowered, made his way to the exit. They let him pass, shrinking 
away from him as from a leper. The door closed with a creak behind him. 
Pankratov picked up the discarded membership card and held it to the flame of the 
oil lamp. The cardboard caught alight and curled up as it burned. 
 
第 147 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A shot echoed in the forest. A horseman turned from the tumbledown barracks and dived 
into  the  darkness  of  the  forest.  A  moment  later  men  came  pouring  out  of  the  barracks 
and  school  building.  Someone  discovered a  piece  of  plywood  that  had  been  stuck  into 
the door. A match flared up and shielding the unsteady flame from the wind they read the 
scrawled message: "Clear out of here and go back where you came from. If you don't, we 
will shoot every one of you. I give you till tomorrow night to get out. Ataman Chesnok." 
 
Chesnok belonged to Orlik's band. 
 
 
 
An open diary lies on the table in Rita's room. 
 
 
 
December 2 
 
"We had our first snow this morning. The frost is severe. I met Vyacheslav Olshinsky on 
the stairs and we walked down the street together. 
" 'I always enjoy the first snowfall,' he said. 'Particularly when it is frosty like this. Lovely, 
isn't it?'  
"But I was thinking of Boyarka and I told him that the frost and snow do not gladden me 
at all. On the contrary they depress me. And I told him why.  
" 'That  is  a  purely  subjective  reaction,'  he  said.  'If  one  argues  on  that  premise  all 
merriment or any manifestation of joy in wartime, for example, would have to be banned. 
But life is not like that. The tragedy is confined to the strip of front line  where the battle is 
being  fought.  There  life  is  overshadowed  by  the  proximity  of  death.  Yet  even  there 
people  laugh.  And  away  from  the  front,  life  goes  on  as  always:  people  laugh,  weep, 
suffer, rejoice, love, seek amusement, entertainment, excitement.'  
"It  was  difficult  to  detect  any shade  of  irony  in  Olshinsky's  words.  Olshinsky is  a  representative  of 
the  People's  Commissariat  of  Foreign  Affairs.  He  has  been  in  the Party since  1917.  He  dresses 
well,  is  always cleanly shaven  with  a  faint  scent  of  perfume  about  him.  He  lives  in  our  house,  in 
Segal's apartment. Sometimes he drops in to see me in the evenings. He is very interesting to talk 
to, he knows a lot about Europe, lived for many years in Paris. But I doubt whether he and I could 
ever  be  good  friends.  That  is  because  for  him  I  am  primarily  a  woman;  the  fact  that  I  am  his Party 
comrade  is  a  secondary  consideration.  True,  he  does  not  attempt to  disguise  his sentiments  and 
opinions on this score, he has the courage of his convictions and there is nothing coarse about his 
attentions. He has the knack of investing them with a sort of beauty. Yet I do not like him.  
 
"The  gruff  simplicity  of  Zhukhrai  is  far  more  to  my  taste  than  all  Olshinsky's  polished 
European manners.  
"News  from Boyarka comes  in  the  form  of  brief  reports. Each  day  another  two  hundred  yards  laid. 
They are laying the sleepers straight on the frozen earth, hewing out shallow beds for them. There 
are  only two  hundred  and  forty men  on the  job.  Half  of  the  replacements  deserted.  The conditions 
there are truly frightful. I can't imagine how they will be able to carry on in the frost. Dubava has  
 
第 148 页 共 259 页  
 
 
 
 
 
been  gone  a  week  now.  They  were  only  able  to  repair  five  of  the  eight  engines  at 
Pushcha-Voditsa, there were not enough parts for the others. 
"Dmitri has had criminal charges laid against him by the tramcar authorities. He and his 
brigade  held  up  all  the  flatcars  belonging  to  the  tram  system  running  to  town  from 
Pushcha-Voditsa,  cleared  off  the  passengers  and  loaded  the  cars  with  rails  for  the 
Boyarka  line.  They  brought  19  carloads  of  rails  along  the  tram  tracks  to  the  railway 
station in town. The tram crews were only too glad to help. 
"The Solomenka Komsomols still in town  worked all night loading the rails onto railway 
cars and Dmitri and his brigade went off with them to Boyarka. 
"Akim refused to have Dubava's action taken up at the Komsomol Bureau. Dmitr i has told 
us  about  the  outrageous  bureaucracy  and  red  tape  in  the  tramcar  administration.  They 
flatly refused to give more than two cars for the job. 
"Tufta, however, privately reprimanded Dubava. 'It's time to drop these partisan tactics,' 
he said, 'or you'll find yourself in jail before you know it. Surely you could have come to 
some agreement without resorting to force of arms?' 
"I had never seen Dubava so furious. 
 
" 'Why didn't you try talking to them yourself, you rotten pen-pusher?' he stormed. 'All you can 
do is sit here  warming your chair and wagging your t ongue.  How do y ou think  I could go  back 
to  Boyarka  without  those  rails?  Instead  of  hanging  around  here  and  getting  in  everybody's 
hair you ought to be sent out there to do some useful work.  Tokar ev  would knock some sense 
into you!' Dmit ri roared so loudly he could be heard all over the building.  
 
"Tufta  wrote  a  complaint  against  Dubava,  but  Akim  asked  me  to  leave  the  room  and 
talked to him alone for about ten minutes, after which Tufta stamped out  red and fuming." 
 
 
December 3 
 
"The Gubernia Committee has received another complaint, this time from the Transport 
Cheka.  It  appears  that  Pankratov,  Okunev  and  several  other  comrades  went  to 
Motovilovka  station  and  removed  all  the  doors  and  window  frames  from  the  empty 
buildings. When they were loading all this onto a freight train the station Cheka man tried 
to arrest them. They disarmed him, emptied his revolver and returned it to him only after 
the train was in motion. They got away with the doors and window frames.  
 
"Tokarev is charged by the supply department of the railway for taking twenty poods of 
nails from the Boyarka railway stocks. He gave the nails to the peasants in payment for 
their help in hauling the timber they are using for sleepers. 
"I  spoke  to  Comrade  Zhukhrai  about  all  these  complaints.  But  he  only  laughed.  'We'll 
take care of all that,' he said. 
"The situation at the railway job is very tense and now every day is precious. We have to 
bring  pressure  to  bear  here  for  every  trifle.  Every  now  and  then  we   have  to  summon 
hinderers  to  the  Gubernia  Committee.  And  over  at  the  job  the  boys  are  overriding  all 
formalities more and more often. 
"Olshinsky has brought me a little electric stove. Olga Yureneva and I warm our hands over it, but 
 
 
 
第 149 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
it doesn't make the room any warmer. I wonder how those men in the woods are faring 
this bitter cold night? Olga tells me that it is so cold in the hospital that the patients shiver 
under their blankets. The place is heated only once in two days. 
"No, Comrade Olshinsky, a tragedy at the front is a tragedy in the rear too!" 
 
 
 
December 4 
 
"It  snowed  all  night.  From  Boyarka  they  write  that  everything  is  snowbound  and  they 
have  had  to  stop  working  to  clear  the  track.  Today  the  Gubernia  Committee  passed a 
decision that the first section of the railway, up to where the wood was being cut, is to be 
ready not  later  than  January  1, 1922.  When  this decision  reached  Boyarka,  Tokarev  is 
said to have remarked: 'We'll do it, if we don't croak by then.' 
"I hear nothing at all about Korchagin. I'm rather surprised that he hasn't been mixed up 
in something like the Pankratov 'case'. I still don't understand why he avoids me." 
 
 
December 5 
 
"Yesterday there was a bandit raid on the railway job." 
 
 
 
The horses trod warily in the soft, yielding snow. Now and then a twig hidden under the 
snow would snap under a hoof and the horse would snort and shy, but a sharp rap over 
its laid-back ears would send it galloping after the others. 
Some  dozen  horsemen  crossed  the  hilly  ridge  beyond  which  lay  a  strip  of  dark  earth  not  yet 
blanketed  with snow.  Here  the  riders  reined  in their  horses.  There  was  a  faint clink  as stirrup  met 
stirrup. The leader's stallion, its coat glossy with sweat after the long run, shook itself noisily. 
 
"There's a hell of a lot of them here," said the head rider in Ukrainian. "But we'll soon put 
the fear of God into 'em. The ataman said the bastards were to be chased out of here by 
tomorrow. They're getting too damned close to the firewood." 
They  rode  up  to  the  station  single  file,  hugging  the  sides  of  the narrow-gauge  line.  In 
sight of the clearing near the old school building they slowed down to a walking pace and 
came to a halt behind the trees, not venturing out into the open. 
A volley rent the silence of the night. A layer of snow dropped squirrel-like off the branch 
of  a  birch  that gleamed  like  silver  in  the  light  of the  moon.  Gunfire  flashed  among  the 
trees,  bullets  bored  into  crumbling  plaster  and  there  was  a  tinkling  of  broken  glass  as 
Pan-kratov's window panes were smashed to smithereens. 
The men on the concrete floor leapt up at the shooting only to drop back again on top of 
one another when the lethal insects began to fly about the room. 
"Where you going?" Dubava seized Pavel by the 
coat tail. "Outside." 
"Get down, you idiot !" Dmitri hissed. "They 'll get you the moment you stick your head out."  
 
 
 
第 150 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
They  lay side  by side  next to the  door.  Dubava  was  flattened  against  the  floor,  with  his  revolver 
pointing toward  the  door. Pavel  sat  on  his  haunches  nervously  fingering  the  drum  of  his  revolver. 
There were five rounds in it ― one chamber was empty. He turned the cylinder another notch. 
 
The shooting ceased suddenly. The silence that followed was weighted with tension. "All 
those who have weapons come this way," Dubava commanded in a hoarse whisper. 
 
Pavel opened the door cautiously. The clearing was deserted. Snowflakes were 
falling softly. In the forest ten horsemen were whipping their mounts into a gallop. 
The next  day  a trolley  arrived from  town.  Zhukhrai  and  Akim  alighted and  were  met  by 
Tokarev and Kholyava. A machine-gun, several crates of cartridge belts and two dozen 
rifles were unloaded onto the platform. 
They hurried over to the railway line. The tails of Fyodor's long greatcoat trailed a zigzag 
pattern in the snow behind him. He still walked with the clumsy rolling gait of the seaman, 
as if he were pacing the pitching deck of a destroyer. Long-legged Akim  walked in step 
with Fyodor, but Tokarev had to break into a trot now and again to keep up with them.  
"The bandit raid is not our worst trouble. There's a nasty rise in the ground right i n the 
path of the line. Just our bad luck. It'll mean a lot of extra digging." 
The old man stopped, turned his back to the wind and lit a cigarette, cupping his hand 
over the match. After blowing out a few puffs of smoke he hurried to catch up with the 
others. Akim had stopped to wait for him, but Zhukhrai strode on ahead. 
"Do you think you'll be able to finish the line on time?" Akim asked 
Tokarev. Tokarev paused a while before replying. 
"Well, it's like this, son," he said at last. "Generally speaking it  can't be done. But it's got 
to be done, so there you are." 
They caught up with Fyodor and continued abreast. 
 
"Here's  how  it  is,"  Tokarev  began  earnestly.  "Only  two  of  us  here,  Patoshkin  and  I, know that it's 
impossible  to  build  a  line  under  these conditions,  with  the scanty  equipment  and  labour  power  we 
have.  But  all  the  others,  every  last man  of  them, know that the line  has  got to  be  built  at  all costs. 
So you see  that's  why  I said  if  we  don't  freeze to  death,  it'll  be  done.  Judge  for  yourselves:  we've 
been  digging  here  for  over  a  month, the  fourth  batch  of  replacements  are  due  for  a  rest,  but  the 
main body of workers have been on the job all the time. It's only their youth that keeps them going. 
But  half  of  them  are  badly chilled.  Makes your  heart  bleed  to  look  at  them.  These  lads  are  worth 
their weight in gold. But this cursed hole will be the death of more than one of them." 
 
 
The ready narrow-gauge track came to an end a kilometre from the station. Beyond that, 
for  a  stretch  of  about  one  and a  half  kilometres,  the  levelled  roadbed  was  covered  by 
what looked like a log palisade blown down by wind ― these were the sleepers, all firmly 
planted in place. And beyond them, all the way to the rise, there was only a level road. 
Pankratov's building crew No. 1 was  working at this section. Forty men were laying ties, 
while  a  carroty-bearded  peasant  wearing  a  new  pair  of  bast  shoes  was  unhurriedly 
emptying a load of logs on the roadbed. Several more sleds were being unloaded a little 
farther  away. Two  long  iron  bars  lay  on  the  ground  ―  these  were  used  to  level  up  the 
sleepers properly. Axes, crowbars and shovels were all used to tamp down t he ballast. 
 
第 151 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Laying railway sleepers is slow, laborious work. The sleepers must be firmly imbedded in 
the earth so that the rails press evenly on each of them. 
Only one man in the group knew the technique of laying sleepers. That was Talya's father, the line 
foreman  Lagutin,  a  man  of  54  with  a  pitch-black  beard  parted  in  the  middle  and  not  a  grey  hair  in 
his  head.  He  had  worked  at  Boyarka since the  beginning  of  the  job, sharing  all  the  hardships  with 
the  younger  men  and  had  earned  the  respect  of  the  whole  detachment.  Although  he  was  not  a 
Party  member,  Lagutin  invariably  held  a  place  of  honour  at  all  Party  conferences.  He  was  very 
proud of this and had given his word not to leave until the job was finished. 
 
"How  can  I  leave  you  to  carry  on  by  yourselves?  Something's  bound  to  go  wrong  without  an 
experienced man to keep  an  eye on things. When it comes to that,  I've  hammered in more  of 
these here sleepers up and down the c ount ry in my time than I can remember," he  would say 
good-humouredly each time the question of replacements came up. And so he stayed.  
 
Patoshkin saw that Lagutin knew his job and rarely inspected his sector. When Tokarev 
with Akim and Zhukhrai came over to where they were working, Pankratov, flushed and 
perspiring with exertion, was hewing out a hollow for a sleeper. Akim hardly recognised 
the young stevedore. Pankratov had lost much weight, his broad cheekbones protruded 
sharply in his grimy face which was sallow and sunken. 
"Well, well," he said as he gave Akim a hot, damp hand, "the big chiefs have come!" 
 
The  ringing  of  spades  ceased.  Akim  surveyed  the  pale  worn  faces  of the  men  around 
him. Their coats and jackets lay in a careless heap on the snow. 
After  a  brief  talk  with  Lagutin,  Tokarev  took  the  party  to  the  excavation  site,  inviting 
Pankratov to join them. The stevedore walked alongside Zhukhrai. 
"Tell  me,  Pankratov,  what  happened  at  Motovilovka?  Don't  you  think  you  overdid  it 
disarming that Cheka man?" Fyodor asked the taciturn stevedore sternly. 
Pankratov grinned sheepishly. 
 
"It  was  all  done  by  mutual consent,"  he  explained. "He  asked  us  to  disarm  him.  He's  a  good  lad. 
When we explained what it was all about, he says: 'I see your difficulty, boys, but I haven't the right 
to let you take those windows and doors away. We have orders from Comrade Dzerzhinsky to put 
a stop to the plunder of railway property. The station master here has his knife in me. He's stealing 
stuff, the bastard, and I'm in his way. If I let you get away with it he's bound to report me and I'll be 
tried by the Revolutionary Tribunal. But you can disarm me and clear off. And if the station master 
doesn't  report  the  matter  that  will  be  the  end  of  it.'  So  that's  what  we  did.  After  all,  we  weren't 
taking those doors and windows for ourselves, were we?" 
 
Noting the twinkle in Zhukhrai's eye, he went on: "You can punish  us for it if you want to, 
but don't be hard on that lad, Comrade Zhukhrai." 
"That's  all  over  and  done  with. But see there's  no more  of that  in  the  future,  it's  bad  for  discipline. 
We  are  strong  enough  now  to  smash  bureaucracy  in  an  organised  way.  Now  let's  talk  about 
something more important." And Fyodor proceeded to inquire about the details of the bandit raid. 
 
 
About four and a half kilometres from Boyarka station a group of men were digging furiously into a 
rise  in  the  ground that stood  in the  path  of  the line. Seven  men  armed  with  all the  weapons  the 
detachment possessed ― Kholyava's rifle and the revolvers belonging to Korchagin, Pankratov, 
 
第 152 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Dubava and Khomutov ― stood on guard. 
 
Patoshkin was sitting on top of the rise jotting down figures in his notebook. He was the 
only engineer on the job. Vakulenko, the technician, preferring to stand trial for desertion 
rather than death at a bandit's hand, had fled that mor ning. 
"It  will  take  two  weeks  to  clear  this  hill  out  of  the  way.  The  ground's  frozen  hard," 
Patoshkin remarked in a low voice to the gloomy Khomutov standing beside him.  
"We've been given twenty-five days to finish the whole line, and you're figuring fifte en for 
this," Khomutov growled, chewing the tip of his moustache. 
"Can't  be  done,  I'm  afraid.  Of  course,  I've  never  built  anything  before  under  such 
conditions  and  with  workers  like  these.  I  may  be  mistaken.  As  a  matter  of  fact  I  have 
been mistaken twice before." 
At that moment Zhukhrai, Akim and Pankratov were seen approaching the slope. 
 
"Look,  who's  that  down  there?"  cried  Pyotr  Trofimov,  a  young  mechanic  from  the  railway 
workshops  in  an  old  sweater  torn  at  the  elbows.  He  nudged  Korchagin  and  pointed  to  the 
newcomers.  The  next  moment  Korchagin,  spade  in  hands,  was  dashing  down  the  hill.  His  eyes 
under the peak of his helmet smiled a warm greeting and Fyodor lingered over their handshake. 
 
"Hallo there, Pavel! Hardly recognised you in this rig-out." 
 
Pankratov  laughed  drily:  "Rig-out  isn't  the  word  for  it.  Plenty  of  ventilation  holes  anyway.  The 
deserters  pinched  his  overcoat,  Okunev  gave  him  that  jacket  ― they've  got  a  commune,  you 
know.  But  Pavel's  all  right,  he's  got  warm  blood  in  his  veins.  He'll  w arm  himself  for  a  week  or 
two  more  on  the  concrete  floor  ―  the  straw  doesn't  make  much  differenc e  ―  and  then  he'll 
be ready for a nice  pine-wood coffin," the stevedore  wound up with grim humour.  
 
Dark -browed,  snub-nosed  Okunev  narrowed  his  mischievous  eyes   and  objected:  "Never 
mind, we'll take care  of P avel. We can  vote him  a job in the kitchen helping Odarka.  If he isn't 
a fool he can  get himself a bit of extra grub and snuggle up to the stove or to Odark a herself."  
 
A roar of laughter met this remark; it was the first time they had laughed that day. 
 
 
 
Fyodor  inspected  the  rise,  then  drove  out  with  Tokarev  and  Patoshkin  by  sled  to  the 
timber felling. When he returned, the men were still digging with dogged persistence into 
the hill. Fyodor noted the rapid  movement of the spades, and the backs of the workers 
bent under the strain. Turning to Akim, he said in an undertone: 
"No  need  of  meetings.  No  agitation  required here.  You  were  right,  Tokarev,  when  you 
said these lads are worth their weight in gold. This is where the steel is tempered." 
Zhukhrai  gazed  at  the  diggers  with  admiration  and stern,  yet  tender  pride. Some  of  them  only a 
short  time  back  had  stood  before  him  bristling  with  the  steel  of  their  bayonets.  That  was  on  the 
night  before  the  insurrection. And  now, moved  by  a  single  impulse, they  were toiling  in  order  that 
the steel arteries of the railway might reach out to the precious source of warmth and life. 
 
 
Politely but firmly Patoshkin showed Fyodor that it was impossible to dig through the rise 
in less than two weeks. Fyodor listened to his arguments with a preoccupied air, his mind 
clearly busy with some problem of its own. 
 
第 153 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
"Stop all work on the cut and carry on farther up the line. We'll tackle that hill in a different 
way," he said finally. 
Down at the station he spent a long time at the telephone. Kholyav a, on guard outside 
the door, heard Fyodor's hoarse bass from within. 
"Ring  up  the  chief  of  staff  of  the  Military  Area  and  tell  him  in  my  name  to  transfer 
Puzyrevsky's regiment to the railway job at once. The bandits must be cleared out of the 
area without delay. Send an armoured train over with demolition men. I'll take care of the 
rest myself. I'll be back late. Tell Litke to be at the station with the car by midnight." 
In the barracks, after a short speech by Akim, Zhukhrai took the floor and an hour fle d by 
in  comradely  discussion. Fyodor  told  the  men there  could  be no  question  of  extending 
the January 1 time limit allotted for the completion of the job. 
"From  now  on  we  are  putting  the  work  on  a  military  footing,"  he  said.  "The  Party 
members  will  form  a  special  task  company  with  Comrade  Dubava  in  command.  All  six 
work teams will receive definite assignments. The remainder of the job will be divided into 
six equal sectors, one for each team. By January 1 all the work must be completed. The 
team  that  finishes  first  will  be  allowed  to  go  back  to  town.  Also,  the  Presidium  of  the 
Gubernia Executive Committee is asking the Government to award the Order of the Red 
Banner to the best worker in the team that comes out first." 
 
The leaders of the various teams were  appointed as follows: No. 1, Comrade Pankratov, 
No.  2,  Comrade  Dubava,  No.  3,  Comrade  Khomutov,  No.  4,  Comrade  Lagutin,  No.  5, 
Comrade Korchagin, No. 6, Comrade Okunev. 
"The  chief  of  the  job,  its  political  and  administrative  leader  will,  as  before,  be  Anton 
Nikiforovich Tokarev," Zhukhrai wound up with an oratorical flourish. 
Like a flock of birds suddenly taking wing, the hand-clapping burst forth and stern faces 
relaxed  in  smiles.  The  warm  whimsical  conclusion  to  the  speech  relieved  the  strained 
attention of the meeting in a gust of laughter. 
Some twenty men trooped down to the station to see Akim and Fyodor off. 
 
As he shook hands with Korchagin, Fyodor glanced down at Pavel's snow-filled galosh. 
 
"I'll send you a pair of boots," he said in a low voice. "You haven't frozen your feet yet, I 
hope?" "They've begun to swell a bit," Pavel replied, then remembering something he 
had asked for a long time ago, he caught Fyodor by the arm. "Could you let me have a 
few cartridges for my revolver? I believe I only have three good ones left." 
Zhukhrai  shook  his  head  in  regret,  but  catching  Pavel's  disappointed  look,  he  quickly 
unstrapped his own Mauser. "Here's a present for you." 
Pavel  could  not  believe  at  first that  he  was  really  getting  something  he  had set  his  heart  on  for  so 
long,  but  Zhukhrai  threw  the  leather strap  over  his shoulder saying: "Take  it,  take  it!  I know  you've 
had  your  eye  on  it  for  a  long  time. But  take care you  don't shoot  any  of  our  own men  with  it.  Here 
are  three  full clips  to  go  with  it." Pavel  felt the  envious  eyes  of  the  others  upon  him. "Hey,  Pavka," 
someone yelled, "I'll swap with you for a pair of boots and a sheepskin thrown in." 
 
Pankratov nudged Pavel provokingly in the back. 
 
"Come on, I'll give you a pair of felt boots for it. Anyway you'll be dead before Christmas 
with that galosh of yours." 
With one foot on the step of the trolley for support, Zhukhrai wrote out a permit for the Mauser. 
 
 
 
第 154 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Early the next morning an armoured train clattered over the switches and pulled up at the 
station. The  engine  spouted  plumes  of  steam  as  white  as  swansdown  that  vanished  in 
the crystal-clear frosty air. Leather-clad figures emerged from the steel cars. A few hours 
later  three  demolition  men  from  the  train  had  planted  in  the earth  of  the hill  two  large 
black pumpkin-like objects with long fuses attached. They fired a few warning shots and 
the men scattered in all directions away from the now deadly hill. A match was put to the 
end of the fuse which flared up with a tiny phosphorescent flame. 
 
For a while the men held their breath. One or two  moments of suspense, and then the 
earth  trembled,  and a  terrific  force rent  the  hill  asunder,  tossing  huge  chunks  of ea rth 
skywards.  The  second  explosion  was  more  powerful  than  the  first.  The  thunder  of  it 
reverberated over the surrounding forest, filling it with a confusion of sound. 
When the smoke and dust cleared a deep pit yawned where the hill had just stood, and 
the sugary snow was sprinkled with earth for dozens of paces all around. 
Men with picks and shovels rushed to the cavity formed by the explosion. 
 
 
 
After  Zhukhrai's  departure,  a  stubborn  contest  for  the  honour  of  being  the  first  to  finish 
the job commenced among the teams. 
Long  before  dawn  Korchagin  rose  quietly,  taking  care  not  to  wake  the  others,  and 
stepping cautiously on numb feet over the chilly floor made his way to the kitchen. There 
he heated the water for tea and went back to wake up his team. 
By the time the others were up it was broad daylight. 
 
That  morning  Pankratov  elbowed  his  way  through  the  crowded  barracks  to  where 
Dubava and his group were having their breakfast. 
"Hear that, Mityai?" he said heatedly. "Pavka went and got his  lads up before daylight. I 
bet  they've  got  a  good  twenty  yards  laid  out  by  now.  The  fellows  say  he's  got  those 
railway repair shop boys all worked up to finish their section by the twenty -fifth. Wants to 
beat the rest of us hollow. But I say nothing doing! " 
Dubava  gave  a  sour  smile.  He  could  understand  why  the  secretary  of  the  river-port 
Komsomol had been touched on the raw by what the railway repair shopmen had done. 
As a matter of fact his friend Pavel had stolen a march on him, Dubava, as well. Without 
saying a word to anyone he had simply challenged the whole company. 
"Friends or no friends, it's the best man who wins," Pankratov said. 
 
Around  midday  Korchagin's  team  was  hard  at  work  when  an  unexpected  interruption 
occurred. The sentry standing guard over the rifles caught sight of a group of horsemen 
approaching through the trees and fired a warning shot. 
"To arms, lads! Bandits!" cried Pavel. He flung down his spade and rushed over to the 
tree where his Mauser hung. 
Snatching  their  rifles  the  others  dropped  down  straight  in  the  snow  by  the  edge  of  the 
line. The leading horsemen waved their caps. 
"Steady there, Comrades, don't shoot!" one of them shouted. 
 
第 155 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Some fifty cavalrymen in Budyonny caps with bright red stars came riding up the road. 
 
A  unit  of  Puzyrevsky's  regiment  had  come  on  a  visit  to  the  job.  Pavel  noticed  that  the 
commander's horse, a handsome grey mare with a white blaze on her forehead, had the 
tip  of  one  ear  missing.  She  pranced restlessly under  her  rider, and  when  Pavel rushed 
forward and seized her by the bridle, she shied away nervously. 
"Why, Lyska old girl, I never thought we'd meet again! So the bullets didn't get you, my 
one-eared beauty." 
He embraced her slender neck tenderly and stroked her quivering nostrils. 
 
The  commander  stared  at  Pavel  for  a  moment,  then  cried  out  in  amazement:  "Well,  if  it  isn't 
Korchagin! You recognise the mare but you don't see your old pal Sereda. Greetings, lad!"  
 
 
In the meantime back in town pressure was being exerted in all quarters to expedite the building of 
the  line,  and  this  was  felt  at  once  at the  job.  Zharky  had  literally  stripped  the Komsomol  District 
Committee  of  all  the  male  personnel  and  sent  them  out  to  Boyarka.  Only  the  girls  were  left  at 
Solomenka. He got the railway school to send out another batch of students. 
 
"I'm left here with the female proletariat," he joked, reporting the results of his work to Akim. "I think 
I'll  put  Talya  Lagutina  in my  place,  hang  out  the sign  'Women's  Department'  on the  door  and clear 
out to Boyarka myself. It's awkward for me here, the only man among all these women. You ought 
to see  the  nasty  looks they  give  me.  I'm sure they're saying:  'Look,  the sly  beggar sent  every body 
off, but stays on himself.' Or something worse still. You must let me go." 
 
But Akim merely laughed at his words. 
 
 
 
New workers continued to arrive at Boyarka, among them sixty students from the railway 
school. Zhukhrai induced the railway administration to send four passenger carriages to 
Boyarka to house the newcomers. 
Dubava's team was released from work and sent to Pushcha -Voditsa to bring back the 
engines and sixty-five narrow-gauge flatcars. This assignment was to be counted as part 
of the work on their section. 
Before  leaving,  Dubava  advised  Tokarev  to  recall  Klavicek  from  town  and  put  him  in 
charge of one of the newly-organised work teams at Boyarka. Tokarev did so. He did not 
know the real reason for Dubava's request: a note from Anna which the newcomers from 
Solomenka had brought. 
 
"Dmitri!" Anna wrote. "Klavicek and I have prepared a pile of books for you. We send our warmest 
greetings  to  you  and  all  the  other  Boyarka  shock  workers.  You  are  all  wonderful!  We  wish  you 
strength and energy to carry on. Yesterday the last stocks of wood were distributed. Klavicek asks 
me  to send you  his  greetings.  He  is  wonderful.  He  bakes  all  the  bread  for  Boyarka, sifts the  flour 
and kneads the dough high himself. He doesn't trust anyone in the bakery to do it. He managed to 
get  excellent  flour  and  his  bread  is  good,  much  better  than  the  kind  I  get.  In  the  evenings  our 
friends gather in my place ― Lagutina, Artyukhin, Klavicek, and sometimes Zharky. We do a bit of 
reading but mostly we talk about everybody and everything, chiefly  about you in 
 
第 156 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Boyarka.  The  girls  are  furious  with  Tokarev  for  refusing  to  let them  work  on  the  railway.  They say 
they  can  endure  hardships  as  well  as  anyone.  Talya  declares  she's  going  to  dress  up  in  her 
father's clothes and go out to Boyarka by herself. 'Let him just try to kick me out,' she says. 
 
"I wouldn't be surprised if she kept her word. Please give my regards to your dark-
eyed friend. "Anna." 
 
The blizzard came upon them suddenly. Low grey clouds spread themselves over the sky and the 
snow  fell  thickly.  When  night  came  the  wind  howled  in  the  chimneys  and  moaned  in  the  trees, 
chasing the whirling snow-flakes and awakening the forest echoes with its malevolent whine. 
 
All  night long the storm  raged  in  a  wild  fury,  and  although  the stoves  were kept  warm  throughout 
the night the men shivered; the wrecked station building could not hold the warmth. 
 
In the morning they had to plough through the  deep s now to  reach their sections. High  above 
the trees the sun shone in a blue sky without a single cloudlet to mar its clear expanse.  
 
Korchagin and his men went to work to clear the snowdrifts from their section. Only now did Pavel 
realise  how  much  a  man could suffer  from  the  cold.  Okunev's  threadbare  jacket  gave  him  scant 
protection  and  his  galosh  was constantly  full  of  snow.  He kept  losing  it  in the snow,  and  now  his 
other  boot  was threatening  to  fall  apart.  Two  enormous  boils  had  broken  out  on  his  neck  ―  the 
result of sleeping on the cold floor. Tokarev had given him his towel to wear in place of a scarf. 
 
Gaunt  and  red-eyed,  Pavel  was  furiously  plying  his  wooden snow shovel  when  a  passenger train 
puffed  slowly  into the  station.  Its  expiring  engine  had  barely  managed  to  haul  it this  far;  there  was 
not a single log of wood in the tender and the last embers were burning low in the firebox. 
 
"Give us fuel and we'll go on, or else shunt us onto a siding while we still have the power 
to move!" the engine driver yelled to the station master. 
The train was switched onto a siding.  The reason  for the halt was explained to the  disgruntled 
passengers and a storm of complaints and curses broke  out in the crowded carriages.  
 
"Go  and  talk  to  that  old  chap,"  the  station  master advised the  train guards,  pointing  to 
Tokarev who was walking down the platform. 
"He's  the  chief  of  the  job  here.  Maybe  he  can  get  wood  brought  down  by  sled  to  the 
engine. They're using the logs for sleepers." 
"I'll  give  you  the  wood,  but  you'll  have  to  work  for  it,"  said  Tokarev  when"  the  conductors 
applied  to  him.  "After  all,  it's  our  building  material.  We're  being  held  up  at  the  moment  by  the 
snow.  There  must  be  about  six  or  seven  hundred  passengers  insi de  your  train.  The  women 
and  children  can  stay  inside  but  let  the  men  come  and  lend  a  hand  clearing  the  snow  until 
evening and I'll give you firewood. If they refuse they can stay where they are till New Year's."  
 
 
"Look  at  the  crowd  coming  this  way!  Look,  women  too!"  Korchagin  heard  a  surprised 
exclamation at his back. He turned round. Tokarev came up. 
"Here are a hundred helpers for you," he said. "Give them work and see none of them is 
idle." Korchagin put the newcomers to work. One tall man in a smart railway uniform with 
a fur collar and a warm caracul cap indignantly twirled the shovel in his hands and turned 
to his companion, a young woman wearing a sealskin hat with a fluffy pompon on top. 
"I am not going to shovel snow and nobody has the right to force me to do it. As a railway  
 
第 157 页 共 259 页  
 
 
 
engineer I could take charge of the work if they ask me to, but neither you nor I need to 
shovel snow. It's contrary to the regulations. That old man is breaking the law. I can have 
him prosecuted. Where is your foreman?" he demanded of the worker nearest him. 
Korchagin came over. 
"Why aren't you working?" 
 
The man examined Pavel contemptuously from head 
to foot. "And who may you be?" 
"I am a worker." 
 
"Then I have nothing to say to you. Send me your foreman, or whatever you call 
him...." Korchagin scowled. 
"You needn't work if you don't want to. But you won' t get back on that train unless your 
ticket is countersigned by us. That's the construction chief's orders." 
"What  about  you?"  Pavel  turned  to  the  woman  and  was  struck  dumb  with  surprise. 
Before him stood Tonya Tumanova! 
Tonya could hardly believe that this tramp who stood before her in his tattered clothing 
and incredible footwear, with a filthy towel around his neck and a face that had not been 
washed  for  many  a  day,  was  the  Korchagin  she  once  knew.  Only  his  eyes  blazed  as 
fiercely as ever. The eyes of the Pavel she remembered. And to think that only a short 
while ago she had given her love to this ragged creature. How everything had changed!  
She had recently married, and she and her husband were on their way to the city where 
he held an important position in the railway administration. Who could have thought that 
she would meet the object of her girlish affections in this way? She even hesitated to give 
him  her  hand.  What  would  Vasili  think?  How  awful  of  Korchagin  to  have  fallen  so  low. 
Evidently the young stoker had not been able to rise above navvy work. 
She stood hesitating, her cheeks burning. Meanwhile the railway engineer, infuriated by 
what he considered the insolence of this tramp who stood staring at his wife, flung do wn 
his shovel and went over to her side. 
"Let us go, Tonya, I can't stand the sight of this lazzarone." 
 
Korchagin had read Giuseppe Garibaldi and he knew what that word meant.  
 
"I  may  be  a  lazzarone,  but  you're  no  more  than  a  rotten  bourgeois,"  he  said  hoarsely,  and 
turning  to  Tonya,  added  curtly:  "Take  a  shovel,  Comrade  Tumanova,  and  get  into  line.  Don't 
take an example from this prize bull here. . .. Excuse me if he is any relation of yours."  
 
Pavel glanced at Tonya's fur boots and smiled grimly, adding casually: 
 
"I wouldn't advise you to stop over here. The other night we were attacked by bandits." 
With that he turned on his heel and walked off, his galosh flapping as he went. 
 
His last words impressed the railway engineer, and Tonya succeeded in persuading him 
to stay and work. 
That evening, when the day's work was over, the crowd streamed  back to the station. Tonya's 
husband  hurried  ahead  to  make  sure  of  a  seat  in  the  train.  Tonya,  stopping  to  let  a  group  of 
work ers pass, saw Pavel trudging wearily behind the others, leaning heavily on his shovel.  
 
"Hello,  Pavlusha," she  said  and  fell into  step  beside  him.  "I must  say  I  never  expected to  find  you 
in  such  straits.  Surely  the  authorities  ought  to  know  you  deserve  something  better  than  navvy's 
work? I thought you'd be a commissar or something like that by now. What a pity life has been so 
 
第 158 页 共 259 页  
 
 
 
unkind to you...." 
 
Pavel halted and surveyed Tonya with surprise. 
 
"Nor did I expect to find you ... so stuffy," he said, choosing the most polite word he could 
think of to express his feelings. 
The tips of Tonya's ears burned. 
"You're just as rude as ever!" 
 
Korchagin hoisted his shovel onto  his shoulder and strode off. Aft er a  few steps he stopped.  
 
"My  rudeness,  Comrade  Tumanova,"  he  said,  "is  not  half  as  offensive  as  your  so -called 
politeness. And as for my life, please don't  worry about that. There's nothi ng wrong  with it. It's 
your  life  that's  all  wrong,  ever  so  much  worse  than  I  expected.  Two  years  ago  you  were 
better,  you  wouldn't  have  been  ashamed  to  shake  hands  with  a  workingman.  But  now  you 
reek of moth balls. To tell the truth, you and I have nothing more to say to each other." 
 
 
Pavel  had a  letter from  Artem  announcing  that  he  was  going  to be  married  and urging 
Pavel to come to the wedding without fail. 
The  wind  tore  the  sheet  of  paper  out  of  Pavel's  hand  and  it  flew  off  into  the  air.  No  wedding 
parties  for  him. How could he leave now? Only yesterday that bear Pank ratov had outstripped 
his  team  and  spurted  forward  at  a  pace  that  amazed  everyone.  The  stevedore  was  making  a 
desperate  bid  for  first  plac e  in  the  contest.  His  usual  nonchalance  had  forsaken  him  and  he 
was whipping up his "water-fronters" to a furious tempo.  
 
Patoshkin,  noting  the  silent  intensity  with  which  the  men  worked,  scratched  his  head 
perplexedly.  "Are  these  men  or  giants?"  he  marvelled.  "Where  do  they  get  their  incredible 
strength?  If  the  weather  holds  out  for  only  eight  more  days  we'll  reach  the  timber!  Well,  live 
and  learn!  These  men  are  breaking  all  records  and  estimates."  Klavicek  came  from  town 
bringing  the  last  batch  of  bread  he  had  baked.  He  had  a  talk  with  Tokarev  and  then  went  off 
to  hunt  for  Korchagin.  The  two  men  shook  hands  warmly.  Klavicek  with  a  broad  smile  dived 
into his knapsack and produced a handsome fur-lined leather jacket of Swedish make.  
 
"This is for you!" he said stroking the soft leather. "Guess from whom? What! You don't 
know? You are dense, man! It's from Comrade Ustinovich. So you shouldn't catch cold. 
Olshinsky gave it to her. She took it from him and handed it straight to me with or ders to 
take it to you. Akim told her you've been going about in the frost with nothing but a thin 
jacket. Olshinsky's nose was put out of joint a bit. 'I can send the comrade an army coat,' 
he says. But Rita only laughed. 'Never mind,' she said, 'he'll wo rk better in this jacket.' " 
 
The  astonished  Pavel  took  the  luxurious-looking  jacket  and  after  some  hesitation  slipped  it  on. 
Almost at once he felt the warmth from the soft fur spreading over his shoulders and chest. 
 
 
Rita wrote in her diary: 
 
 
 
December 20 
 
 
 
 
第 159 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
"We  have  been  having  a  bout  of  blizzards.  Snow  and  wind.  Out  at  Boyarka  they  had 
almost reached their goal when the frosts and storms halted them. They are up to their 
necks in snow and the frozen earth is not easy to dig. They have only three-quarters of a 
kilometre to go, but this is the hardest lap of all. 
"Tokarev reports an outbreak of typhoid fever. Three men are down with it." 
 
December 22 
 
"There  was  a  plenary  session  of  the  Komsomol  Guber-nia  Committee  but  no  one  from  Boyarka 
attended.  Bandits  derailed  a trainload  of  grain seventeen  kilometres  from  Boyarka,  and the Food 
Commissariat representative ordered all the construction workers to be sent to the spot." 
 
 
December 23 
 
"Another seven  typhoid cases  have  been  brought  to town  from  Boyarka.  Okunev  is  one  of  them.  I 
went down to the station and saw frozen corpses of people who had been riding the buffers taken 
off a Kharkov train. The hospitals are unheated. This accursed blizzard, when will it end?" 
 
 
December 24 
 
"Just  seen  Zhukhrai.  He  confirmed  the  rumour  that  Orlik  and  his  band  attacked  Boyarka  last 
night.  The  fight  lasted  two  hours.  Communications  were  c ut  and  Zhukhrai  did  not  get  the 
exact report until this morning.  The  band  was beaten back but  Tokarev has been  wounded,  a 
bullet went right through his chest. He  will be brought to town today. Franz Klavicek, who  was 
in charge of the  guard that night, was killed. He  was the  one  who spotted the band  and  raised 
the  alarm.  He  started  shooting  at  the  raiders  but  they   were  on  him  before  he  had  time  to 
reach  the  school  building.  He  was  cut  down  by  a  sabre  blow.  Eleven  of  the  builders  were 
wounded.  Two cavalry squadrons and an armoured train are there by now.  
 
"Pankratov  has taken  charge of  the  job.  Today  Puzyrevsky  caug ht  up  with  part  of  the 
band in Gluboky village and wiped it out. Some of the non -Party workers started out for 
town without waiting for a train; they are walking along the track." 
 
 
December 25 
 
"Tokarev  and  the  other  wounded  men  arrived,  and  were  placed  in  hospital.  The  doctors  promised 
to save the old man. He is still unconscious. The lives of the others are not in danger. 
 
"A telegram  came  from Boyarka  addressed to  us  and the  Gubernia Party  Committee.  'In  reply  to 
the bandit assault, we builders of the narrow-gauge line gathered at this meeting together with the 
crew  of the  armoured train  For  Soviet Power  and  the  Red  Army men  of  the cavalry  regiment,  vow 
to you that notwithstanding all obstacles the town shall have firewood by January 1. Mustering all 
 
第 160 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
our strength we are setting to work. Long live the Communist Party, which sent us here! 
Korchagin, chairman of the meeting. Berzin, secretary.' 
"Klavicek was buried with military honours at Solomenka." 
 
 
 
The  cherished  goal  was  in  sight,  but  the  advance  toward  it  was  agonisingly  slow,  for 
every day typhoid fever tore dozens of badly needed hands from the builders' ranks. 
One day Korchagin, returning from work to the station, staggered along like a drunkard, 
his legs ready to give way beneath him. He had been feverish for quite some time, but 
today it gripped him more fiercely than usual. 
Typhoid  fever,  which  had  thinned  the  ranks  of  the  building  detachment,  had  claimed  a  new 
victim.  But  Pavel's  sturdy  constitution  resisted  the  disease  and  for  five  days  in  succession  he 
had  found  the  strength  to  pick  himself  up  from  his  straw  pallet  on  the  concrete  floor  and  join 
the  others  at  work.  But  the  fever  had  taken  possession  of  him  an d  now  neither  the  warm 
jacket nor the felt boots, Fyodor's gift, worn over his already frostbitten feet, helped.  
 
A sharp pain seared his chest with each step he took, his teeth chattered, and his vision 
was blurred so that the trees seemed to be whirling around in a strange merry -go-round. 
With  difficulty  he  dragged  himself  to  the  station.  An  unusual  commotion  there  caused  him  to 
halt,  and  straining  his  fever-hazed  eyes,  he  saw  a  long  train  of  flatcars  stretching  the  entire 
length  of  the  platform.  Men  who  had  come  with  the  train  were  busy  unloading  narrow -gauge 
engines,  rails  and  sleepers.  Pavel  staggered  forward  and  lost  his  balance.  He  felt  a  dull  pain 
as his head hit the ground and the pleasant coolness of the snow against his burning cheek.  
 
Several hours later he was found and carried back to the barracks. He was breathing heavily, quite 
unconscious  of  his  surroundings.  A  doctor's  assistant  summoned  from  the  armoured  train 
examined  him  and  diagnosed  pneumonia  and  typhoid  fever.  His  temperature  was  over  106°.  The 
doctor's  assistant  noted  the  inflammation  of  the  joints  and  the  ulcers  on  the  neck  but  said  they 
were trifles compared with the pneumonia and typhoid which alone were enough to kill him. 
 
Pankratov and Dubava, who had arrived from town, did all they could to save Pavel. 
 
Alyosha Kokhansky, who came from the same town as Pavel, was entrusted with taking 
him home to his people. 
With the help of all the members of Korchagin's team, and mainly with Kholyava acting 
as battering ram, Pankratov and Dubava managed to get Alyosha and the unconscious 
Korchagin into the packed railway carriage. The passengers, suspecting typhus, resisted 
violently and threatened to throw the sick man out of the train en route. 
Kholyava waved his gun under their noses and roared: "His illness is not infectious! And 
he's going on this train even if we have to throw out the whole lot of you! And remember, 
you swine, if anyone lays a finger on him,  I'll send  word down the line and you'll all be 
taken  off  the  train  and  put  behind  the  bars.  Here,  Alyosha,  take  Pavel's  Mauser  and 
shoot the first man who tries to put him off," Kholyava wound up for additional emphasis. 
The  train  puffed  out  of  the  station.  Pankratov  went  over  to  Dubava  standing  on  the 
deserted platform. 
"Do you think he'll pull through?" The 
question remained unanswered. 
 
第 161 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
"Come along, Mityai, it can't be helped. We've got to answer for everything now. We 
must get those engines unloaded during the night and in the morning we'll try to start 
them going." Kholyava telephoned to all his Cheka friends along the line urging them  to 
make sure that the sick Korchagin was not taken off the train anywhere. Not until he had 
been given a firm assurance that this would be done did he finally go to bed. 
 
 
At a railway junction farther down the line the body of an unknown fair -haired young man 
was  carried  out  of  one  of  the  carriages  of  a  passenger  train  passing  through  and  set 
down on the platform. Who he was and  what he had died of no one knew. The station 
Cheka  men,  remembering  Kholyava's  request, ran  over  to  the  carriage, but  when  they 
saw  that  the  youth  was  dead,  gave  instructions  for  the  corpse  to  be  removed  to  the 
morgue, and immediately telephoned to Kholyava at Boyarka informing him of the death 
of his friend whose life he had been so anxious to save. 
 
A  brief  telegram  was  sent  from  Boyarka  to  the  Gubernia  Committee  of  the  Komsomol 
announcing Korchagin's death. 
In the meantime, however, Alyosha Kokhansky delivered the sick Korchagin to his people 
and came down himself with the fever. 
 
 
January 9 
 
"Why  does  my  heart  ache  so?  Before  I  sat  down  to  write  I  wept  bitterly.  Who  would  have 
believed  that  Rita  could  weep  and  with  such  anguish?  But  are  tears  always  a  sign  of 
weak ness?  Today  mine  are  tears  of  searing  grief.  Why  did  grief  come  on  this  day  of  vi ctory 
when  the  horrors  of  cold  have  been  overcome,  when  the  railway  stations  are  piled  high  with 
precious  fuel,  when  I  have  just  returned  from  the  celebration  of  the  victory,  an  enlarged 
plenary  meeting  of  the  Town  Soviet  where  the  heroes  of  the  railway  job  were  accorded  all 
honours. This is  victory, but two men lost their lives ― Klavicek and Korchagin.  
 
"Pavel's death has opened my eyes to the truth ― he was far dearer to me than I had thought. 
"And now I shall close this diary. I doubt whether I shall ever return to it. Tomorrow I am writing to 
Kharkov to accept the job offered me in the Central Committee of the Ukrainian Komsomol." 
 
 
Chapter Three 
 
But  youth  triumphed.  Pavel  did  not  succumb  to  the  typhoid  fever.  For  the  fourth  time  he 
crossed the border line of death and came back to life. It was a whole month, however, before 
he  was  able  to  rise  from  his  bed.  Gaunt  and  pale,  he  tottered  feebly  across   the  room  on  his 
shaky legs, clinging to the  wall for support. With his mother's help he reached the  window and 
stood  there  for  a  long  time  looking  out  onto  the  road  where  pools  of  melted  snow  glittered  in 
the early spring suns hine. It was the first thaw o f the year. 
 
Just in front of the window a grey-breasted sparrow perched on the branch of a cherry-tree was 
 
 
 
第 162 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
preening its feathers, stealing quick uneasy glances at Pavel. 
 
"So you and I got through the winter, eh?" Pavel said, softly tapping on the 
window pane. His mother looked up startled. 
"Who are you talking to out there?" 
 
"A sparrow.... There now, he's flown away, the little rascal." And Pavel gave a wan smile. 
 
By  the  time  spring  was  at  its  height  Pavel  began to  think  of  returning  to  town.  He  was 
now strong enough to walk, but some mysterious disease was undermining his strength. 
One  day  as  he  was  walking  in  the  garden  a  sudden  excruciating  pain  in  his  spine 
knocked him off his feet. With difficulty he got up and dragged himself back to his room. 
The  next  day  he  submitted  to a  thorough  medical examination.  The  doctor,  examining 
Pavel's back, discovered a deep depression in his spine. 
 
"How did you get this?" he asked. 
 
"That  was  in  the  fighting  near  Rovno.  A  three-inch gun  tore up  the  highway  behind  us 
and a stone hit me in the back." 
"But how did you manage to walk? Hasn't it ever bothered you?" 
 
"No.  I couldn't get up for an hour or two after it happened, but then it passed and I got 
into the saddle again. It has never troubled me till now," 
The doctor's face was very grave as he carefully examined the depression. 
 
"Yes, my friend, a very nasty business. The spine does not like to be shaken up like that. 
Let us hope that it will pass." 
The doctor looked at his patient with undisguised concern. 
 
 
 
One day Pavel went to see his brother. Artem lived with his wife's people. His wife Styosha was a 
plain-featured young peasant woman who came from a poverty-stricken family. A grimy slant-eyed 
urchin playing in the small, filthy yard stared fixedly at Pavel, picking his nose stolidly. 
 
"What d'ye want?" he demanded. "Maybe you're a thief? You'd better clear off or you'll 
get it from my Ma!" 
A tiny window was flung open in the shabby old cottage and Artem 
looked out. "Come on in, Pavel!" he called. 
An  old  wo man  with  a  face  like  yellowed  parchment  was  busy  at  the  stove.  She  flung 
Pavel an unfriendly look as he passed her and resumed her clattering with the pots. 
Two girls with stringy pigtails clambered onto the stove ledge and stared down from there 
at the newcomer with the gaping curiosity of little savages. 
Artem, sitting at the table, looked somewhat uncomfortable. He was aware that neither his mother 
nor his brother approved of his marriage. They could not understand why Artem, whose family had 
been proletarian for generations, had broken off with Galya, the stonemason's pretty daughter and 
a  seamstress  by  trade  whom  he  had  been  courting  for  three  years,  to  go  and  live  with  a  dull, 
ignorant  woman  like Styosha  and  be the  breadwinner  in  a  family  of  five.  Now,   after  a  hard  day's 
work at the railway yard he had to toil at the plough in an effort to revive the run-down farm. 
 
 
Artem knew that Pavel  disapproved of his desertion to what he called the "petty -bourgeois 
 
 
 
第 163 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
elements", and he now watched his brother take stock of his surroundings. 
 
They sat for a while exchanging a few casual remarks. Presently Pavel rose to go, but 
Artem detained him. 
"Wait a bit, and have a bite with us. Styosha will bring the milk in soon. So you're going 
away again tomorrow? Are you sure you're quite strong enough, Pavka?" 
Styosha came in. She greeted Pavel, and asked Artem to go with her to the barn and help her 
carry  somet hing.  P avel  was  left  alone  with  the  dour  old  woman.  Through  the  window  came 
the sound of church bells. The old  woman laid  down her pothook and began to mutter sourly:  
 
"Lord  above,  with  all  this cursed  housework  a  body can  scarce  find  time  to  pray!" She  took  off  her 
shawl  and,  eyeing  the  newcomer  askance,  went  over  to  the corner  where  hung  the  holy  images, 
dreary and tarnished with age. Pressing together three bony fingers she crossed herself. 
 
"Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be Thy name!" she whispered through 
withered lips. The urchin playing outside in the yard leapt astride a black lop -eared hog. 
He dug his small bare heels smartly into its sides, clung to its bristles and shouted to the 
running, snorting beast: "Gee-up, gee-up! Whoa! Whoa!" 
The hog with the boy on its back dashed madly about the yard in a desperate effort to 
throw him, but the slant-eyed imp kept his seat firmly. 
The old woman stopped praying and stuck her head out of the window. 
"Get off that pig this minute, you little beast, or I'll wring your neck!" 
 
The hog  finally succeeded in shaking  his tormentor off his back, and the old woman, mollified, 
returned to her icons, composed her  features into a pious expression and continued:  
 
"Thy kingdom come. . . ." 
 
At that moment the boy appeared in the doorway, his face grimy with tears. Wiping his 
smarting nose with his sleeve and sobbing with pain, he whined: 
"Gimme a pancake, Mummy!" 
 
The old woman turned on him in a fury. 
 
"Can't you see I'm praying, you cross-eyed devil, you? I'll give you pancakes, you limb of 
satan!..." And she snatched a whip from the bench. The boy was gone in a flash. The two 
little girls on top of the stove snickered. 
The old woman returned to her devotions for the third time. 
 
Pavel got up and went out without waiting for his brother. As he closed the gate behind 
him he noticed the old woman peering suspiciously out at him through the end window of 
the house. "What evil spirit lured Artem out here?" he thought bitterly. "Now he's tied 
down for the rest of his life. Styosha will have a baby every year. And Artem will be stuck 
like a beetle on a dunghill. He may even give up his work at the railway." Thus Pavel 
reflected gloomily as he strode down the deserted streets of the little town. "And I had 
hoped to be able to interest him in political work." 
 
Pavel  rejoiced  at  the  thought  that  tomorrow  he  would  be  leaving  this  place  and  going  to  the  big 
town  to  join  his  friends  and comrades,  all  those  dear  to  his  heart.  The  big  city  with its  bustling  life 
and activity, its endless stream of humanity, its clattering trams and hooting automobiles drew him 
like a magnet. But most of all he yearned for the large brick factory buildings, the sooty workshops, 
the  machines,  the  low  hum  of  transmission  belts.  He  yearned  for  the  mad  spinning  of  the  giant 
flywheels, for the smell of machine oil, for all that had become so much a part of him. 
 
第 164 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
This quiet provincial town whose streets he now roamed filled him with a vague feeling of 
depression. He was not surprised that he felt a stranger here now. Even to take a stroll 
through  the  town  in  daytime  had  become  an  ordeal.  Passing  by  the  gossiping 
housewives sitting on their stoops, he could not help overhearing their idle chatter. 
"Now who could that scarecrow be?" 
 
"Looks like he had the consumption, lung trouble, that 
is." "A fine jacket he's got on. Stolen, I'll be bound." 
 
And plenty more in the same vein. Pavel was disgusted with it all. 
 
He had torn himself away from all this long ago. He felt a far closer kinship now with the 
big city to which he was bound by the strong, vitalising bonds of comradeship and labour. 
By now he had reached the pine woods, and he paused a moment at the road fork. To 
his right stood the old prison cut off from the woods by a high spiked fence, and beyond it 
the white buildings of the hospital. 
It  was  here  on  this  broad  common  that  the  hangman's  noose  had  choked  the  warm  life  out  of 
Valya  and  her  comrades.  Pavel  stood  in  silence  on  the  spot  where  the  gallows  had  been,  then 
walked  over  to the  bluff  and  down  to the  little cemetery  where the  victims  of the Whiteguard  terror 
lay in their common graves. Loving hands had laid spruce branches on the graves and built a neat 
green fence around the graveyard. The pines grew straight and slender on the top of the bluff and 
the young grass spread a silky green carpet over the slopes. 
 
There  was  a  melanc holy  hush  here  on  the  outskirts  of  the  town.  The  trees  whispered  gently 
and the  fresh scent of spring  rose from the regenerated earth.  On this spot Pavel's comrades 
had gone bravely to their deaths that life might be beautiful  for those born in  poverty. 
 
Slowly Pavel raised his hand and removed his cap, his heart filled with sadness. 
 
Man's  dearest  possession  is  life.  It  is  given  to  him  but  once,  and  he must  live  it so  as  to  feel  no 
torturing regrets for wasted years, never know the burning shame of a mean and petty past; so live 
that, dying, he might say: all my life, all my strength were given to the finest cause in all the world 
 
― the fight for the Liberation of Mankind. And one must make use of every moment of 
life, lest some sudden illness or tragic accident cut it short. 
With these reflections, Korchagin turned away from the cemetery. 
 
 
 
At  home  his  mother  was  unhappily  preparing  for  her  son's  departure.  Watching  her, 
Pavel saw that she was hiding her tears from him. 
"Perhaps you'll stay, Pavel dear?" she ventured. "It's hard for me to be left alone in my 
old age. It doesn't matter how many children you have, they all grow up and leave you. 
Why must you run off to the city? You can live here just as well. Or perhaps so me bob-
haired  magpie  there  has  caught  your  fancy?  You  boys  never  tell  your  old  mother 
anything. Artem went and got married without a word to me and you're worse than him in 
that respect. I only see you when you get yourself crippled," his mother grumbled s oftly 
as she packed his meagre belongings into a clean bag. 
 
Pavel took her by the shoulders and drew her towards him. 
 
"No  magpies  for  me,  Mother!  Don't  you  know  that  birds  choose  mates  of  their  own 
species? And would you say I was a magpie?" 
 
第 165 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
His mother smiled in spite of herself. 
 
"No, Mother, I've given my  word to keep away from the girls until we've finished with all 
the bourgeois in the world. Bit long to  wait, you say? No,  Mother, the bourgeoisie can't 
hold out very long now. Soon there will be one big republic for all men, and  you old folk 
who've worked all your lives will go to Italy, a beautiful warm country by the sea. There is 
no winter there, Mother. We'll install you in the rich men's palaces, and you'll lie about in 
the sun warming your old bones while we'll go and finish off the bourgeois in America." 
 
"That's  a  lovely  fairy-t ale,  Son,  but  I  shan't  live  to  see  it  come  true.  .  .  .  You're  just  like  your 
grandad,  the  sailor,  always  full  of  ideas  he  was.  A  regular  brigand,  God  forgive  him!  Finished 
up at Sevastopol and came home  with one arm and one leg missing and two crosses and two 
silver medals on  his chest. But he died poor. Bad -tempered too, he was. Hit some official over 
the  head  with  his  crutch  once  and  was  sent  to  jail  for  about  a  year.  Even  his  military  crosses 
didn't help  him then. Yes, it's your grandad you take after and no mistake."  
 
"Now  then,  Ma,  we  can't  have  such  a  sorrowful  farewell,  can  we?  Let  me  have  my 
accordion. I haven't touched it for a long time." 
He bent his head over the mother-of-pearl rows of keys and began to play. His mother, 
listening, caught a new quality in his music. He never used to play like this. The dashing, 
rollicking  tunes  with  the  trills  and  runs,  the  intoxicating  rhythms  for  which  the  young 
accordionist had once been famed, were gone. His fingers had lost none of their power 
or skill, but the melody that flowed from under them now was richer and deeper. 
Pavel went to the station alone. 
 
He  had  persuaded  his  mother  to  stay  at  home for  he  knew  that the  final parting  would 
upset her too much. 
The waiting crowd piled pell-mell into the train. Pavel climbed onto one of the topmost shelves and 
sat there watching the shouting, excited passengers arguing and gesticulating down below. 
 
As usual everyone carried packs and bundles which they shoved under the seats. 
 
As soon as the train got into motion the hubbub subsided somewhat and the passengers 
settled down to the business of stuffing themselves with food. 
Pavel soon fell asleep. 
 
 
 
On his arrival in Kiev, Pavel set out at once for Kreshchatik Street in the heart of the city. 
Slowly he climbed onto the bridge. Everything was as it had been, nothing had changed. 
He  walked across the bridge, sliding his hand over the smooth railings. There was not a 
soul  on  the  bridge.  He  paused  before  descending to  admire the  majesty  of  the  scene. 
The  horizon  was  wrapped  in  the  velvety  folds  of  darkness,  the  stars  sparkled  and 
glittered with a phosphorescent glow. And down below, where the earth merged with the 
sky at some invisible point, the city scattered the darkness with a million lights. . . . 
 
Voices  raised  in  argument  invaded the  stillness  of  the  night and  roused  Pavel  from his 
reverie. Someone was coming this way. Pavel tore his eyes away from the city lights and 
descended the stairs. 
At the Area Special Department the man on duty informed Pavel that Zhukhrai had left 
town a long time ago. 
 
 
 
第 166 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
He  questioned  P avel  searchingly  and,  satisfied  that  the  young  man  really  was  a  personal 
friend  of  Zhukhrai,  finally  told  him  that  Fyodor  had  been  sent  to  work  in  Tashkent  on  the 
Turkestan  front.  Pavel  was  so  upset  by  the  news  that  he  turned  and  walked  out  without 
asking for further details. A sudden weariness made him sink down onto the doorstep to rest.  
 
A tramcar clattered by, filling the street with its din. An endless stream of people flowed 
past  him.  Pavel  caught  snatches  of  gay  women's  laughter,  a rumbling  bass,  the  high-
pitched treble of a youth, the wheezy falsetto of an old man. The ebb and flow of hurrying 
crowds  never  ceased.  Brightly-lit  trams,  glaring  automobile  headlights,  electric  lights 
ablaze  over  the  entrance  to a  cinema  near by....  And  everywhere  ―  people, filling  the 
street with their incessant hum of conversation. 
 
The noise and bustle of the avenue dulled the edge of the pain caused by the news of 
Fyodor's departure. Where was he to go now? It  was a long  way to Solo -menka  where 
his friends lived. Suddenly he remembered the house on University Street. It was not far 
from here. Of course he would go there! After all, the first person he longed to see, after 
Fyodor, was Rita. And perhaps he could arrange to spend the night at Akim's place. 
He  saw  a  light  in  the  end  window  from  afar.  Controlling  his  emotion  with  an  effort  he 
pulled open the heavy oaken outer door. For a few seconds he paused on the landing. 
Voices issued from Rita's room and someone was strumming on a guitar. 
"Oho,  so  she  allows  guitars  nowadays.  Must  have  relaxed  the  regime,"  he  said  to 
himself. He tapped lightly on the door, biting his lip to quell his inner excitement.  
The door was opened by a young woman with corkscrew curls. She looked questioningly 
at Korchagin. 
"Whom do you want?" 
 
She held the door ajar and a brief glance within told Pavel that his errand was 
fruitless. "May I see Rita Ustinovich?" 
"She's not here. She went to Kharkov last January and I hear she's in 
Moscow now." "Does Comrade Akim still live here or has he left as well?" 
"No,  he  isn't  here  either.  He  is  Secretary  of  the  Odessa  Gubernia  Komsomol 
now."  There  was  not hing  to  do  but  turn  back.  The  joy  of  his  return  to  the  city 
had  faded.  The problem now was to find somewhere to spend the night.  
 
"You can walk your legs off trying to look up old friends who aren't there," he grumbled to 
himself,  swallowing  his  disappointment.  Nevertheless  he  decided  to  try  his  luck  once 
more and see whether Pankratov was still in town. The stevedore lived in the vicinity of 
the wharves and that was nearer than Solomenka. 
By  the  time  he  reached  Pankratov's  place  he  was  utterly  exhausted.  "If  he  isn't  here 
either I'll give up the search," Pavel vowed to himself as he knocked at a door that had 
once been painted yellow. "I'll crawl under a boat and spend the night there." 
The  door  was  opened  by  an  old  woman  with  a  kerchief  tied  under  her  chin.  It  was 
Pankratov's mother. 
"Is Ignat home, Mother?" 
"He's just come in." 
 
She did not recognise Pavel, and turned round to call: "Ignat, someone to see you!" 
 
Pavel followed her into the room and laid his knapsack on the floor. Pankratov, sitting at the table 
 
第 167 页 共 259 页  
 
 
 
eating his supper, glanced quickly at the newcomer over his shoulder. 
 
"If it's me you want, sit down and fire away, while I get some borshch into my system," he 
said. "Haven't had a bite since morning." And he picked up a giant wooden spoon. 
Pavel sat on a rickety chair to one side. He took off his cap and, relapsing into an old 
habit, wiped his forehead with it. 
"Have I really changed so much that even Ignat doesn't recognise me?" he asked 
himself. Pankratov dispatched a spoon or two of borshch, but since his visitor said 
nothing, he turned his head to look at him. 
"Well, come on! What's on your mind?" 
 
His hand with the piece of bread remained suspended in mid air. He stared at his visitor 
blinking with astonishment. 
"Hey.... What's this? ... Well, of all the! ..." 
 
The sight of the confusion and bewilderment on Pankratov's red face was too much for 
Pavel and he burst out laughing. 
"Pavka!"  cried  the  other.  "But  we  all  thought  you  were  a  goner!  Wait  a  minute,  now? 
What's your name again?" 
Pankratov's elder sister and his mother came running in from the next room at his shouts. 
All  three  began  showering  Pavel  with  questions  until  at  last  they  finally  satisfied 
themselves that it really was Pavel Korchagin and none other. 
Long  after  everyone  in  the  house  was  fast  asleep  Pankratov  was  still  giving  Pavel  an 
account of all that had happened during the past four months. 
"Zharky  and  Mityai  went  off  to  Kharkov  last  winter.  And  where  do  you  think  they  went,  the 
beggars?  To the  Communist University! Got into the preparat ory cours e.  There were fifteen of 
us at first. I also got into the spirit  of t he thing  and  applied. A bout time I  got rid of some of the 
sawdust  in  my  noodle,  I  thought.  And  would  you  believe  it,  that  examination  board  flunked 
me!" Pankratov snorted at the memory an d went on: "At first everything was fine. I  fitted in on 
all  counts:  I  had  my  Party  card,  I'd  been  in  the  K omsomol  long  enough,  nothing  wrong  with 
my background and antecedents, but when it came to political knowledge  I got into hot water.  
 
"I  got  into  an  argument  with  one  of  the  chaps  on  the  examining  board.  He  comes  at  me  with  a 
nasty little  question  like  this:  'Tell  me,  Comrade  Pankratov,  what  do you  know  about  philosophy?' 
Well,  the  fact  is  I  didn't  know  a  damned  thing  about  philosophy.  But  there  was  a  fellow  used  to 
work  with  us  at  the  wharves,  a  grammar school  student  turned  tramp,  who  had  taken  a  job  as a 
stevedore  for  the  fun  of  it.  Well,  I  remember  him  telling  us  about  some  brainy  fellows  in  Greece 
who  knew  all  the  answers to  everything,  philosophers they  called  them,  he  said. Well, there  was 
one chap, can't remember his name now, Diogineez or something like that, he lived all his life in a 
barrel.  ..  .  The  smartest  of them  all  was the  one  who could  prove  forty  times  over  that  black  was 
white and white was black. A lot of spoofers, you see? So I remembered what that student told me 
and  I  says  to  myself:  'Aha,  he's  trying  to  trip  me  up.'  I  see  that  examiner  looking  at  me  with  a 
twinkle in his eye and I let him have it. 'Philosophy,' I says, 'is just poppycock, and I'm not going to 
have  any  truck  with it,  Comrades.  The  history  of  the  Party,  now,  that's  another  matter.  I'll  be  only 
too  glad  to  have  a  crack  at  that.' Well, they  went  for  me  good  and  proper,  wanted  to know  where 
I'd  gotten  those  queer  ideas  of  mine.  So  I  told  them  about  that  student  fellow  and  some  of  the 
things he'd said and the whole commission nearly split their sides. The laugh was on me all 
 
第 168 页 共 259 页  
 
 
 
right. But I got sore and walked out. 
 
"Later on that examiner fellow got hold of me in the Gubernia Committee and lectured me 
for  a  good  three  hours.  It  turns  out  that  the  student  down  at  the  docks  had  got  things 
mixed up. It seems philosophy is all right, dashed important, as a matter o' fact. 
"Dubava and  Zharky passed the exams. Mityai was always good at studies, but Zharky isn't much 
better than me. Must have been his Order that got him by. Anyway I was left back here. After they 
went I was given a managing job at the wharves ― assistant chief of the freight wharves. I always 
used  to  be  scrapping  with  the  managers  about  the  youth  and  now  I'm  a  manager  myself. 
Nowadays  if  I come  across  some slacker  or  nitwit  I  haul  him  over  the coals  both  as  manager  and 
Komsomol  secretary.  He can't  throw  dust  in  my  eyes! Well,  enough  about  me. What  else  is there 
to  tell  you?  You  know  about  Akim  already;  Tufta  is  the  only  one  of  the  old  crowd  left  on  the 
Gubernia  Committee.  Still  on  his  old  job.  Tokarev  is  Secretary  of  t he  District  Committee  of  the 
Party  at  Solomenka.  Okunev,  your  fellow  commune  member,  is  on  the  Komsomol  District 
Committee. Talya works in the Political Education Department. Tsvetayev has your job down in the 
repair  shops.  I  don't know  him  very  well. We  only meet  occasionally  in the  Gubernia  Committee; 
he  seems  to  be  quite  a  brainy  fellow,  but  a  bit  standoffish.  Remember  Anna  Borhart?  She's  at 
Solomenka  too,  head  of  the  Women's  Department  of  the  District  Party  Committee.  I've  told  you 
about all the others. Yes, Pavel, the Party's sent lots of folk off to study. All the old activists attend 
the Gubernia Soviet and Party School. They promise to send me too next year." 
 
It  was  long  past  midnight  when  they  retired  for  the  night.  By  the  time  Pavel  awoke  the 
next  morning,  Pankratov  had gone  to the  wharves.  Dusya,  his  sister,  a  strapping  lass 
closely resembling her brother, served Pavel tea, keeping up a lively patter of talk all the 
while. Pankratov the elder, a ship's engineer, was away from home. 
As Pavel was preparing to go out, Dusya reminded him: 
"Don't forget now, we're expecting you for dinner." 
 
 
The Gubernia Committee of the P arty presented the usual scene of bustling activity. The  front 
door opened and closed incessa ntly. The corridors and offices were crowded, and the muffled 
clicking of typewriters issued from  behind the  door of the Administration Department.  
 
Pavel  lingered  in  the  corridor  for  a  while  in  search  of  a  familiar  face,  but  finding  no  one  he 
knew,  went  straight  in  to  see  t he  secretary.  The  latter,  dressed  in  a  blue  Russian  shirt,  was 
seated behind a large desk. He looked up briefly as Pavel  entered and  went on writing.  
 
Pavel took a seat opposite him and studied the features of Akim's successor. 
 
"What can I do for you?" the secretary in the Russian shirt asked as he finished 
his writing. Pavel told him his story. 
"I want you to restore my membership and send me to the railway workshops," he wound 
up. "Please issue the necessary instructions." 
The secretary leaned back in his chair. 
 
"Well  put  you  back  on  the  lists,  of  course,  that  goes  without  saying,"  he  replied  with  some 
hesitation. "But it'll be  a bit awkward to send you to the  workshops.  Ts vetayev is there.  He's a 
member of the Gubernia Com mittee. We'll have to  find something else for you to do." 
 
Korchagin narrowed his eyes. 
 
 
 
第 169 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
"I don't intend to interfere with Tsvetayev's work," he said. "I'm going to work at my trade 
and not as secretary. And since my health is rather poor I would ask you not to assign 
me to any other job." 
The secretary agreed. He scribbled a few words on a slip of paper. 
"Give this to Comrade Tufta, he'll make all the arrangements." 
 
In the Personnel Department Pavel found Tufta giving a dressing down to his assistant. 
Pavel stood for a minute or two listening to the heated exchange, but since it threatened 
to last for a long time, he broke in. 
"You'll finish the argument another time,  Tufta. Here's a note  for you about fixing up my 
paper." Tufta stared. He look ed from the paper to Korchagin, until at last it dawned on him,  
 
"I'll be damned! So you didn't die after all? Tut, tut, what are we going to do now? You've 
been  struck  off the  lists.  I  myself  turned  in  your  card  to the  Central  Committee.  What's 
more, you've missed the census, and according to the circular from the Komsomol C.C. 
those who weren't registered in the census are out. So the only thing you can do is to file 
an application again in the regular way." Tufta's tone brooked no argument. 
Pavel frowned. 
 
"I see you haven't changed, Tufta. The same musty old bureaucrat. When will you learn 
to be human?" 
Tufta sprang up as if a flea had bitten him. 
 
"I would thank you not to lecture me. I am in charge here. Circular instructions are issued 
to be obeyed and not violated. And you'd better be careful with your accusations!" 
With  these  words,  Tufta  sat  down  and  demonstratively  drew  the  pile of  unopened  mail 
toward him. 
Pavel walked slowly to the door, then remembering something, he went back to the desk 
and picked up the secretary's slip that lay before Tufta. The latter watched him  closely. 
He was a mean spiteful person, with nothing youthful about him, a trifle ridiculous with his 
big ears that seemed forever on the alert. 
"All right," Pavel said in a c alm mocking  voice. "You can accuse me of disorganising statistics 
if you like, but, tell me, how on  earth do you manage to  wangle  reprimands  for  people  who go 
and  die  without  giving  formal  notice  in  advance?  After  all,  anyone  can  get  sick  if  he  wants to, 
or die if he  feels like it, there's nothing in the instructions about that, I bet. " 
 
"Ho! Ho! Ho!" roared Tufta's assistant, no longer able to preserve his neutrality. 
 
The  point  of  Tufta's  pencil  brok e  and  he  flung  it  on  the  floor,  but  before  he  had  time  to  retort 
several  people  burst  into  the  room,  talking  and  laughing.  Okunev  was  among  them.  There 
was much excitement when Pavel  was rec ognised and endless questions were  fired at him. A 
few  minutes  later  another  group  of  young  people  came  in,  Olga  Yureneva  with  them.  Dazed 
by the shock and delight of seeing Pavel again, Olga clung to his hand  for a long time.  
 
Pavel  had  to  tell  his  story  all  over  again.  The  sincere  joy  of  his  comrades,  their 
undisguised  friendship  and  sympathy,  the  warm  handclasps  and  friendly  slaps  on  the 
back made Pavel forget about Tufta for the moment. 
But when he had finished his account of himself and told his comrades about his talk with 
Tufta there was a chorus of indignant comments. Olga, with an annihilating look at Tufta, 
marched off to the secretary's office. 
 
第 170 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
"Come  on,  let's  all  go  to  Nezhdanov,"  cried  Okunev.  "He'll  take  care of  him."  And  with 
these  words  he  took  Pavel  by  the  shoulders  and  the  whole  group  of  young  friends 
trooped after Olga into the office of the secretary. 
"That Tufta  ought  to  be  taken  off  the  job  and  sent  down  to  the  wharves  to  work  under 
Pankratov for a year. He's a hidebound bureaucrat!" stormed Olga. 
The Gubernia Committee secretary listened with an indulgent smile when Okunev, Olga 
and the others demanded that Tufta be dismissed from the Personnel Department. 
"Korchagin will be reinstated without question," he assured Olga. "A new card will be issued him at 
once. I agree with you that Tufta is a formalist," he went on. "That is his chief failing. But it must be 
admitted that he has not done so badly on the job. Komsomol personnel statistics wherever I have 
worked  have  always  been  in  a  state  of indescribable  chaos,  not  a single  figure  could  be  relied  on. 
In our Personnel Department the statistics are in good order. You know yourselves that Tufta often 
sits  up  nights  working.  Here's  how  I  look  at  it:  he  can  always  be  removed,  But  if  his  place  is taken 
by  some  free  and  easy  chap  who  knows  nothing  about  keeping  records,  we  may  not  have  any 
bureaucracy, but neither will we have any order. Let him stay on the job. I'll give him a good talking 
to. That will help for a while and later on we'll see." 
 
"All right, let him be," Okunev agreed. "Come on, Pavel, let's go to Solomenka. There's a 
meeting at the club tonight. Nobody knows you're back yet. Think what a surprise they'll 
get when we announce: 'Korchagin has the floor!' You're a great lad, Pavel, for not dying. 
What good would you be to the proletariat dead?" And Okunev threw his arm around his 
friend and piloted him down the corridor. 
"Will you come, Olga?" 
"Of cours e I will."  
 
Korchagin did not return to the Pankratovs for dinner, in fact he did not go back there at 
all that day. Okunev took him to his own room in the House of Soviets. He gave him the 
best meal he could muster, then placed a pile of newspapers and two thick files of the 
minutes of the District Komsomol Bureau meetings before him with the advice: 
"Glance  through  this  stuff.  Lots  of  things  happened  while  you  were  frittering  away  your 
time with the typhus. I'll come back toward evening and we'll go to the club together. You 
can lie down and take a nap if you get tired." 
Stuffing his pockets full with all kinds of papers and documents (Okunev scorned the use 
of  a  portfolio  on  principle  and  it  lay  neglected  under  his  bed),  the  District  Committee 
secretary said good-bye and went out. 
When he returned that evening the floor of his room was littered with newspapers and a 
heap of books had been moved out from under the bed. Some of them were piled on the 
table. Pavel was sitting on the bed reading the last letters of the Central Committee which 
he had found under his friend's pillow. 
"A fine mess you've made of my quarters, you ruffian!" Okunev cried in mock indignation. 
"Hey, wait a minute, Comrade! Those are secret documents you're reading! That's what I 
get for letting a nosy chap like you into my den!" 
Pavel, grinning, laid the letter aside. 
 
"This particular one doesn't happen to be secret," he said, "but the one you're using for a 
lampshade is marked 'confidential'. Look, it's all singed around the edges!" 
 
第 171 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Okunev  took  the  scorched  slip  of  paper, glanced  at  the  title  and  struck  himself  on  the 
forehead in dismay. 
"I've been looking for the damn thing for three days! Couldn't imagine where it had got to. 
Now  I  remember.  Volyntsev  made  a  lampshade  out  of  it  the  other  day  and  then  he 
himself searched for it high and low." Okunev folded the document carefully and stuffed it 
under the mattress. "We'll put everything in order later on," he said reassuringly. "Now for 
a bite and then off to the club. Pull up to the table, Pavel!" 
From  one  pocket  he  produced  a  long  dried  roach  wrapped  in newspaper and from  the 
other, two slices of bread. He spread the newspaper out on the table, took the roach by 
the head and whipped it smartly against the table's edge to soften it. 
Sitting on the table and working vigorously with his jaws, the jolly Okunev gave Pavel all 
the news, cracking jokes the while. 
 
 
At the club  Okunev  took Korchagin  through  the  back  entrance  behind the stage.  In  the  corner  of 
the spacious hall, to the right of the stage near the piano sat Talya Lagutina and Anna Borhart with 
a  group  of Komsomols  from the  railway  district. Volyntsev,  the  Komsomol  secretary  of  the  railway 
shops, was sitting opposite Anna. He had a face as ruddy as an August apple, hair and eyebrows 
the colour of ripe corn. His once black leather jacket was extremely shabby. 
 
Next  to  him,  his  elbow  resting  negligently  on  the  lid  of  the  piano,  sat  Tsvetayev,  a  handsome 
young man with  brown  hair  and  finely chiselled lips. His shirt was unbuttoned at the throat.  
 
As he came up to the group, Okunev heard Anna say: 
 
"Some  people  are  doing  everything  they  can  to  complicate  the  a dmission  of  new 
members. Tsvetayev is one." 
"The Komsomol is not a picnic ground," Tsvetayev snapped with stubborn disdain. 
 
"Look  at  Nikolai!"  cried  Talya,  catching  sight  of Okunev.  "He's  beaming  like  a  polished 
samovar tonight!" 
Okunev was dragged into the circle and bombarded with 
questions. "Where have you been?" 
"Let's get started." 
 
Okunev raised his hand for silence. 
 
"Hold on, lads. As soon as Tokarev comes we'll 
begin." "There he comes now," remarked Anna. 
Sure  enough  the  Secretary  of  the  District  Party  Committee  approached.  Okunev  ran 
forward to meet him. 
"Come along, Dad, I'm going to take you backstage to meet a friend of mine. Prepare for 
a  shock!"  "What're  you  up  to  now?"  the  old  man  growled,  puffing  on   his  cigarette,  but 
Okunev was already pulling him by the sleeve. 
 
 
Okunev rang  the  chairman's  bell  with  such  violence  that  even  the  noisiest  members  of 
the audience were silenced. 
Behind Tokarev the leonine  head of the genius of the Communist Manifesto, i n a frame  of 
 
第 172 页 共 259 页  
 
 
 
evergreen, surveyed the assembly. While Okunev opened the meeting Tokarev could not 
keep his eyes off Korchagin who stood in the wings waiting for his cue. 
"Comrades! Before we get down to the current organisational questions on the agenda, a 
comrade here has asked for the floor. Tokarev and I move that he be allowed to speak." 
A murmur of approval rose from the hall, whereupon Okunev 
rapped out: "I call upon Pavel Korchagin to address the meeting!" 
At  least  eighty  of  the  one  hundred  in  the  hall  knew  Korchagin,  and  when  the  familiar 
figure  appeared  before  the  footlights  and  the  tall  pale  young  man  began  to  speak,  a 
storm of delighted cries and thunderous applause broke from the audience. 
"Dear Comrades!" 
 
Korchagin's voice was steady but he could not conceal his emotion. 
 
"Friends, I have returned to take my place in the ranks. I am happy to be back. I see a 
great  number  of  my  comrades  here.  I  understand  that  the  Solomenka  Komsomol  has 
thirty  per  cent  more  members  than  before,  and  that  they've  stopped  making  cigarette 
lighters in the workshops and yards, and the old carcasses are being hauled out of the 
railway cemetery for capital repairs. That means our countr y is getting a new lease on life 
and is mustering its strength. That is something to live for! How could I die at a time like 
this!" Korchagin's eyes lit up in a happy smile. 
 
Amid  a  storm  of  applause  and  greetings  he  descended  the  platform  and  went  over  to 
where  Anna  and Talya  were  sitting.  He  shook  the  hands  outstretched  in  greeting,  and 
then the friends moved up and made room for him between them. Talya laid her hand on 
his  and  squeezed  it  tight.  Anna's  eyes  were  still  wide  with  surprise,  her  eyelashes 
quivered faintly as she gave Pavel a look of warm welcome.  
 
 
The  days slipped swiftly  by. Yet there  was  nothing monotonous  about their  passage,  for  each  day 
brought something new, and as he planned his work in the morning Pavel would note with chagrin 
that the day was all too short and much of what he had planned remained undone. 
 
Pavel had moved in  with Okunev. He worked  at the railway shops as assistant electrical fitter.  
 
He  had  had  a  long  argument  with  Okunev  before  the  latter  agreed  to  his  temporary 
withdrawal from work in the Komsomol leadership. 
"We're  too  short  of  people  for  you  to  cool  your  heels  in  the  workshops,"  Okunev  had 
objected. "Don't tell me you're ill. I hobbled about with a stick myself for a whole month 
after the typhus. You can't fool me, Pavel, I know you, there's something behind all this. 
Come on, out with it," Okunev insisted. 
"You're right, Kolya, there is. I want to study." 
 
"There  you  are!"  Okunev  cried  exultantly.  "I  knew  it!  Do  you  think  I  don't  want  to  study 
too? It's downright egoism on your part. Expect us to put our shoulders to the wheel while 
you go off to study. Nothing doing, my lad, tomorrow you start as organiser. " 
Nevertheless, after a lengthy discussion Okunev gave in. 
 
"Very well, I'll leave you alone for two months. And I hope you appreciate my generosity. 
But I don't think you'll get along with Tsvetayev, he's a bit too conceited." 
Pavel's return to the workshops had put Tsvetayev on the alert. He was certain that Korchagin's 
 
 
 
第 173 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
coming  would  mark  the  beginning  of  a  struggle  for  leadership.  His  self-esteem  was  wounded 
and  he  prepared  to  put  up  a  stiff  resistance.  He  soon  saw,  however,  that  he  had  been 
mistaken.  When  Korchagin  learned  that  there  was  a  plan  afoot  to  make  him  a  member  of  the 
Komsomol  Bureau  he  went  straight  to  the  Komsomol  secretary's  office  and  persuaded  him  to 
strike the question off the agenda, giving his understanding with  Okunev  as the excuse. In the 
Komsomol shop cell Pavel took a  political study class, but did n ot ask for work in t he B ureau.  
Nevertheless, although he had  officially no part in t he leadership, Pavel's influence was felt in 
all phases of t he collective's  work. In his comradely, unobtrusive  fashion  he  helped  Ts vetayev 
out of  difficulties on more than one occasion.  
 
Coming  into  the  shop  one  day  Tsvetayev  was  amazed  to  see  all  the  members  of  the 
Komsomol  cell  and  some  three  dozen  non-Party  lads busy  washing  windows,  scraping 
many years' accumulation of filth off the machines and carting heaps of rubbish  out into 
the yard. Pavel, armed with a huge mop, was furiously scrubbing the cement floor which 
was covered with machine oil and grease. 
"Spring-cleaning? What's the occasion?" Tsvetayev asked Pavel. 
 
"We're tired of all this muck. The place hasn't been cleaned for a good twenty years, we'll 
make it look like new in a week," Korchagin replied briefly. 
Tsvetayev shrugged his shoulders and went away. 
 
Not content with cleaning out their workshop, the electricians tackled the factory yard. For 
years  the  huge  yard  had  served  as  a  dumping  ground  for  all  manner  of  disused 
equipment. There were hundreds of carriage wheels, and axles, mountains of rusty iron, 
rails,  buffers, axle  boxes  ―  several  thousand  tons of  metal  lay  rusting  under  the  open 
sky. But the factory management put a stop to the young people's activities. 
"We have more important things to attend to. The yard can wait," they were told. 
 
And  so  the  electricians  paved  a  small  area  of  the  yard  outside  the  entrance  to  their  shop, 
placing  a  wire  mat  outside  the  door  and  left  it  at  that.  But  inside  their  shop  the  cleaning 
continued  after  working  hours.  When  Strizh,  the  chief  engineer,  dropped  in  a  week  later  he 
found  the  workshop  flooded  with  light.  The  huge  iron  barred  windows,  freed  from  their  heavy 
layer  of  dust  and  oil,  now  admitted  the  sunlight  which  was  reflected  brightly  in  the  polished 
copper  parts  of  the  diesel  engines.  The  heavy  parts  of  the  machines  shone  with  a  fresh  coat 
of green paint, and someone had even  painted yellow arrows on the spok es of t he  wheels. 
 
"Well, well..." Strizh muttered in amazement. 
 
In the far corner of the shop a few of the men were finishing their work. Strizh went over. 
On the way he met Korchagin carrying a tin of paint. 
"Just a moment, my friend," the engineer stopped him. "I fully approve of what you have 
done here. But where did you get that paint? Haven't I given strict orders that no paint is 
to be used without my permission? We can't afford to waste paint for such pu rposes. We 
need all we've got for the engine parts." 
"This paint was scraped out of the bottoms of discarded cans. We spent two days on it 
but we scraped out about twenty-five pounds. We're not breaking any laws here, 
Comrade Engineer." The engineer snorted again, but he looked rather sheepish. 
"Then carry on, of course. Well, well. Now this is really interesting. How do you explain this ... 
 
what shall we call it ... this voluntary striving for cleanliness in a workshop? All done after 
 
 
 
第 174 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
working hours, I take it?" 
 
Korchagin detected a note of genuine perplexity in the 
engineer's voice. "Of course," he said. "What did you suppose?" 
"Yes, but...." 
 
"There is nothing to be surprised at, Comrade Strizh. Who told you that the Bolsheviks 
are going  to  leave  dirt  alone?  Wait  till  we  get  this thing  going  properly.  We have  some 
more surprises in store for you." 
And carefully skirting the engineer so as to avoid splashing him with paint, Korchagin moved on. 
Every evening found Pavel in the public library where he lingered until late. He had made friends 
with all the three librarians, and by using all his powers of persuasion he had finally won the right 
to browse freely among the books. Propping the ladder against the tall bookcases he would sit 
there for hours leafing through volume after volume. Most of the books were old. Modern literature 
occupied one small bookcase ― a few odd Civil War pamphlets, Marx's Capital, The Iron Heel by 
Jack London and several others. Rummaging among the old books he came across Spartacus. He 
read it in two nights and when he finished it he placed it on the shelf alongside the works of Maxim 
Gorky. This gradual selection of the more interesting books with a modern revolutionary message 
lasted for some time. 
 
The librarians did not object. 
 
 
 
The calm routine of Komsomol life at the railway shops was suddenly disturbed by what 
appeared at first to be an insignificant incident: repair worker Kostya Fidin, member of the 
cell  bureau,  a  sluggish  lad  with  a  snub  nose  and  a  pock-marked  face,  broke  an 
expensive  imported  drill  on  a  piece  of  iron.  The  accident  was  the  result  of  downright 
carelessness; worse, it looked like deliberate mischief on Fidin's part. 
It  happened  in  the  morning.  Khodorov,  senior  repair  foreman,  had  told  Kostya  to  drill 
several holes in an iron plate. Kostya refused at first, but on the foreman's insistence he 
picked up the iron and started to drill it. The foreman, an  exacting taskmaster, was not 
popular  with  the  workers.  A  former  Menshevik,  he  took  no  part  in  the  social  life of  the 
plant and did not approve of the Young Communists. But he was an expert at his job and 
he performed his duties conscientiously. Khodorov noticed that Kostya was drilling "dry", 
without using any oil. He hurried over to the machine and stopped it. 
 
"Are you blind or what? Don't you know better than to use a drill that way!" he shouted at 
Kostya, knowing that the drill would not last long with such handling. 
Kostya  snapped  back  at  him  and  restarted  the  lathe.  Khodorov  went  to  the  department  chief  to 
complain.  Kostya  in  the  meantime,  leaving  the machine  running,  hurried  off  to  fetch the  oiling  can 
so that everything would be in order by the time the chief appeared. When he returned with the oil 
the  drill  was  broken.  The  chief submitted  a  report  recommending Fidin's  dismissal.  The  bureau  of 
the Komsomol cell,  however,  took  up the  cudgels  on  Fidin's  behalf  on the  grounds that  Khodorov 
had  a  grudge  against  all  active  Komsomol  members.  The  management  insisted  on  Fidin's 
dismissal, and the case was put before the Komsomol bureau of the workshops. The fight was on. 
 
Three  of  the  five  members  of the  bureau  were  in  favour  of  giving  Kostya  an  official  reprimand  and 
transferring him to other work. Tsvetayev was one of the three. The other two did not think 
 
第 175 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Fidin should be punished at all. 
 
The bureau meeting to discuss the case was called in Tsvetayev's office. Around a large 
table covered with red cloth stood several benches and stools made by the Komsomols 
of the carpenter shops. There were portraits of the leaders on the walls, and the railway 
workshops' banner was spread over one entire wall behind the table. 
Tsvetayev  was  now  a  "full-time"  Komsomol  worker.  He  was  a  blacksmith  by  trade,  but  being  a 
good  organiser  had  been  promoted  to  a  leading  post in the Komsomol:  he  was  now  a  member  of 
the  Bureau  of  the  Komsomol  District  Committee  and  a  member  of  the  Gubernia  Committee 
besides.  He  was  a  newcomer  to  the  railway  shops.  From  the  first  he  had  taken  the  reins  of 
management firmly into his hands. Self-assured and hasty in his decisions, he had suppressed the 
initiative of the other Komsomol members from the outset. He insisted on doing everything himself 
―  even  the  office  had  been  decorated  under  his  personal  supervision  ―  and  when  he  found 
himself unable to cope with all the work, stormed at his assistants for their inactivity. 
 
He conducted the meeting sprawled in the only soft armchair in the room which had been 
brought from the club. It was a closed meeting. Khomutov, the Party organiser, had just 
asked for the floor, when there was a knock on the door which was closed on the latch. 
Tsvetayev scowled at the interruption. The knock was repeated. Katya Zelenova got up 
and opened the door. Korchagin stood on the threshold. Katya let him in. 
Pavel was making his way to a vacant seat when Tsvetayev 
addressed him. "Korchagin, this is a closed meeting of the bureau." 
The blood rushed to Pavel's face, and he turned slowly to face the table. 
 
"I know that. I am interested in hearing your opinion on the Fidin case. I have a point to 
raise in connection with it. What's the matter, do you object to my presence?" 
"I don't object, but you ought to know that closed meetings are attended only by bureau 
members.  The  more people  there  are  the  harder  it  is  to  thrash  things  out properly.  But 
since you're here you might as well stay." 
Korchagin had never suffered such a slight. A crease appeared on his forehead. 
 
"What's  all  the  formality  about?"  Khomutov  remarked  disapprovingly,  but  Korchagin 
stopped him with a gesture, and sat down. "Well, this is what I wanted to say," Khomutov 
went  on.  "It's  true  that  Khodorov  belongs  to  the  old  school, but  something  ought  to  be 
done about discipline. If all the Komsomols go smashing up drills, there'll be nothing to 
work  with.  What's  more,  we're giving a rotten  example  to  the  non-Party  workers.  In  my 
opinion the lad ought to be given a serious warning." 
 
Tsvetayev  did  not  give  him  a  chance  to  finish,  and  began  voicing  his  objections.  Ten 
minutes passed. In the meantime Korchagin saw which way the wind was blowing. When 
the  matter  was  finally  put  to  the  vote  he  got  up  and  asked  for  the  floor.  Tsvetayev 
reluctantly permitted him to speak. 
"I  should  like  to  give  you  my  opinion  of  the  Fidin  case,  Comrades,"  Pavel  began.  His 
voice sounded harsh in spite of himself. 
"The  Fidin case  is  a  signal,  and  it  is  not Kostya's  action  in itself  that's most important.  I collected 
some-figures yesterday." Pavel took a notebook out of his pocket. "I got them from the timekeeper. 
Now  listen  carefully:  twenty-three  per  cent  of  our  Komsomols  come  to  work  from  five  to  fifteen 
minutes late every day. That has become a rule. Seventeen per cent don't report for 
 
第 176 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
work at all one or two days out of every month; the percentage of absenteeism among young non-
Party  workers  is  fourteen  per cent.  These  figures  sting  worse  than  a  whiplash,  Comrades.  I jotted 
down  a  few  more:  four  per cent  of  our  Party  members  are  absent  one  day  a  month,  and  four  per 
cent  report  late  for  work.  Of  the  non-Party  workers  eleven  per  cent  miss  one  day  in  the  month 
while  thirteen  per cent  regularly  report  late  for  work.  Ninety  per cent  of  breakages  are  accounted 
for  by young  workers, seven  per  cent  of  whom  are  newcomers.  The conclusion  to  be  drawn  from 
these  figures  is  that  we Komsomols  are  making  a  far  worse showing than  the Party members  and 
adult  workers. But  the situation  is  not  the same  everywhere.  The  foundry  record  is  excellent,  the 
electricians  are  not  so  bad,  but  the  rest  are  more  or  less  on  the  same  level.  In  my  opinion 
Comrade  Khomutov  said  only  a  fraction  of  what  ought  to  be  said  about  discipline.  The  immediate 
problem now is to straighten out these zigzags. I don't intend to begin agit ating here, but we've got 
to put a stop to carelessness and sloppiness. The old workers are frankly admitting that they used 
to  work  much  better  for  the  master,  for  the  capitalist,  but  now  we're  the  masters  and  there's  no 
excuse  for  working  badly.  It's  not  so  much  Kostya  or  any  other  worker  who's  to  blame.  We 
ourselves, all of us, are at fault because instead of fighting the evil properly we sometimes defend 
workers like Kostya under one or another pretext. 
 
"Samokhin  and  B utylyak  have  just  said  here  that  Fidin  is  a  good  lad,  one  of  t he  best,  an 
active Komsomol and all that. What if he did bust a drill, it could happen to  anybody. He's one 
of  us,  while  the  foreman  isn't...  . But  has  anyone  ever  tried  to  talk  to  Khodorov?  Don't  forget 
that  grumbler  has  thirty  years  of  working  experience  behind  him!  We  won't  talk  about  his 
politics.  In  the  given  case  he  is  in  the  right,  because  he,  an  outsider,  is  taking  care  of  state 
property  while  we  are  smashing  up  valuable  tools.  What  do  you  call such  a  state  of  affairs ?  I 
believe that we ought to strike the first blow now and launch an offensive on this sector.  
 
"I move that Fidin be expelled from the Komsomol as a slacker and disorganiser of production. His 
case should be discussed in the wall newspaper, and these figures  published in an editorial article 
openly  without  fear  of  the  consequences.  We  are  strong,  we  have  forces  we  can  rely  on.  The 
majority  of the Komsomol  members  are  good  workers.  Sixty  of  them  have  gone  through  Boyarka 
and  that  was  a  severe  test.  With  their  help  and  their  assistance  we  can  iron  out  the  difficulties. 
Only we've got to change our attitude to the whole business once and for all." 
 
Korchagin, usually calm and reticent, spoke with a passion that surprised Tsvetayev. He 
was seeing the real Pavel for the first time. He realised that Pavel was right, but he was 
too cautious to agree with him openly. He took Korchagin's speech as a harsh criticism of 
the  general  state  of  the  organisation,  as  an  attempt  to  undermine  his,  Tsvetayev's, 
authority, and he resolved to make short shrift of his opponent. He began his speech by 
accusing Korchagin of defending the Menshevik Khodorov. 
 
The  stormy  debate  lasted  for  three hours. Late  that  night  the  final  point  was  reached. 
Defeated  by  the  inexorable  logic  of  facts  and  having  lost  the  majority  to  Korchagin, 
Tsvetayev made a false step. He violated the rules of democracy by ordering Korchagin 
to leave the room just before the final vote was taken. 
"Very well, I shall go, although your behaviour does not do you credit, Tsvetayev. I warn you that if 
you continue to insist on your viewpoint I shall put the matter before the general meeting tomorrow 
and  I  am  sure you  will  not  be  able  to  win  over  the  majority there. You  are  not  right,  Tsvetayev.  I 
think, Comrade Khomutov, that it is your duty to take up the question with the Party 
 
第 177 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
group before the general meeting." 
 
"Don't try to scare me," Tsvetayev shouted defiantly. "I can go to the Party group myself, 
and  what's  more  I  have  something  to  tell  them  about  you.  If  you  don't  want  to  work 
yourself, don't interfere with those who do." 
Pavel  closed  the  door behind  him.  He  passed  his hand  over  his  burning  forehead  and 
went through the empty office to the exit. Outside on the street he took a deep breath of 
air, lit a cigarette and set out for the little house on Baty Hill where Tokarev lived. 
He found the old mechanic at supper. 
 
"Come  on,  let's  hear  the  news.  Darya,  bring  the  lad  a  plate  of  gruel,"  said  Tokarev, 
inviting Pavel to the table. 
Darya  Fominishna,  Tokarev's  wife,  as  tall  and  buxom  as  her  husband  was  short  and 
spare, placed a plate of millet gruel before Pavel and wiping her moist lips with the edge 
of her white apron said kindly: "Set to, dearie." 
Pavel had been a frequent visitor at the Tokarevs' in the days when the old man worked 
in the repair shops, and had spent many a pleasant evening with the old couple, bu t this 
was his first visit since his return to the city. 
The old mechanic listened attentively to Pavel's story, working busily with his spoon and 
making no comment apart from an occasional grunt. When he had finished his porridge, 
he wiped his moustache with his handkerchief and cleared his throat. 
"You're right, of course," he said. "It's high time the question was put properly. There are 
more  Komsomols  down  at  the  workshops  than  anywhere  else  in  the  district  and that's 
where  we  ought  to  start.  So  you  and Tsvetayev  have  come  to blows  after  all, eh?  Too 
bad. He's a bit of an upstart, of course. You used to get on with the lads, didn't you? By 
the way, what exactly is your job at the shops?" 
"I'm working in one of the departments. And generally I'm in on everything that's doing. In 
my own cell I lead a political study circle." 
"What about the bureau?" 
Korchagin hesitated. 
 
"I  thought  that  while  I  still  felt  a  bit  shaky  on  my  legs,  and  since  I  wanted  to  do  some 
studying, I wouldn't take part officially in the leadership for a while." 
"So that's it!" Tokarev cried in disapproval. "Now, my boy, if it weren't for your health I'd 
give you a good scolding. How do you feel now, by the way? Stronger?" 
"Yes." 
 
"Good,  and  now  get to  work  in  earnest.  Stop  beating  about  the  bush.  No  good  will come  of  sitting 
on  the sidelines! You're  just  trying  to  evade  responsibility  and you  know  it. You must  put  things  to 
rights tomorrow. Okunev will hear from me about this." Tokarev's tone showed his annoyance. 
 
"No, dad, you leave him alone," Pavel hastened to object. "I asked him not to give me 
any work." Tokarev whistled in scorn. 
"You did, eh, and he let you off? Oh well, what can  we do with you, Komsomols. . . . Will you 
read me the paper, son, the way you used to? My eyes aren't as good as they might be."  
 
 
The Party bureau at the workshops upheld the decision of the majority in the Komsomol bureau. 
 
 
 
第 178 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
The  Party  and  Komsomol  groups  undertook  the  important  and  difficult  task  of  setting  an 
example  of  labour  discipline.  Ts vet ayev  was  given  a  thorough  dressing  do wn  at  the  bureau. 
He  tried  to  bluster  at  first  but  pinned  to  the  wall  by  Lopakhin,  the  Secretary,  an  elderly  man 
with the waxen pallor of the consumptive,  Ts vetayev  gave in and partly admitted his error.  
 
The following day the wall newspaper carried a series of articles that caused something 
of  a  sensation  at  the  railway  shops.  The  articles  were  read aloud  and  hotly  discussed, 
and the unusually well-attended youth meeting held that same evening dealt exclusively 
with the problems they raised. 
Fidin was expelled from the Komsomol, and a new member was added to the bureau in 
charge of political education ― Korchagin. 
Unusual quiet reigned in the hall as the meeting listened to Nezhdanov outline the new 
tasks confronting the railway workshops at this new stage. 
After the meeting Tsvetayev found Korchagin waiting for him 
outside. "I have something to say to you," Pavel said. 
"What about?" Tsvetayev asked sourly. 
 
Pavel took him by the arm and after they had  gone a few yards paused at a 
bench. "Shall we sit down for a moment?" he suggested and set the example.  
 
The burning tip of Tsvetayev's cigarette now glowed red, now 
faded. "What have you got against me, Tsvetayev?" 
There was silence for a few minutes. 
 
"Oh, so that's it? I thought you wanted to talk business," Tsvetayev said feigning surprise, 
but his voice was unsteady. 
Pavel laid his hand firmly on the other's knee. 
 
"Get off your high horse, Dimka. That sort  of talk is only for diplomats. You tell me this: 
why have you taken such a dislike to me?" 
Tsvetayev shifted uneasily in his seat. 
 
"What  are  you  talking  about?  Why  should  I  have  anything  against  you?  I  offered  you 
work, didn't I? You refused, and now you're accusing me of trying to keep you out." 
But his words carried no conviction, and Pavel, his hand still on Tsvetayev's knee, went 
on with feeling: 
"If you won't say it, I will. You think  I  want to cramp your style, you think it's your job I'm  after. 
If  you  didn't,  we  wouldn't  have  quarrelled  over  the  Kostya  affair.  Relations  like  these  can  ruin 
our  work.  If  this  concerned  only  the  t wo  of  us  it  wouldn't  matter  ―  I  wouldn't  care  what  you 
thought  of  me.  But  from  tomorrow  we'll  be  working  together.  How  can  we  carry  on  like  this? 
Now listen.  There must be  no  rift  between us. You  and I  are both workingmen. If our cause is 
dearer  to  you  than  everything  else  you'll  give  me  your  hand  on  it,  and  tomorrow  we'll  start  as 
friends.  But  unless  you  throw  all  this  nonsense  out  of  your  head  and  steer  clear  of  intrigues, 
you  and  I  will  fight  like  blazes  over  every  setback  in  the  work  that  results.  Now  here's  my 
hand, take it, while it is still proffered to you in  friends hip." 
 
A deep sense of satisfaction swept Korchagin as Tsvetayev's rough fingers closed over his palm. 
 
 
 
A week passed. The workday was coming to an end in the District Committee of the Party. Quiet 
 
 
 
第 179 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
settled over the offices. But Tokarev was still at his desk. He was sitting in his armchair 
studying the latest reports, when a knock came at the door. 
"Come in!" 
 
Korchagin entered and placed two filled out questionnaire blanks on the 
Secretary's desk. "What's this?" 
"It's an end to irresponsibility, Dad. And high time, if you ask me. If you are of the same 
opinion I would be grateful for your support." 
Tokarev glanced at the heading, looked up quickly at the young man, then picked up his 
pen.  Under  the  head:  "Party  standing  of  comrades  recommending  Pavel  Andreyevich 
Korchagin for  candidate  membership  in  the  Russian  Communist  Party  (Bolsheviks)"  he 
wrote "1903" with a firm hand, and signed his name. 
"There, my son. I know that you will never bring disgrace upon my old grey head." 
 
 
 
The room was suffocatingly hot. One thought was uppermost in everyone's mind: to get 
away to the cool shade of the chestnut trees of Solomenka as quickly as possible. 
"Wind  up,  Pavel,  I  can't  stand  another  minute  of  this,"  implored  Tsvetayev,  who  was 
sweating profusely. Katyusha and the others supported him. 
Pavel Korchagin closed the book and the study circle broke up. 
 
As  they  rose the  old-fashioned Ericson telephone  on the  wall jangled.  Tsvetayev,  who  answered 
its summons, had to shout to make himself heard above the clamour of voices in the room. 
 
He hung up the receiver and turned to Korchagin. 
 
"There are two diplomatic railway carriages down at the station belonging to the Polish 
consulate. Their lights are out, something's gone wrong with the wiring. The train leaves 
in an hour. Get some tools together and run down there, Pavel. It's urgent." 
The two sleepers gleaming with polished brass and plate glass stood at the first platform. 
The saloon-carriage with its wide windows  was brightly lit. But the neighbouring carriage 
was in darkness. 
Pavel  went  up  to  the  steps of  the  luxurious  carriage  and  gripped  the  handrail  with  the 
intention of entering the carriage. 
A figure hastily detached itself from the station wall and seized him by the 
shoulder. "Where are you going?" 
The  voice  was  familiar.  Pavel  turned and  took  in  the  leather  jacket,  broad -peaked  cap, 
the thin, hooked nose and the suspicious look in the eyes. 
It was Artyukhin. He had not recognised Pavel at first, but now his hand fell from Pavel's 
shoulder, and his grim features relaxed although his glance paused questioningly on the 
instrument case. 
"Where were you heading for?" he said in a less formal tone. 
 
Pavel briefly explained. Another figure appeared from behind the carriage. 
 
"Just  a  moment,  I'll  call  their  guard."  Several  people  in  expensive  travelling  clothes  were 
sitting in the saloon-carriage  when Korchagin entered  on the  heels of the guard. A woman sat 
with  her  back  to  the  door  at  a  table  covered  with  a  damask  cloth.  When  P avel  entered  she 
was chatting wit h a tall officer.  They stopped talking when the electrician appeared.  
 
第 180 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Korchagin made a rapid examination of the wiring which ran from the last lamp into the 
corridor, and finding it in order, left the carriage to continue his search for the damage. 
The stout, bull-necked guard, in a uniform resplendent with large brass butto ns bearing 
the Polish eagle, kept close at his heels. 
"Let's try the next carriage, everything is in order here. The trouble must be there." 
 
The guard turned the key in t he door and they passed into t he darkened corridor.  Training his 
torch  on  the  wiring  Pavel  soon  found  the  spot  where  the  short  circuit  had  occurred.  A  few 
minutes later the first lamp  went on in the corridor suffusing it with o paque light. 
 
"The  bulbs  inside  the  compartment  will  have  to  be  changed.  They  have  burned  out," 
Korchagin said to his guide. 
"In  that  case  I'll  have  to  call  the  lady,  she  has  the  key."  Not  wishing  to  leave  the 
electrician alone in the carriage, the guard bade him to follow. 
The  woman  entered  the  compartment  first,  Korchagin  followed.  The  guard  remained 
standing  in  the  doorway,  blocking  the  entrance.  Pavel  noted  the  two  elegant  leather 
travelling  bags,  a  silken  cloak  flung  carelessly  on  the  seat,  a  bottle  of  perfume  and a 
small  malachite  vanity  case  on  the  table  under  the  window.  The  woman  sat  down  in a 
corner of the couch, patted her fair hair and watched the electrician at work.  
"Will  madam  permit  me  to  leave for  a  moment?"  the  guard  said  obsequiously,  incl ining 
his bull neck with some difficulty. "The Major has asked for some cold beer." 
"You may go," replied the woman in an affected 
voice. The exchange had been in Polish. 
A  shaft  of  light  from  the  corridor  fell  on  the  woman's  shoulder.  Her  exquisite  gown  of  fine  silk 
made by the  best Paris dress designers left  her shoulders and arms bare.  In the lobe of each 
delicate  ear  a  diamond  drop  blazed  and  sparkled.  Korchagin  could  only  see  one  ivory  
shoulder  and  arm.  The  face  was  in  shadow.  Working  swiftly  with  his  screwdriver  Pavel 
changed  the  outlet  in  the  ceiling  and  a  moment  later  the  lights  went  on  in  the  compartment. 
Now he had only to examine the other bulb over the sofa  on which the woman sat.  
 
"I need to test that bulb," Korchagin said, pausing in front of h er. 
 
"Oh yes, I am in your way," the lady replied in perfect Russian. She rose lightly and stood 
close beside him. Now he had a full view of her. The arched eyebrows and the pursed, 
disdainful  lips  were  familiar. There  could  be  no  doubt  of  it:  it  was  Nelly  Leszczinskaya, 
the lawyer's daughter. She could not help noticing his look of astonishment. But though 
Pavel had recognised her, he had altered too much in these four years for her to realise 
that this electrician was her troublesome neighbour. 
 
With  a  frown  of  displeasure  at  his  surprised  stare,  she  went  over  to  the  door  of  the 
compartment  and  stood  there  tapping  the  heel  of  her  patent-leather  shoe  impatiently. 
Pavel turned his attention to the second bulb. He unscrewed it, raised it to the light and 
almost as much to his own surprise as hers he asked in Polish: 
"Is Victor here as well?" 
 
Pavel  had  not  turned  when  he  spoke.  He  did  not  see  Nelly's  face,  but  the  long  silence 
that followed his query bore testimony to her confusion. 
"Why, do you mean you know him?" 
 
"Yes, and very well too. We were neighbours, you know." Pavel turned to look at her. 
 
 
 
第 181 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
"You're . . . you're Pavel, the son. . . ." Nelly broke off in 
confusion. ". . .Of your cook," Korchagin came to her assistance. 
 
"But how you have grown! You were a wild youngster when I knew 
you." Nelly examined him coolly from head to foot. 
"Why  do  you  ask  about  Victor?  As  far  as  I  remember  you  and  he  were  not  exactly 
friends,"  she  said  in  her  cooing  voice.  This  unexpected  encounter  promised  to  be  a 
pleasant relief to her boredom. 
The screw swiftly sank into the wall. 
 
"There is a certain debt Victor hasn't paid yet. Tell him when you see him that I haven't 
lost hope of seeing it settled." 
"Tell me how much he owes you and I shall pay you on his account." 
 
She  knew  very  well  what  debt  Korchagin  had  in  mind.  She  knew  that  her  brother  had 
betrayed Pavel to the Petlyura men, but she could not resist the temptation to make fun 
of this "ragamuffin". 
Korchagin said nothing. 
 
"Tell me, is it true that our house has been looted and is now falling into decay? I daresay 
the summer house and the bushes have all been torn up," Nelly inquired wistfully. 
"The house is not yours any more, it is ours, and we are not likely to destroy our own 
property." Nelly gave a mocking little laugh. 
"Oh, I see you have been well schooled! Incidentally, this carriage belongs  to the Polish 
mission and here I am the mistress and you are the servant just as you always were. You 
see, you are working now to give me light so that I may lie comfortably on the sofa and 
read.  Your  mother  used  to  wash  clothes  for  us  and  you  used  to  car ry  water.  We  meet 
again under precisely the same circumstances." 
Her voice rang with malicious triumph. Scraping the insulation off the end of the wire with 
his penknife, Pavel gave her a look of undisguised contempt. 
"I  wouldn't  hammer  a  single rusty  nail for  you,  but  since  the  bourgeoisie  have  invented 
diplomats we can play the same game.  We don't cut off their heads, in fact we're even 
polite to them, which is more than can be said of yourself." 
Nelly's cheeks crimsoned. 
 
"What would you do with  me if you succeeded in taking Warsaw? I suppose you would 
make mincemeat out of me, or perhaps take me for your mistress?" 
She stood in the doorway in a graceful pose; her sensitive nostrils that were no strangers 
to cocaine quivered. The light went on over the sofa. Pavel straightened up. 
"You?  Who  would  bother  to  kill  the  likes  of  you!  You'll  croak  from  too  much  cocaine 
anyway. I'd sooner take a whore than the likes of you!" 
He picked up  his tool case  and strode to the  door. Nelly moved  aside to let him pass. He  was 
half-way down the corridor  when he heard the curse she spat after him: "Damned Bolshevik !"  
 
 
The following evening as he was on his way to the library Pavel met Katyusha Zelenova. 
She caught hold of his sleeve with her tiny hand and laughingly barred his path. 
"Where are you dashing off to, old politics-and-enlightenment?" 
 
第 182 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
"To the library, auntie, let me pass," Pavel replied in the same bantering tone. He took her 
gently by the shoulders and shifted her aside. Katyusha shook herself free and  walked along 
beside him. "Listen here, Pavel! You can't study all the time, you know. I'll tell you  what ― 
let's go to a party tonight. The crowd is meeting at  Zina Gladysh's. The girls keep asking me 
to bring you. But you never think of anything but political study nowadays. Don't you ever 
want to have some fun? It will do you good to miss your reading for once," Katyusha coaxed.  
 
"What sort of a party is it? What are we going to do there?" 
 
"What are we going to do!" Katyusha smilingly mocked him. "We're not going to say prayers, we're 
going to have a good time, that's all. You play the accordion, don't you? I've never heard you play! 
Do  come  and  play  for  us  this  evening,  won't  you?  Just  to  pleas e  me?  Zina's  uncle  has  an 
accordion  but  he  can't  play  for  anything.  The  girls  are  very  much  interested  about  you,  you  old 
bookworm.  Who  said  Komsomols  mustn't  enjoy  themselves?  Come  along,  before  I  get  sick  of 
persuading you or else we'll quarrel and then I shan't talk to you for a month." 
 
Katyusha  was  a  house  painter,  a  good  comrade  and  a  first-rate  Komsomol  member. 
Pavel did not want to hurt her feelings and so he agreed, although he felt awkward and 
out of place at such parties. 
A  noisy  crowd  of  young  people  had  gat hered  at  engine-driver  Giadysh's  home.  The  adults 
had  retired  to  another  room,  leaving  some  fifteen  lads  and  girls  in  possession  of  the  large 
living  room  and  porch  which  gave  onto  a  small  front  garden.  A  game  called  "feeding  the 
pigeons"  was  in  progress  when  Katyusha  led  Pavel  through  the  garden  into  the  porc h.  In  the 
middle  of the porch stood two chairs back to back. At a call from the hostess who  was leading 
the  game,  a  boy  and  a  girl  seated  themselves  on  the  chairs  with  their  backs  to  each  other, 
and  when she cried " Now feed the pigeons!" the couple leaned back until their lips met, much 
to  the  delight  of  the  onlookers.  After  that  they  played  "the  ring"  and  "postman's  knock",  both 
kissing  games,  although  in  "postman's  knock"  the  players  avoid ed  publicity  by  doing  their 
kissing  not  on  the  brightly  lit  porch  but  in  the  room  with  the  lights  out.  For  those  who  did  not 
care  for these two  games, there  was a pack of " flower  flirt" cards on a small  round table in the 
corner.  Pavel's  neighbour,  a  girl  of  about  sixteen  with  pale  blue  eyes  who  introduced  herself 
as Mura, handed him one of the cards with a coy glance and said softly:  
 
"Violet." 
 
A  few years  back Pavel  had  attended  parties  of this kind,  and  if  he  had  not  taken  a  direct  part  in 
the frivolities he had not thought them anything out of the ordinary. But now that he had broken for 
ever with petty-bourgeois small-town life, the party struck him as disgusting and silly. 
 
Yet  here he  was  with  the  "flower"  card  in his  hands.  Opposite  the  "violet"  he  read  the 
words: "I like you very much." 
Pavel looked up at the girl. She returned his look without a trace of 
embarrassment. "Why?" 
His question sounded rather flat. But Mura had her ans wer 
ready. "Rose," she murmured and handed him another card.  
 
The card with the "rose" bore the legend: 
 
"You are my ideal." Korchagin turned to the girl and making a conscious effort to soften 
his tone, asked: 
"Why do you go in for this nonsense?" 
 
第 183 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Mura was so taken aback that she did not know what to say. 
"Don't you like my message?" she said with a capricious pout. 
 
Pavel ignored the question. Yet he was curious to know more about her. He asked her a 
number of questions which she willingly answered. Within a few minutes he had learned 
that she attended secondary school, that her father worked at the repair shops and t hat 
she had known Pavel for a long time and had wanted to make his acquaintance. 
"What is your surname?" Pavel 
asked. "Volyntseva." 
"Your brother is secretary of the Komsomol cell at the yards, 
isn't he?" "Yes." 
Now it was clear to him that Volyntsev, one of the most active Komsomols in the district, 
was  allowing  his  own  sister  to grow  up an  ignorant  little  philistine.  She  and  her friends 
had  attended  innumerable  kissing  parties  like  this  in  the  past  year.  She  told  Pavel  she 
had seen him several times at her brother's place. 
Mura  felt  that  Pavel  did  not  approve  of  her.  Noticing  the  scornful  smile  on  his  face,  she  flatly 
refused  to  obey  the  summons  to  come  and  " feed  the  pigeons".  They  sat  talking  for  another 
few minut es while Mura told him more about herself. Presently Katyusha came  over to them.  
 
"Shall I bring you the accordion?" she asked, adding with a mischievous glance at Mura, 
"I see you've made friends?" 
Pavel  made  Katyusha  sit  down  beside  them,  and  taking  advantage  of  the  noise  and 
laughter around them, he said: 
"I'm not going to play. Mura and I are leaving." 
 
"Oho! So you've fallen for her, have you?" Katyusha teased. 
 
"That's right. Tell me, Katyusha, are there any other Komsomols here besides ourselves? 
Or are we the only 'pigeon fanciers'?" 
"They've stopped that nonsense," Katyusha said placatingly. "We're going to 
dance now." Korchagin rose. 
"All right, old girl, you can dance, but Mura and I are going." 
 
 
 
One evening Anna Borhart dropped in to Okunev's place and found Korchagin there alone.  
 
"Are you very busy, Pavel? Would you care to come with  me to the plenary session of 
the Town Soviet? I would rather not go alone, especially since we'll be returning la te." 
Korchagin  agreed  at  once.  He  was  about  to  take  the  Mauser  from  the  nail  over  his  bed,  but 
decided  it  was  too  heavy.  Instead  he  pulled  Okunev's  pistol  out  of  the  drawer  and  slipped  it 
into his pocket. He left a note for Okunev and put the key where his  room-mate would  find it. 
 
At the theatre where the plenum was being held they met Pankratov and Olga Yureneva. 
They all  sat  together  in  the hall  and  during  the  intermissions  strolled  in  a  group  on  the 
square. As Anna had expected, the meeting ended very late. 
"Perhaps  you'd  better  come  to  my  place  for  the  night?"  Olga  suggested.  "It's  late  and 
you've a long way to go." 
But Anna declined. "Pavel has agreed to see me home," she said. 
 
Pankratov and Olga set off down the main street and the other two took the road up the hill to 
 
 
 
第 184 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
Solomenka. 
 
It  was  a  dark,  stuffy  night.  The  city  was  asleep  as  the  young  people  made  their  way  through 
the  deserted  streets.  Gradually  the  sound  of  their  steps  and  voices  died  away.  Pavel  and 
Anna  walked at a  brisk pace  away from the cent re of the town. At the market  place t hey were 
stopped  by  a  patrol  who  examined  their  papers  and  let  them  pass.  They  crossed  the 
boulevard  and  came  out  onto  a  dark  silent  street  which  cut  across  a  vacant  lot.  Turning  left, 
they  continued  along  the  highway  parallel  to  the  main  railway  warehouses,  a  long  row  of 
gloomy  and 
forbidding  conc rete  buildings.  Anna  was  seized  by  a  vague 
feeling  of 
apprehension.  She  peered  anxiously  into  the  darkness,  giving  nervous  jerky  ans wers  to  her 
companion's questions. When  a sinister shadow turned  out to b e nothing more terrible than  a 
telephone  pole,  she  laughed  aloud  and  confided  her  nervousness  to  Pavel.  She  took  him  by 
the arm and the  pressure of his shoulder against hers reassured her.  
 
"I am only twenty-three but I'm as nervous as an old woman. If you think I' m a coward, 
you are mistaken. But somehow my nerves are all on edge tonight. With you here though 
I feel quite safe, and I'm really ashamed of my fears." 
And indeed Pavel's calmness, the warm  glow of his cigarette which for  an instant lit up part  of 
his  face,  revealing  the  courageous  sweep  of  his  brows  ―  all  this  drove  away  the  terrors 
evoked  by  the  dark  night,  the  loneliness  of  the  spot  and  the  story  they  had  just  heard  at  the 
meeting  about a horrible murder committed the night before  on the outsk irts of town.  
 
The  warehouses  were  left behind. They  crossed  the  plank  spanning  a  small  creek  and 
continued  along  the  main  road  to  the  tunnel  which  ran  under  the  railway  line  and 
connected this section of the town with the railway district. 
The station building was now far behind them to the right. A train was pulling into a siding 
beyond the engine-shed. They were already on home ground. Up above on the railway 
track the coloured lights of switches and semaphores twinkled in the darkness, an d over 
by the shed a shunting engine on its way home for the night sighed wearily. 
Above the mouth of the tunnel a street lamp hung from a rusty hook. The wind swayed it 
gently, causing its murky yellow light to dance on the tunnel walls. 
A  small  cottage  stood  solitary  by  the  side  of  the  highway  some  ten  yards  from  the  tunnel 
entrance.  Two years ago it had  been hit  by a heavy  shell  which  had burnt  out the interior  and 
badly damaged the  facade, so that it was now  one  huge  gaping  hole,  and it stood there like   a 
beggar on the roadside exhibiting its deformity. A train roared over the embankment above.  
 
"We're nearly home now," Anna said with a sigh of relief. 
 
Pavel  made  a  furtive  attempt  to  extricate  his  arm.  But  Anna  would not release  it.  They 
walked past the ruined house. 
Suddenly  something  crashed  behind  them.  There  was  a  sound  of running  feet,  hoarse 
breathing. They were overtaken. 
Korchagin jerked his arm but Anna, petrified with fear, clung wildly to it. And by the time 
he was able to tear it loose, it was too late; his neck was caught in an iron grip. Another 
moment and he was swung round to face his assailant. The hand crept up to his throat 
and, twisting his tunic collar until it all but choked him, held him facing the  muzzle of a 
revolver that slowly described an arc before his eyes. 
Pavel's fascinated eyes followed the arc with superhuman tension. Death stared at him through the 
 
 
 
第 185 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
muzzle of the revolver, and he had neither the strength nor the will to tear his eyes from 
that muzzle. He waited for the end. But his assailant did not fire, and Pavel's dilated eyes 
saw the bandit's face, saw the huge skull, the heavy jaw, the black shad ow of unshaven 
beard. But the eyes under the wide peak of the cap were invisible. 
Out  of the corner  of  his  eye Korchagin  had  one  brief  and stark  glimpse  of the chalk -white  face  of 
Anna whom one of the three dragged into the gaping hole in the wall at that moment. Twisting her 
arms cruelly he flung her onto the ground. Another shadow leapt towards them; Pavel only saw its 
reflection  on the tunnel  wall.  He  heard the scuffle  within  the  ruined  house  behind  him. Anna  was 
fighting  desperately;  her choking cry  broke  off  abruptly  as  a cap  was stuffed  against  her mouth. 
The large-skulled ruffian who had Korchagin at his mercy, was drawn to the scene of the rape like 
a beast to its prey. He was evidently the leader of the gang and the role of passive observer under 
the  circumstances  did  not suit  him.  This youngster  he  had covered  was  just  a  greenhorn,  looked 
like one of those "railway yard softies". Nothing to fear from a snotnose like him. Give him a couple 
of good knocks on the head and tell him to cut along over the field and he'd run all the way to town 
without looking back. He relaxed his hold. 
 
"All right you, hop it, clear out the way you came, but no squealin', mind, or you'll get a 
bullet in your neck." He pressed the barrel of the gun against Korchagin's forehead. "Hop 
it, now," he said in a hoarse whisper and lowered his gun to show that his  victim need not 
fear a bullet in the back. Korchagin staggered back and began to run sideways keeping 
his eyes on his assailant. The ruffian, thinking the youngster was still afraid that he would 
shoot, turned and made for the ruined house. 
 
Korchagin's hand flew to his pocket. If only he could be quick enough! He swung round, 
thrust his left hand forward, took swift aim and fired. 
The bandit realised his mistake too late. The bullet tore into his side before he had time 
to raise his hand. 
The  blow  sent  him  reeling  against  the  tunnel  wall  with  a  low  howl,  and  clawing  at  the  wall  he 
slowly  sank  to  the  ground.  A  shadow  slid  out  of  the  house  and  made  for  the  gully  below. 
Korchagin sent another bullet in pursuit. A second shadow bent double  dart ed toward the in ky 
depths  of the tunnel. A shot rang  out.  The dark shape, sprinkled  with the dust  from the  bullet -
shattered  concrete,  leapt  aside  and  vanished  into  the  blackness.  Once  again  the  Browning 
rent the night's stillness. Beside the wall the large-headed bandit writhed in his death agony. 
 
Korchagin  helped  Anna  to  her  feet.  Stunned  and  shaken,  she  stared  at  the  bandit's 
convulsions, unable to believe that she was safe. 
Korchagin dragged her away into the darkness back toward the town and away from the 
circle of light. As they ran toward the railway station, lights were already twinkling on the 
embankment near the tunnel and a rifle shot rang out on the track. 
 
 
By  the  time  they  reached  Anna's  flat,  on  Baty  Hill,  the  cocks  were  crowing.  Anna  lay 
down on the bed. Korchagin sat by the table, smoking a cigarette and watching the grey 
spiral of smoke floating upward. ... He had just killed for the fourth time in his life. 
Is  there such  a  thing  as  courage,  he  wondered. Something  that manifests  itself  always  in  its  most 
perfect form? Reliving all his sensations he admitted to himself that in those first few seconds with 
 
第 186 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
the black sinister eye of the gun muzzle upon him fear had laid its icy grip on his heart. And was it 
only  because  of  his  weak  eyesight  and  the  fact  that  he  had  had  to  shoot  with  his  left  hand  that 
those two shadows had been able to escape? No. At the dist ance of a few paces his bullets would 
have  found their mark, but tension and haste, sure signs of nervousness, had made him waver.  
 
The light from the table lamp fell on his face. Anna studied his features anxiously. But his 
eyes were calm; only the knitted brow showed that he was deep in thought. 
"What are you thinking about, Pavel?" 
 
His thoughts, startled by the sudden question, floated away like smoke beyond the circle 
of light, and he said the first thing that came into his head: 
"I must go over to the Commandant's Office. This business must be reported 
at once." He rose with reluctance, conscious of a great weariness. 
She clung to his hand for she shrank from being left alone. Then she saw him to the door 
and stood on the threshold until he had vanished into the night. 
Korchagin's  report  cleared  up  the  mystery  of  the  murder  that  had  puzzled  the  railway 
guards. The  body  was  identified  at  once as  that  of  a notorious  criminal  named  Fimka 
Death-Skull, a murderer and bandit with a long prison record. 
The next day everybody was talking about the incident by the tunnel. As it happened that 
incident was the cause of an unexpected clash between Pavel and Tsvetayev. 
Tsvetayev came into the workshop in the middle of the shift and asked Korchagin to step 
outside. He led the way in silence to a remote corner of the corridor. He was extremely 
agitated, and did not seem to know how to begin. At last he blurted out: 
"Tell me  what happened 
yesterday." "I thought you knew?"  
 
Ts vetayev jerked  his shoulders uneasily. Pavel  was unaware that the t unnel incident  affected 
Ts vetayev more k eenly than the others. He did not know that,  for all  his out ward indifference, 
the blacksmith had formed a  deep attachment for Anna Borhart. He  was not the only one  who 
was  attracted  to  her,  but  he  was  seriously  smitten.  Lagutina  had  just  told  him  what  had 
happened t he  night  before  at the tunnel and he  was now tormented by one  question that  had 
remained unans wered.  He could not put the question bluntly to Pavel, yet he had to know the 
answer.  His  better  self  told  him  that  his  fears  were  selfish  and  base,  yet  in  the  conflict  of 
emotions that seethed  within him the savage and primitive prevailed.  
 
"Listen,  Korchagin,"  he  said  hoarsely.  "This  is  strictly  between  ourselves.  I  know  you 
don't want to talk about it for Anna's sake, but you can surely trust me. Tell me this, while 
that bandit had you covered did the others rape Anna?" 
He lowered his eyes in confusion before he finished speaking. 
 
Dimly  Korchagin  began  to  see  what  was  in  his  mind.  "If  he  cared  nothing  for  Anna  he 
would not be so upset. But if Anna is dear to him, then...." And Pavel burned at the insult 
to Anna the question implied. 
"Why do you ask?" 
 
Tsvetayev  mumbled  something  incoherent.  He  felt  that  Pavel  understood  what  was  in 
question and he lost his temper: 
"Don't beat about the bush. All I want is a straight 
answer." "Do you love Anna?" 
 
第 187 页 共 259 页  
 
 
 
There was a long silence. At last Tsvetayev forced out: "Yes." 
 
Korchagin,  suppressing  his  anger  with  an  effort,  turned  and  strode  down  the  corridor 
without looking back. 
 
 
One night Okunev, who had been hovering uncertainly around his friend's bed for some 
time, finally sat down on the edge and laid his hand on the book Pavel was reading. 
"Listen,  Pavel,  there's  something  I've  got  to  get  off  my  chest.  On  the  one  hand,  it  mightn't 
seem  important,  but  on  the  other,  it's  quit e  the  revers e.  There's  been  a  misu nderstanding 
between  me  and  Talya  Lagutina.  You  see,  at  first,  I  liked  her  quite  a  bit."  Okunev  scratched 
his head sheepishly, but seeing  no sign  of laughter on his friend's  face, he took courage. "But 
then,  Talya  ..  .  well,  you  know.  All  right,  I  won't  gi ve  y ou  all  the  details,  you  know  how  it  is. 
Yesterday she and  I  decided to  hitch up and see how it works out.  I'm t wenty -two,  we're bot h 
of age. We want to live together on an equality basis. What do you think?"  
 
Korchagin pondered the question. 
 
"What  can  I  say,  Kolya?  You  are  both  friends  of  mine,  we're  all  members  of  the  same  clan, 
and  we have everything else in common.  Talya's a  very nice girl. It's all plain sailing."  
 
The next day Korchagin moved over to the  workers'  hostel, and a  few days later Anna  gave  a 
party,  a  modest  Communist  party  without  food  and  drink,  in  honour  of  Talya  and  Nikolai.  It 
was  an  evening  of  reminiscences,  and  readings  of  excerpts  from  favourite  books.  They  sang 
many  songs  and  sang  them  well;  the  rousing  melodies  ec hoed  far  and  wide.  Later  on, 
Katyusha  Zelenova  and  Volyntseva  brought  an  accordion,  and  the  rich  rolling  basses  and 
silvery cadences filled the  room. That evening P avel played even better than  usual, and when 
to everyone's delight the  hulking P ankratov flung himself into the dance, Pavel  forgot the  new 
melancholy style he had adopt ed and played with  his old abandon.  
 
When Denikin gets to know 
 
Of old Kolchak's overthrow, 
 
Oh, how crazy he will go!  
 
The  accordion  sang  of  the  past,  of  the  years  of  storm  and  stress  and  of  today's  friends hip, 
struggles  and  joys.  But  when  the  instrument  was  handed  over  to  V olyntsev  and  the  whirling 
rhythm  of  the  "Yablochko"  dance  rang  out,  Korchagin  surprised  everyone  by  breaking  into  a 
wild tap dance ― the third and last time he was to dance in his life.  
 
 
 
 
Chapter Four 
 
This  is the  frontier ― two  posts  facing  one  another  in  silent  hostility,  each  standing  for  a  world  of 
its  own.  One  of  them  is  planed  and  polished  and  painted  black  and  white like  a  police  box,  and 
topped  by  a  single-headed  eagle  nailed  in  place  with  sturdy  spikes.  Wings  outspread,  claws 
gripping the striped pole, hooked beak outstretched, the bird of prey stares with malicious eyes at 
 
第 188 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
the cast-iron shield with the sickle-and-hammer emblem on the opposite pole ― a sturdy, 
round, rough-hewn oak post planted firmly in the ground. The two poles stand six paces 
apart on  level ground,  yet  there  is  a  deep  gulf  between  them  and  the  two  worlds  they 
stand for. To try to cross this no man's land means risking one's life. 
This is the frontier. 
 
From the Black Sea  over  thousands  of kilometres to the Arctic  Ocean  in  the  Far  North  stands  the 
motionless line of these silent sentinels of the Soviet Socialist Republics bearing the great emblem 
of  labour  on  their  iron shields.  The  post  with the  rapacious  bird marks  the  beginning  of  the  border 
between  Soviet  Ukraine  and  bourgeois  Poland.  It  stands  ten  kilometres  from  the  small  town  of 
Berezdov  tucked  away in the  Ukrainian  hinterland,  and  opposite  it is  the  Polish  townlet  of  Korets. 
From Slavuta to Anapol the border area is guarded by a Frontier Guard battalion. 
 
The  frontier  posts  march  across  the  snowbound  fields,  push  through  clearings  cut  in  forests, 
plunge  down  valleys  and,  heaving  themselves  up  hillsides,  disappear  behind  the  crests  only 
to pause on the high bank of a  river to survey the  wintry plains of an alien land. 
 
It  is  biting  cold,  one  of  those  days  when  the  frost  makes  the  snow  crunch  under  the  soles  of 
felt  boots.  A  giant  of  a  Red  Army  man  in  a  helmet  fit  for  the  titans  of  old  moves  away  from  a 
post  with  the  sickle-and-hammer  shield  and  with  heavy  tread  sets  out  on  his  beat.  He  is 
wearing a  grey greatcoat with  green tabs on the collar, and  felt boots. On top  of t he greatcoat 
he  has  a  sheepskin  coat  reaching  down  to  his  heels  with  a  collar  of  generous  proportions  to 
match  ―  a  coat  that  will  keep  a  man  warm  in  the  cruellest  blizzard.  On  his  head  he  wears  a 
cloth  helmet  and  his  hands  are  enc ased  in  sheepskin  mittens.  His  rifle  is  slung  on  his 
shoulder, and as he proceeds along the sentry path, the  tail of his long coat  wearing a groove 
in  the  snow,  he  pulls  at  a  cigarette  of  home -grown  tobacco  with  obvious  relish.  On  open 
stretches the Soviet border  guards are  posted  a kilometre apart so that each  man can always 
see his neighbour. On the Polish side there are two sentries to the kilometre.  
 
A  Polish  infant ryman  plods  along  his  sentry  path  toward  t he  Red  Army  man.  He  is  wearing 
rough  army  issue  boots,  a  greenish  grey  uniform  and  on  top  a  black  coat  with  two  rows  of 
shining  buttons.  On  his  head  he  has  the  square-topped  uniform  cap  with  the  white  eagle 
emblem;  there  are  more  white  eagles  on  his  cloth  shoulder  straps  and  the  collar  tabs,  but 
they  do  not  make  him  feel  any  warmer.  The  frost  has  chilled  him  to  the  marrow,  and  he  rubs 
his  numb  ears  and  knocks  his  heels  together  as  he  walks,  while  his  hands  in  the  thin  gloves 
are  stiff  with  cold.  The  Pole  cannot  risk  stopping  his  pacing  for  a  moment,  and  sometimes  he 
trots,  for  otherwise  the  frost  would  stiffen  his  joints  in  a  moment.  When  the  two  sentries  draw 
together, the zolnierz turns around to walk alongside the  Red Army man.  
 
Conversation on the  frontier is forbidden, but when there is no one around within a kilometre 
― who can tell whether the two are patrolling their sectors in silence or  violating inte rnational 
laws. The Pole  wants a smoke  very badly, but he has forgotten his matches in the barracks, 
and the breeze wafts over  from the Soviet side the tantalising  fragrance of tobacco. The Pole 
stops rubbing his ear and glances back over his shoulder, for who knows when the capt ain, or 
maybe Pan the lieutenant, might pop up from behind a knoll  with a mounted  patrol on one of 
their eternal inspection rounds. But he sees nothing save the dazzling whiteness of the snow 
in the sun. In the sky there is not so much as a fleck of a cloud. 
 
"Got a light, Comrade?"  The Pole is the first to  violate the sanctity of the law. And shifting his  
 
 
 
第 189 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
French  magazine  rifle  with  the  sword  bayonet  back  on  his  shoulder  he  laboriously 
extracts with stiff fingers a packet of cheap cigarettes from the depths of his coat pocket, 
The  Red  Army  man  hears  him,  but  the  frontier  service  regulations  forbid  conversati on  across 
the border. Besides, he could  not quite catch what the soldier  wanted to say. So he continues 
on his way, firmly treading down on the crunching snow with  his warm, soft felt boots.  
 
"Comrade Bolshevik, got a light? Maybe you'll throw a box of matches across?" This time 
the Pole speaks Russian. 
The  Red  Army  man  looks  closely  at  his  neighbour.  "The  frost  has  nipped  the  Pan  good  and 
proper," he says to himself. "The poor beggar may be a bourgeois soldier but he's got a dog's life. 
Imagine  being  chased  out  into this cold  in  that miserable  outfit,  no  wonder  he  jumps  about  like a 
rabbit, and without smoke either." Not turning around, the Red Army man throws a box of matches 
across to  the  other.  The  soldier  catches it  on  the  fly,  and  getting  his cigarette  going  after several 
unsuccessful attempts, promptly sends the box back across the border. 
 
"Keep it. I've got some more," says the Red frontier guard, forgetting 
the rules. From beyond the frontier comes the response: 
"Thanks, I'd better not. If they found that box on me I'd get a couple of years in jail." 
 
The Red Army man examines the match box. On the label is an airplane with a sinewy 
fist instead of a propeller and the word "Ultimatum".  
"Right enough, it won't do for them." 
 
The soldier continues to walk, keeping pace with the Red Army man. He does not like to 
be alone in the midst of this deserted field. 
 
 
The  saddles  creaked  rhythmically  as  the  horses  trotted  along  at  an  even,  soothing  pace,  their 
breath congealing into momentary plumes of white vapour in the frosty air. A hoary rime stood out 
around  the  nostrils  of  the  black  stallion.  Stepping  gracefully,  her  fine  neck  arched,  the  Battalion 
Commander's dappled mare was playing with her bit. Both horsemen wore army greatcoats  belted 
in  at  the  waist  and  with three  red  squares  on the  sleeves;  the  only  difference  was  that  Battalion 
Commander Gavrilov's collar tabs were green, while his companion's were red. 
 
Gavrilov was with the Frontier Guards; it was his battalion that manned  the frontier posts 
on  this  seventy-kilometre  stretch,  he  was  the  man  in  charge  of  this  frontier  belt.  His 
companion  was  a  visitor  from  Berezdov  ―  Battalion  Commissar  Korchagin  of  the 
universal military training system. 
It had snowed during the night and now the snow lay white and fluffy, untouched by either man or beast. 
The two men cantered out from the woods and were about to cross an open stretch some forty paces 
from  border  posts  when  Gavrilov  suddenly  reined  in  his  horse.  Korchagin  wheeled  around  to  see 
Gavrilov  leaning  over  from  his  saddle  and  inspecting  a  curious  trail  in  the  snow  that  looked  as  if 
someone  had  been  running  a  tiny  cogwheel over  the  surface.  Some  cunning  little  beast  had  passed 
here leaving behind the intricate, confusing pattern. It wa s hard to make out which way the creature had 
been travelling, but it was not this that caused the Battalion Commander to halt. Two paces away lay 
another trail under a powdery sprinkling of snow ― the footsteps of a man. There was nothing uncertain 
about these footprints ― they led straight toward the woods, and there was not the slightest doubt that 
the intruder had come from the Polish side. The Battalion 
 
第 190 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Commander urged on his horse and followed the tracks to the sentry path. The footprints 
showed distinctly for a dozen paces or so on the Polish side. 
"Somebody crossed the border last night," muttered the Battalion Commander. "The third 
platoon  has been  napping again  ―  no  mention  of  it  in  the  morning  report!" Gavrilov's 
greying moustache silvered by his congealed breath hung grimly over his lip. 
In  the  distance  two  figures  were  approaching  ―  one  a  slight  man  garbed  in  black  and 
with  the  blade  of  a French  bayonet  gleaming  in  the  sun,  the  other  a  giant  in  a  yellow 
sheepskin coat. The dappled mare responded to a jab in her flanks and briskly the two 
riders bore down on the approaching pair. As they came, the Red Army man hitched up 
the rifle on his shoulder and spat out the butt of his cigarette into the snow. 
"Hullo,  Comrade.  How's  everything  on your  sector?"  The  Battalion  Commander  stretched  out  his 
hand  to the  Red Army man,  who  hurriedly  removed  a  mitt to  return the  handclasp. So  tall  was  the 
frontier guard that the Commander hardly had to bend forward in his saddle to reach him. 
 
The  Pole  looked  on  from  a  distance.  Here  were  t wo  Red  officers  greeting  a  soldier  as  they 
would a close  friend. For a moment he pictured himself shaking hands with Major  Zakrzewski, 
but the  very thought was so shocking that he glanced  furtively over his shoulder.  
 
"Just look over, Comrade Battalion Commander," reported the Red 
Army man. "Seen the track over there?" 
"No, not yet." 
 
"Who was on duty here from two to six at night?" 
"Surotenko, Comrade Battalion Commander." "All 
right, but keep your eyes open." 
 
As the Commander was about to ride on he added a stern word of 
warning: "And you'd better keep away from those fellows." 
"You  have  to  keep  your  eyes  open  on  the  border,"  the  Commander  said  to  his  companion  as 
their  horses  cantered  along  the  broad  road  leading  from  the  frontier  to  Berezdov.  "The 
slightest  slip  can  cost  you  dearly.  Can't  afford  to  take  a  nap  on  a  job  like  ours .  In  broad 
daylight it's not so easy to skip the border, but at night we've  got to be on the alert. Now judge 
for  yourself,  Comrade  Korchagin.  On  my  sector  the  frontier  cuts  right  through  four  villages, 
which complicates things considerably. No matter how  close you  place your  guards you'll  find 
all  the  relatives  from  the  one  side  of  the  line  attending  every  wedding  or  feast  held  on  the 
other.  A nd  no  wonder  ―  it's  only  a  couple  of  dozen  paces  from  cottage  t o  cottage  and  the 
creek's  shallow  enough  for  a  chicken  to  wade  across.  And  there's  some  smuggling  being 
done, too.  True, much of it on a  petty scale ― an old woman carting ac ross a bottle or two  of 
Polish  vodka  and  that  sort  of  thing.  But  there  is  quite  a  bit  of  large-scale  contraband  traffic  ― 
people  with  big  money  to  operate  with.  Have  you  heard  that  the  Poles  have  opened  shops  in 
all the border  villages where you can get practically everything you  want?  Those shops aren't 
intended  for their own pauperised peasants, you may be sure." 
 
As  he  listened  to  the  Battalion  Commander,  Korchagin  reflected  that  life  on  the  border 
must resemble an endless scouting mission. 
"Probably  there's  something  more  serious  than  smuggling going on.  What  do  you  say, 
Comrade Gavrilov?" 
"That's just the trouble," the Battalion Commander replied gloomily. 
 
第 191 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Berezdov  was  a  small  backwoods  town  that  had  been  within the  Jewish  pale  of  residence.  It  had 
two  or  three  hundred  small  houses  scattered  haphazardly,  and  a  huge  market  square  with  a 
couple  of  dozen  shops  in the middle.  The square  was  filthy  with  manure. A round the town  proper 
were the peasant huts. In the Jewish central section, on the road to the slaughter house, stood an 
old  synagogue  ―  a  rickety,  depressing  building.  Although  the  synagogue  still  drew  crowds  on 
Saturdays, its heyday had gone, and the rabbi lived a life that was by no means to his liking. What 
happened  in  1917 must  have  been  evil  indeed  if  even  in  this  Godforsaken corner  the youngsters 
no  longer  accorded  him  the  respect  due  his  position.  True, the  old  folk  would  still  eat  only kosher 
food,  but  how  many  of the  youngsters  indulged  in the  pork sausage  which  God  had cursed.  The 
very  thought  was  revolting!  And  Rabbi  Borukh in  a  fit  of  temper  kicked  viciously  at  a  pig that  was 
assiduously  digging in  a  heap  of  manure  in  search  of  something  edible.   The  rabbi  was  not  at  all 
pleased that  Berezdov  had  been made  a  district centre,  nor  did  he  approve  of  these  Communists 
who had descended on the place from the devil knows where and were now turning things upside 
down. Each  day  brought  some  fresh  unpleasantness. Yesterday,  for instance,  he  had seen  a  new 
sign  over  the  gate  of  the  priest's  house: "Berezdov  District  Committee,  Young  Communist  League 
of the Ukraine," it had read. 
 
To  expect  this  sign  to  augur  anything  but  ill  would  be  useless,  mused  the  rabbi.  So 
engrossed was he in his thoughts that he did not notice the small announcement pasted 
on the door of his synagogue before he actually bumped into it. 
A  public  meeting  of  working  youth  will  be  held  today at  the  club. The  speakers  will  be 
Lisitsyn, Chairman of the Executive Committee, and Korchagin, Acting Secretary of the 
Komsomol District Committee. After the meeting a concert will be given by the pupils of 
the nine-year school. 
 
In a fury the rabbi tore down the sheet of paper. The struggle had begun. 
 
In  the  centre  of  a  large  garden  adjoining  the  local  church  stood  an  old  house  that  had  once 
belonged  to the  priest.  A  deadly  air  of  boredom  filled the  musty  emptiness  of the  rooms  in  which 
the  priest  and  his  wife  had lived,  two  people  as  old  and  as  dull  as  the  house itself  and  long  bored 
with one another. The dreariness was swept away as soon as the new masters of the place moved 
in. The big hall in which the former pious residents had entertained guests only on church holidays 
was  now  always  full  of  people,  for  the  house  was  the  headquarters  of  the  Berezdov  Communist 
Party  Committee.  On the  door  leading  into  a small  room  to the  right  just  inside the  front  hall  the 
words "Komsomol  District  Committee"  had  been  written  in chalk.  Here Korchagin spent  part  of  his 
working day. Besides being Military Commissar of the Second Universal Military Training Battalion 
he was also Acting Secretary of the newly-organised Komsomol District Committee. 
 
Eight months had passed since that gathering at Anna's, yet it seemed tha t it had been 
only  yesterday.  Korchagin  pushed  the  stack  of  papers  aside,  and  leaning  back  in  his 
chair gave himself up to his thoughts. ... 
The house was still. It was late at night and the Party Committee office was deserted. Trofimov,  
 
 
 
第 192 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
the  Committee's  Secret ary,  had  gone  home  some  time  ago,  leaving  K orchagin  alone  in  the 
building.  Frost  had  woven  a  fantastic  pattern  on  the  window,  but  the  room  was  warm.  A 
paraffin  lamp  was  burning  on  the  table.  Korchagin  recalled  the  rec ent  past.  He  remembered 
how  in  August  the  shop  Komsomol  organisation  had  sent  him  as  a  youth  organiser  wit h  a 
repair  train  to  Yekaterinoslav.  Until  late  autumn  he  had  travelled  with  the  train's  crew  of  a 
hundred  and  fifty  from  station  to  station  bringing  order  into  the  chaotic  aftermath  of  war, 
repairing  damage  and  clearing  away  the  remnants  of  smashed  and  burnt -out  railway 
carriages.  Their  route  took  them  from  Sinelnikovo  to  Polog,  through  country  where  t he  bandit 
Makhno  had once operated leaving behind him  a trail of  wreckage  and wanton destruction. In 
Gulyai-P olye  a  whole  week  went  into  repairing  the  brick  structure  of  the  water  tower  and 
patching  the  sides  of  the  dynamited  wat er  tank  with  iron  sheets.  Though  lacking  the  skill  of  a 
fitter and unaccustomed to the heavy work, Pavel wielded a  wrench along  with the others and 
tightened more thousands of rusty bolts than he could  remember.  
 
Late in the autumn the train returned home and the railway shops again  were the richer 
for a hundred and fifty pairs of hands. . . . 
Pavel  was  now  a  more  frequent  visitor  at  Anna's  place.  The  crease  on  his  forehead 
smoothed out and his infectious laughter could again be heard. 
Once again the grimy-faced fraternity from the railway shops gathered to hear him talk of 
bygone  years  of  struggle,  of  the  attempts  made  by  rebellious  but  enslaved  peasant 
Russia  to  overthrow  the  crowned  monster  that  sat  heavily  on  her  shoulders,  of  the 
insurrections of Stepan Razin and Pugachov. 
One evening at Anna's, when even more young people than usual had gathered there, 
Pavel  announced  that  he  was  going  to  give  up  smoking,  which  unhealthy  habit  he  had 
acquired at an early age. 
"I'm not smoking any more," he declared firmly. 
 
It all came about unexpectedly. One of the young people present had said that habit  ― 
smoking,  for  instance  ―  was  stronger  than  will  power.  Opinions  were  divided.  At  first 
Pavel said nothing, but drawn in by Talya, he finally joined the debate. 
"Man governs his habits, and not the other way round. Otherwise what would we get?"  
 
"Sounds fine, doesn't it?" Tsvetayev  put in from his corner. "Korchagin likes to talk big. 
But why doesn't he apply his wisdom to himself? He smokes, doesn't he? He knows it's a 
rotten habit. Of course he does. But he isn't man enough to drop it." Then, changing his 
tone, Tsvetayev went on with a cold sneer: "He was busy 'spreading culture' in the study 
circles not so long ago. But did this prevent him from using foul language? Anyone who 
knows Pavel will tell you that he doesn't swear very often, but when he does he certainly 
lets himself go. It's much easier to lecture others than to be virtuous yourself." 
 
There was a strained silence. The sharpness of Tsvetayev's tone had laid a chill on the 
gathering.  Korchagin  did  not  reply  at  once.  Slowly  he  removed  the  cigarette  from 
between his lips and said quietly: 
"I'm not smoking any more." 
Then, after a pause, he added: 
 
"I'm doing this more for myself than  for  Dimka. A man who can't break himself of  a bad habit 
isn't worth anything. That leaves only the swearing to be taken care of. I know I haven 't quite 
 
 
第 193 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
overcome that shameful habit, but even Dimka admits that he doesn't hear me curse very 
often. It's harder to stop a foul word from slipping out than to stop smok ing, so I can't say 
at the moment that I've finished with that too. But I will." 
 
 
Just before the frosts set in, rafts of firewood drifting down the river jammed the channel. Then the 
autumn  floods  broke  them  up  and  the much-needed  fuel  was swept  away  by  the  rushing  waters. 
And again Solomenka sent its people to the rescue, this time to save the precious wood. 
 
Unwilling to drop behind the others, Korchagin concealed the fact that he had caught a 
bad chill until a week later, when the wood had been piled high on shore. The icy water 
and the chill dankness of autumn had awakened the enemy lurking in his blood and he 
came  down  with  a  high  fever.  For  two  weeks  acute  rheumatism  racked  his  body,  and 
when  he  returned from  hospital, he  was  able  to  work  at  the  vice only by  straddling  the 
bench.  The  foreman  would  look  at  him  and  shake  his  head  sad ly.  A  few  days  later  a 
medical  board  declared  him  unfit  for  work  and  he  was  given  his  discharge  pay  and 
papers certifying his right to a pension. This, however, he indignantly refused to accept. 
 
With  a  heavy  heart  he  left  the  shops.  He  moved  about  slowly,   leaning  on  his  stick,  but  every 
step caused excruciating pain.  There  were several letters from  his mother asking him to come 
home  for a  visit, and each time he thought of her, her parting  words came back to his mind:  
 
"I never see you unless you're crippled!" 
 
At  the  Gubernia  Committee  he  was  handed  his  Komsomol  and  Party  registration  cards  and, 
with as few leave-takings as possible, he left town bound for home. For two weeks his mother 
steamed  and  massaged  his  swollen  legs,  and  a  month  later  to  his  great  joy  he  was  able  t o 
walk without the cane. Once again sunlight pierced the gloom. Before long he was back in the 
gubernia cent re; three days there and the  Organisational  Department sent him to the  regional 
military commissariat to be used as a political worker in  a military training unit. 
 
Another  week  passed  and  Pavel  arrived  in  a  small  snowbound  town  as  Military 
Commissar  assigned  to  Battalion  Two.  The  Regional  Committee  of  the  Komsomol  too 
gave him an assignment: to rally the scattered Komsomol members in  the locality and set 
up a youth league organisation in the district. Thus life got into a new stride. 
 
 
Outside  it  was  stifling  hot.  The  branch  of  a  cherry-tree  peeped  in  through  the  open 
window of the Executive Committee Chairman's office. Across the way the gilded cross 
atop the gothic belfry of the Polish church blazed in the sun. And in the yard in front of 
the  window  tiny  downy  goslings  as  green  as  the  grass  around  ―  the  property  of  the 
caretaker of the Executive Committee premises ― were busily searching for food. 
The Chairman of the Executive Committee read the dispatch he had just received to the 
end. A shadow flitted across his face, and a huge gnarled hand strayed into his luxurious 
crop of hair and paused there. 
Nikolai  Nikolayevich  Lisitsyn,  the  Chairman  of  the  Berezdov  Executive  Committee,  was  only 
twenty-four, but none of the members of his staff and the local Party workers would have believed 
it. A big, strong man, stern and often formidable in appearance, he looked at least thirty -five. He 
 
第 194 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
had a powerful physique, a big head firmly planted on a thick neck, piercing brown eyes, 
and  a  strong,  energetic  jaw.  He  wore  blue  breeches  and  a  grey  tunic,  somewhat  the 
worse for wear, with the Order of the Red Banner over the left breast pocket. 
Like his father and grandfather before him Lisitsyn had been a metalworker almost from 
childhood,  and  before  the  October  Revolution  he  had  "commanded"  a  lathe  at  a  Tula 
munitions plant. 
Beginning  with  that  autumn  night  when  the  Tula  gunsmith  shouldered  a  rifle  and  went  out  to 
fight for the workers ' power, he had been caught up in the whirlwind of  events. The Revolution 
and the Party sent Lisitsyn from one tight spot to another along a glorious path that witnessed 
his rise from rank-and-file  Red Army man to regimental commander and commissar.  
 
The fire of battle and the thunder of guns had receded into the past. Nikolai Lisitsyn was 
now  working  in  a  frontier  district.  Life  went  on  at  a  quiet  measured  pace,  and  the 
Executive  Committee  Chairman  sat  in  his  office  until  late  night  after night  poring   over 
harvest reports.  The  dispatch  he  was  now  studying,  however,  momentarily  revived  the 
recent past. It was a warning couched in terse telegraphic language: 
 
"Strictly confidential. To Lisitsyn, Chairman of the Berezdov Executive Committee.  
 
"Marked  activity  has  been  observed  latterly  on  the  border  where  the  Poles  have  been  trying  to 
send  across  a  large  band  to terrorise  the  frontier  districts.  Take  precautions. Suggest  everything 
valuable at the Finance Department, including collected taxes, be transferred to area centre." 
 
From  his  window  Lisitsyn  could  see  everyone  who  entered  the  District  Executive 
Committee  building.  Looking  up  he  caught  sight  of  Pavel  Korchagin  on  the  steps.  A 
moment later there was a knock on the door. 
"Sit down, I've got something to tell you," Lisitsyn said, returning Pavel's 
handshake. For a whole hour the two were closeted in the office. 
By the time Korchagin emerged from the office it was noon. As he stepped out, Lisitsyn's 
little sister, Anyutka, a timid child far too serious for her years, ran toward him from the 
garden. She always had a warm smile for Korchagin and now too she greeted him shyly, 
tossing a stray lock of her cropped hair back from her forehead. 
"Is Kolya busy?" she asked. "Maria Mikhailovna has had his dinner re ady for a 
long time." "Go right in, Anyutka, he's alone." 
Long  before  dawn  the  next  morning  three  carts  harnessed to  well-fed  horses  pulled  up  in  front  of 
the  Executive  Committee.  The  men  who came  with  them  exchanged  a  few  words  in  undertones, 
and  several  sealed  sacks  were  then carried  out  of  the  Finance  Department.  These  were  loaded 
into the  carts  and  a  few minutes  later  the  rumble  of  wheels  receded  down  the  highway.  The carts 
were convoyed by a detail under Korchagin's command. The forty -kilometre journey to the regional 
centre  (twenty-five  of  them  through  forests)  was  made  without  mishap  and  the  valuables  safely 
deposited in the vaults of the Regional Finance Department. 
 
Some days later a cavalryman galloped into B erezdov from t he direction  of t he  frontier. As he 
passed through the streets he was followed by the wondering stares of the local idlers.  
 
At the  gates  of the  Executive  Committee the  rider  leapt  to the  ground,  and, supporting  his sabre 
with one hand, stamped up the front stairs in his heavy boots. Lisitsyn took the packet with a 
 
第 195 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
worried  frown.  A  few  minutes  later,  the  messenger  was  galloping  back  in  the direction 
whence he had come. 
No  one  but  the  Chairman  of  the  Executive  Committee  knew  the  contents  of  the  dispatch.  But 
such  news  had  a  way  of  getting  round,  especially  among  the  local  shopkeepers  many  of 
whom were smugglers in a small way and had almost an instinct for sensing danger.  
 
Two men  walked briskly along the pavement leading to the headquarters of the Military 
Training Battalion. One of them was Pavel Korchagin. Him the watchers knew; he always 
carried a gun. But the fact that his companion, the Party Committee Secretary Trofimov, 
had strapped on a revolver looked ominous. 
Several  minutes  later  a  dozen men  ran  out  of  the  headquarters carrying  rifles  with  bayonets  fixed 
and  marched  briskly  to the mill standing  at the crossroads.  The  rest  of the  local  Communist Party 
and Komsomol members were being issued arms at the Party Committee offices. The Chairman of 
the  Executive  Committee  galloped  past,  wearing  a  Cossack  cap  and  the  customary  Mauser. 
Something  was  obviously  afoot.  The main square  and sidestreets  grew  deserted.  Not  a  soul  was 
in  sight.  In  a  flash  huge  medieval  padlocks  appeared  on  the  doors  of the tiny shops  and shutters 
boarded windows. Only the fearless hens and hogs continued to rummage among piles of refuse. 
 
The pickets  took  cover  in  the  gardens  at  the  edge  of  the  town  where  they  had  a  good 
view of the open fields and the straight road reaching into the distance. 
The dispatch received by Lisitsyn had been brief: 
 
"A  mounted  band  of  about  one  hundred  men  with  two  light  machine-guns  broke  through  to 
Soviet territory aft er a  fight in the area  of P oddubtsy last night.  Take  precautionary measures. 
The  trail  of  the  band  has  been  lost  in  the  Slavuta  woods.  A  Red  Cossack company  has  been 
sent  in  pursuit  of  the  band.  The  company  will  pass  through  Berezdov  during  the  day.  Do  not 
mistake them for the enemy. Gavrilov, Commander, Detached Frontier Battalion.  
 
No  more  than  an  hour  had  passed  when  a  rider  appeared  on  t he  road  leading  to  the  town, 
followed  by  a  group  of  horsemen  moving  about  a  kilometre  behind.  Korchagin's  keen  eyes 
followed  their  movements.  The  lone  rider  was  a  young  Red  Army  man  from  the  Seventh  Red 
Cossack  Regiment,  a  novice  at  rec onnaissance,  and  hence,  though  he  picked  his  way 
cautiously enough, he  failed to spot the pickets ambushed in the roadside gardens. Before he  
knew  it  he  was  surrounded  by  armed  men  who  poured  onto  the  road  from  the  greenery,  and 
when  he  saw  the  Komsomol  emblem  on  their  tunics,  he  smiled  sheepishly.  After  a  brief 
confab, he turned his horse around and galloped back to the mounted force now coming up at 
a trot. The pickets let the Red  Cossacks through and resumed their watch in the gardens.  
 
Several  anxious  days  passed  before  Lisitsyn  received  word  that  the  raid  had  failed. 
Pursued by the Red cavalry, the riders had had to beat a hasty retreat acr oss the frontier. 
A  handful  of Bolsheviks,  numbering  nineteen  in  all,  applied  themselves  energetically to the job  of 
building  up Soviet  life  in the  district.  This  was  a  new  administrative  unit  and  hence  everything  had 
to  be  created  from  bottom  up.  Besides,  the  proximity  of the  border called  for  unflagging  vigilance. 
Lisitsyn,  Trofimov,  Korchagin  and  the  small  group  of  active  workers  they  had  rallied  toiled  from 
dawn  till  dusk  arranging  for  re-elections  of  Soviets,  fighting the  bandits,  organising cultural  work, 
putting down smuggling, in addition to Party and Komsomol work to strengthen defence. 
 
第 196 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
From  saddle  to  desk,  and  from  desk  to  the  common  where  squads  of  young  military 
trainees  diligently  drilled,  then  the  club  and  the  school  and  two  or  three  committee 
meetings ― such was the daily round of the Military Commissar of Battalion Two. Often 
enough his nights were spent on horseback, Mauser at his side, nights whose stillness 
was  broken  by  a  sharp  "Halt,  who  goes  there?"  and  the  pounding  of  the  wheels  of  a 
fleeing cart laden with smuggled goods from beyond the border. 
 
The  Berezdov  District  Committee  of  the  Komsomol consisted  of Korchagin,  Lida  Polevykh,  a  girl 
from  the  Volga  who  headed  the Women's  Department,  and  Zhenka  Razvalikhin,  a  tall,  handsome 
young  man  who  had  been  a  Gymnasium  student  only  a  short  time  before.  Razvalikhin  had  a 
weakness  for  thrilling  adventures  and  was  an  authority  on  Sherlock  Holmes  and  Louis 
Boussenard. Previously  he  had  been  office  manager  for  the  District  Committee  of  the Party,  and 
though  he  had  joined  the  Komsomol  only  four  months  before,  posed  as  an  "old  Bolshevik". 
Someone was needed in Berezdov to take charge of political education work, and since there was 
no one else to send, the Regional Committee, after some hesitation, had chosen Razvalikhin. 
 
 
The  sun  had  reached  its  zenith.  The  heat  penetrated  everywhere  and  all  living  creatures  sought 
refuge  in  the shade.  Even  the  dogs crawled  under  sheds  and  lay there  panting,  inert  and  sleepy. 
The only sign of life in the village was a hog revelling in a puddle of mud next to the well. 
 
Korchagin untethered his horse, and biting his lip from the pain in his knee, climbed into 
the saddle. The teacher was standing on the steps of the schoolhouse shading her eyes 
from the sun with the palm of her hand. 
"I hope to see you soon again, Comrade Military Commissar," she smiled. 
The horse stamped impatiently, stretched its neck and pulled at the reins. 
 
"Good-bye, Comrade Rakitina. So it's settled: you'll give the first lesson tomorrow." 
 
Feeling the  pressure  of  the  bit  relax, the  horse  was  off  at  a  brisk  trot.  Suddenly  wild cries  reached 
Pavel's  ears.  It sounded  like  the shrieking  of  women  when  villages  catch  fire. Wheeling  his  mount 
sharply around, the Military Commissar saw a young peasant woman running breathlessly into the 
village. Rakitina rushed forward and stopped her. From the nearby cottages the inhabitants looked 
out, mostly old men and women, for all the able-bodied peasants were working in the fields. 
 
"0-o-oh!  Good  people!  Come  quickly!  Come  quickly!  They 're  a-murdering  each  other  over 
there!"  When  Korchagin  galloped  up  people  were  crowding  around  the  woman,  pulling  at  her 
white  blouse  and  showering  her  with  anxious  questions,  but  they  could  make  nothing  of  her 
incoherent  cries.  "It's  murder!  They're  cutting  them  up..."  was  all  she  could  say.  An  old  man 
with a tousled beard came up, supporting his homespun trous ers with one hand  as he ran.  
 
"Stop your noise," he shouted at the hysterical woman. "Who's being murdered? What's it 
all about? Stop your squealing, damn you!" 
"It's our men and the Poddubtsy crowd . . . fighting over the boundaries again. They're 
slaughtering our men!" 
That  told  them  all. Women  wailed  and  the  old men  bellowed  in  fury.  The  news  swept through  the 
village  and  eddied  in  the  backyards:  "The  Poddubtsy  crowd  are  cutting  up  our  fellows  with 
scythes....  It's those  boundaries  again!"  Only the  bedridden  remained  indoors,  all  the  rest  poured 
into the village street and arming themselves with pitchforks, axes or sticks pulled from wattle 
 
第 197 页 共 259 页  
 
 
 
fences ran toward the fields where the two villages were engaged in their bloody annual 
contest over the boundaries between their fields. 
Korchagin  struck  his  horse  and  the  animal  was  off  at  a  gallop.  The  animal  flew  past  the 
running  village  folk  and,  ears  pressed  back  and  hooves  furiously  pounding  the  ground, 
steadily  increased  its  breakneck  pace.  On  a  hillock  a  windmill  spread  out  its  arms   as  if  to  bar 
the way. To the right, by the river bank, were the low  meadows, and to the left a rye  field rose 
and  dipped  all  the  way  to  the  horizon.  The  wind  rippled  the  ears  of  the  ripe  grain.  Poppies 
sprinkled  the  roadside  with  bright  red.  It  was  quiet  here,  and  unbearably  hot.  But  from  the 
distance, where the silvery ribbon of the river basked in the sun, came the cries of battle.  
 
The horse continued its wild career down toward the meadows. "If he stumbles, it's the 
end  of  both of us,"  flashed  in  Pavel's  mind.  But  there  was  no  stopping  now,  and all  he 
could do was to listen to the wind whistle in his ears as he bent low in the saddle. 
Like a whirlwind he galloped into the field where the bloody combat was raging. Several 
already lay bleeding on the ground. 
The horse ran down a bearded peasant armed with the stub of a scythe handle who was 
pursuing a young man with blood streaming down his face. Nearby a sunburned giant of 
a man was aiming vicious kicks with his big heavy boots at the solar plexus of his victim.  
Charging into the mass of struggling men at full speed, Korchagin sent them flying in all 
directions. Before they could recover from the surprise, he whirled madly now upon one, 
now on another, realising that he could disperse this knot of brutalised humanity only by 
terrorising them. "Scatter, you swine!" he shouted in a fury. "Or I'll shoot every last man 
of you, you blasted bandits!" 
And pulling out his Mauser  he  fired over an upturned face twisted with savage rage. Again the 
horse  whirled  around  and  again  the  Mauser  spoke.  Some  of  the  combatants  dropped  their 
scythes  and  turned  back.  Dashing  up  and  down  the  field  and  firing  incessantly,  the 
Commissar finally got the situation in hand.  The peasants took to their heels and scattered in 
all  directions  anxious  to  escape  both  from  responsibility  for  the  bloody  brawl  and  from  this 
man on  hors eback so terrible in his fury who was shooting without stop. 
 
Luckily no one  was killed and the  wounded recovered. Nevertheless soon afterward  a session 
of  the  district  court  was  held  in  P oddubtsy  to  hear  the  case,  but  all  the  judge's  efforts  to 
discover  the  ringleaders  were  unavailing.  With  the  persistence  and  patience  of  the  true 
Bolshevik,  the  judge  sought  to  make  the sullen  peasants  before  him  see  how  barbarous  their 
actions had been, and to impress upon them that such violence would not be tolerated.  
 
"It's  the  boundaries  that  are  to  blame,  Comrade  judge,"  they  said.  "They've  a  way  of 
getting mixed up ― every year we fight over them." 
Nevertheless some of the peasants had to answer for the fight. 
 
A week later a commission came to the hay lands in question and began staking out the 
disputed strips. 
"I've  been  working  as  land  surveyor  for  nearly  thirty  years,  and  always  it's  been  the  dividing  lines 
that caused  trouble," the  old surveyor  with  the commission said  to  Korchagin  as  he  rolled  up  his 
tape. The old man was sweating profusely from the heat and the exertion. "Ljooking at the way the 
meadows  are  divided  you'd  hardly  believe  your  eyes. A  drunkard could  draw straighter  lines.  And 
the fields are even worse. Strips three paces wide and one crossing into the other ― to try and 
 
第 198 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
separate them is enough to drive you mad. And they're being cut up more and more what 
with  sons  growing  up  and  fathers  splitting up  their  land  with  them.  Believe  me,  twenty 
years from now there won't be any land left to till, it'll all be balks. As it is, ten per cent of 
the land is being wasted in this way." 
Korchagin smiled. 
 
"Twenty years from now we won't have a single balk left, Comrade 
surveyor." The old man gave him an indulgent look. 
"The communist society, you mean? Well, now, that's pretty much in the future, 
isn't it?" "Have you heard about the Budanovka Collective Farm?" 
"Yes. I've been in Budanovka. But that's the exception, Comrade Korchagin." 
 
The commission  went on measuring strips of land. Two young men hammered in stakes. And 
on  both  sides  stood  the  peas ants  watching  closely  to  make  sure  that  they  went  down  where 
the half-rotten sticks barely  visible in the grass marked the previous dividing lines.  
 
 
Whipping up his wretched nag, the garrulous driver turned to his passengers. 
 
"Where  all  these  Komsomol  lads  have  sprung  up  from  beats  me!"  he  said.  "Don't  remember 
anything  like  it  before.  It's  that  schoolteacher  woman  who's  started  it,  for  sure.  Rakitina's  her 
name,  maybe  you  know  her?  She's  a  young  wench,  but  she's  a  troublemaker.  Stirs  up  all  the 
womenfolk  in  the  village,  puts  all  kinds  of  silly  ideas  into  their  heads  and  that's  how  the  trouble 
begins. It's got so a man can't beat his wife any more! In the old days you'd give the old woman a 
clout  whenever  you  felt  out  of sorts  and she'd  slink  away  and sulk,  but  now  she kicks  up such a 
row you wished you hadn't touched her. She'll threaten you with the People's Court, and as for the 
younger  ones, they'll talk  about  divorce  and  reel  off  all  the  laws  to  you.  Look  at  my  Ganka,  she 
quietest  wench you  ever  saw,  now she's  gone  and  got  herself made  a  delegate;  the  elder  among 
the  womenfolk,  I  think that means.  The  women  come to  her  from  all  over  the  village.  I  nearly  let 
her  have  a  taste  of  the  whip  when  I  heard  about  it,  but  I  spat  on  the  whole  business.  They can  go 
to the devil! Let them jabber. She isn't a bad wench when it comes to housework and such things." 
 
The  driver  scratched  his  hairy  chest  visible  through  the  opening  in  his  homespun  shirt  and 
flicked  his  whip  under  the  horse's  belly.  The  two  in  the  cart  were  Raz valikhin  and  Lida.  They 
both  had  business  in  Poddubtsy.  Lida  planned  to  call  a  conference  of  women's  delegates, 
and  Raz valikhin had been sent to help the local cell organise its work.  
 
"So you don't like the Komsomols?" Li da jokingly asked the 
driver. He plucked at his little beard  for a while before  replying.  
 
"Oh I don't mind them.... I believe in letting the youngsters enjoy themselves, p utting on 
plays  and  such  like.  I'm  fond  of  a  comedy  myself  if  it's  good.  We  did  think  at  the 
beginning the young folk would get out of hand, but it turned out just the opposite. I've 
heard folks  say  they're  very  strict  about  drinking and rowing  and  such  like. They  go  in 
more for book learning. But they won't leave God be, and they're always trying to take the 
church  away  and  use  it  for  a  club.  Now  that's no good,  it's  turned  the  old  folks  against 
them.  But  on  the  whole  they're  not  so  bad.  If  you  ask  me,  tho ugh,  they  make  a  big 
mistake taking in all the down-and-outs in the village, the ones who hire out, or who can't 
make a go of their farms. They won't have anything to do with the rich peasants' sons." 
 
第 199 页 共 259 页  
 
 
 
The cart clattered down the hill and pulled up outside the school building. 
 
The  caretaker  had  put  up  the  new  arrivals  and  gone  off  to sleep  in the  hay.  Lida  and  Razvalikhin 
had just returned from a meeting which had ended rather late. It was dark inside the cottage. Lida 
undressed  quickly, climbed into  bed  and  fell  asleep  almost  at  once.  She  was  rudely  awakened  by 
Razvalikhin's hands travelling over her in a manner that left no doubt as to his intentions. 
 
"What do you want?" 
 
"Shush, Lida, don't make so much noise. I'm sick of lying there all by myself. Can't you 
find anything more exciting to do than snooze?" 
"Stop pawing me and get off my bed at once!" Lida said, pushing him away. Razvalikhin's 
oily  smile  had  always  sickened  her  and  she  wanted  to  say  something  insulting  and 
humiliating, but sleep overpowered her and she closed her eyes. 
"Aw,  come  on!  You  weren't brought  up  in  a  nunnery  by  any  chance?  Stop  playing  the 
little innocent, you can't fool me. If you were really an advanced woman, you'd satisfy my 
desire and then go to sleep as much as you want." 
Considering the matter settled, he went over and sat on the edge of the bed again, laying 
a possessive hand on her shoulder. 
"Go to hell!" Lida was now wide awake. "I'm going to tell Korchagin about this tomorrow." 
Razvalikhin  seized  her  hand  and  whispered  testily:  "I  don't  care  a  damn  about  your 
Korchagin, and you'd better not try to resist or I'll take you by force." 
There  was  a  brief  scuffle  and  then  two  resounding  slaps  rang  out.  Razvalikhin  leapt 
aside. Lida groped her way to the door, pushed it open and rushed out into the yard. She 
stood there in the moonlight, panting with fury and disgust. 
"Get inside, you fool!" Razvalikhin called to her viciously. 
 
He  carried  his own  bed  out  under  the  shed  and  spent  the  rest  of  the night  there.  Lida 
fastened the door on the latch, curled up on the bed and went to sleep again. 
In  the  morning  they  set  out  for  home.  Razvalikhin  sat  gloomily  beside  the  old  driver 
smoking one cigarette after another. 
"That  touch-me-not  may  really  go  and  spill  the  beans  to  Korchagin,  blast her!"  he  was 
thinking.  "Who'd  have  thought  she'd  turn  out  to be  such a  prig?  You'd  think  she  was  a 
raving beauty by the way she acts, but she's nothing to look at. But I'd better make it up 
with her or there may be trouble. Korchagin has his eye on me as it is." 
He  moved over to Lida. He pretended to be ashamed of himself, put on a downcast  air 
and mumbled a few words of apology. 
That did the trick. Before they had reached the edge of the village Lida had given him her 
promise not to tell anyone what had happened that night. 
 
 
Komsomol  cells  sprang  up  one  after  another  in  the  border  villages.  The  District 
Committee  members  carefully  tended  these  first  young  shoots  of  the  Communist 
movement.  Korchagin  and  Lida  Polevykh  spent  much  time  in  the  various  localities 
working with the local Komsomol members. 
Razvalikhin did not like making trips to the countryside. He did not know how to win the confidence 
of the peasant lads and only succeeded in bungling things. Lida and Pavel, on the other 
 
第 200 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
hand,  had  no  difficulty  in  making  friends  wit h  the  peasant  youth.  The  girls  took  to  Lida  at 
once,  they  accepted  her  as  one  of  themselves  and  gradually  she  awak ened  their  interest  in 
the  Komsomol  movement.  As  for  Korchagin,  all  the  young  folk  in  the  distric t  knew  him.  One 
thousand  six  hundred  of  the  young  men  due  to  be  called  up  for  military  service  went  through 
preliminary training in his  battalion. Never  before  had his accordion  played such an important 
role  in  propaganda  as  here  in  the  village.  The  instrument  made  Pavel  tremendously  popular 
with  the  young  folk,  who  gathered  of  an  evening  on  the  village  lane  to  enjoy  themselves,  and 
for  many  a  towheaded  youngster  the  road  to  the  Komsomol  began  here  as  he  listened  to  the 
enchanting  music  of  the  accordion,  now  passionate  and  stirring,  now  strident  and  brave,  now 
tender  and  caressing  as  only  the  sad,  wistful  songs  of  the  Ukraine  can  be.  They  listened  to 
the  accordion,  and  they  listened  to  the  young  man  who  played  it,  a  railway  worker  who  was 
now Military Commissar  and Komsomol secretary. And the music of the  accordion seemed t o 
mingle  harmoniously  with  what  the  young  Commissar  told  them.  Soon  new  songs  rang  out  in 
the  villages, and  new books appeared in the cottages beside the prayer -books and Bibles. 
 
The  smugglers  now  had  more  than  the  frontier  guards to  reckon  with;  in the Komsomol members 
the  Soviet  Government  had  acquired  staunch  friends  and  zealous  assistants.  Sometimes  the 
Komsomol cells in the border towns allowed themselves to be carried away by their enthusiasm in 
hunting down enemies and then Korchagin would have to come to the aid of his young comrades. 
Once Grishutka Khorovodko, the blue-eyed Secretary of the Poddubtsy cell, a hot-headed lad fond 
of  an  argument  and  very  active  in  the  anti-religious  movement,  learned  from  private  sources  of 
information that some smuggled goods were to be brought that night to the village mill. He roused 
all  the  Komsomol members  and,  armed  with  a training  rifle  and  two  bayonets,  they  set  out  at  the 
dead  of  night,  quietly  laid  an  ambush  at the  mill  and  waited  for their  quarry to  appear.  The  border 
post, which had been informed of the smugglers' move, sent out a detail of its own. In the dark the 
two sides met  and clashed,  and  had  it  not  been  for the  vigilance  displayed  by  the  frontier  guards, 
the  young  men  might  have  suffered  heavy  casualties  in  the  skirmish.  As  it  was  the  youngsters 
were merely disarmed, taken to a village four kilometres away and locked up. 
 
Korchagin  happened  to  be  at  Gavrilov's  place  at  the  time.  When  t he  Battalion  Commander 
told  him  the  news  the  following  morning,  Pavel  mounted  his  horse  and  galloped  off  to  rescue 
his boys. The  frontier man in charge laughed as he told him the story.  
 
"I'll tell you what we'll do, Comrade Korchagin," he said. "They're f ine lads and we shan't 
make trouble for them. But you had better give them a good talking to so that they won't 
try to do our work for us in the future." 
The sentry opened the door of the shed and the eleven lads got up and stood sheepishly 
shifting their weight from one foot to the other. 
"Look  at  them,"  the  frontier  man  said  with  studied  severity.  "They've gone  and  made a 
mess of things, and now I'll have to send them on to area headquarters." 
Then Grishutka spoke up. 
 
"But  Comrade  Sakharov,"  he  said  agitatedly,  "what  crime  have  we  committed?  We've 
had our eye on that kulak for a long time. We only wanted to help the Soviet authorities, 
and you go and lock us up like bandits." He turned away with an injured air. 
After  a  solemn  consultation,  during  which  Korchagin  and  Sakharov  had  difficulty  in 
preserving their gravity, they decided the boys had had enough of a fright. 
 
第 201 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
"If  you  will  vouch  for  them  and  promise  us  that  they  won't  go  taking  walks  over  to  the  frontier 
any more I'll let them go," Sakharov said to Pavel. "They can help us in other ways."  
 
"Very well, I'll vouch for them. I hope they won't let me down any more." 
 
The youngsters marched back to Poddubtsy singing. The incident was hushed up. And it 
was not long before the miller was caught, this time by the law. 
 
 
In  the  Maidan-Villa  woods  there  lived  a  colony  of  rich  German  farmers.  The  kulak  farms  stood 
within  half  a kilometre  of  each  other,  as sturdily  built  as miniature  fortresses.  It  was  from Maidan-
Villa that Antonyuk and his band operated. Antonyuk, a one-time tsarist army sergeant major, had 
recruited  a  band  of seven  cutthroats  from  among  his kith  and kin  and,  armed  with  pistols, staged 
hold-ups  on  the  country  roads.  He  did  not  hesitate  to  spill  blood,  he  was  not  averse  to  robbing 
wealthy speculators,  but  neither  did  he  stop  at molesting Soviet  workers.  Speed  was Antonyuk's 
watchword. One day he would rob a couple of co-operative store clerks and the next day he would 
disarm a postal employee in a village a good twenty kilometres away, stealing everything the  man 
had  on  him,  down  to the last kopek. Antonyuk competed  with  his  fellow-brigand  Gordei,  one  was 
worse than the other, and between them the two kept the area militia and frontier guard authorities 
very  busy.  Antonyuk  operated  just  outside  Berezdov,  and  it  grew  dangerous  to  appear  on  the 
roads  leading  to  the town.  The  bandit  eluded capture;  when things  grew  too  hot  for  him  he  would 
withdraw  beyond  the  border  and  lie  low  only  to  turn  up  again  when  he  was  least  expected.  His 
very  elusiveness  made  him  a  menace.  Every  report  of  some  fresh  outrage  committed  by  this 
brigand caused Lisitsyn to gnaw his lips with rage. 
 
"When  will  that  rattlesnake  stop  biting  us?  He'd  better  take  care,  the  scoundrel,  or  I'll 
have  to  settle  his  hash  myself,"  he  would  mutter  through  clenched  teeth.  Twice  the 
District Executive Chairman, taking Korchagin and three other Communists with him, set 
out hot on the bandit's trail, but each time Antonyuk got away. 
A  special  detachment  was  sent  to  Berezdov  from  the  area  centre  to  fight  the  bandits.  It  was 
commanded  by  a  dapper  youth  named  Filatov.  Instead  of  reporting  to  the  Chairman  of  the 
Executive  Committee,  as  frontier  regulations  demanded, this conceited  youngster  went  straight  to 
the  nearest  village,  Semaki,  and  arriving  at  the  dead  of  night,  put  up  with  his  men  in  a  house  on 
the  outskirts.  The  mysterious  arrival  of  these  armed  men  was  observed  by  a Komsomol  member 
living  next  door  who  hurried  off  at  once  to  report to  the  Chairman  of the Village Soviet.  The  latter, 
knowing  nothing  about  the  detachment, took  them  for  bandits  and  dispatched the  lad  at  once  to 
the  district centre  for  help.  Filatov's  foolhardiness  very  nearly  cost many  lives.  Lisitsyn  roused  the 
militia in the middle of the night and hurried off with a dozen men to tackle the "bandits" in Semaki. 
They  galloped  up  to  the  house,  dismounted  and  climbing  over  the  fence  closed  in  on  the  house. 
The  sentry  on  duty  at  the  door  was  knocked  down  by  a  blow  on  the  head  with  a  revolver-butt, 
Lisitsyn  broke  in  the  door  with  his shoulder  and  he  and  his  men  rushed into  a  room  dimly  lighted 
by  an  oil  lamp  hanging  from the ceiling. With  a  grenade  in  one  hand  and  his Mauser  in the  other 
Lisitsyn roared so that the window panes rattled: 
 
"Surrender, or I'll blow you to bits!" 
 
Another  second  and the  sleepy  men  leaping to  their  feet  from the  floor  might  have  been  cut  down 
by a hail of bullets. But the sight of the man with the grenade poised for the throw was so awe- 
 
第 202 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
inspiring that they put up their hands. A few minutes later, when the "bandits" were 
herded outside in their underwear, Filatov noticed the decoration on Lisitsyn's tunic and 
hastened to explain. Lisitsyn was furious. "You fool!" he spat out with witherin g contempt. 
 
 
Tidings  of the  German  revolution,  dim  echoes  of  the  rifle  fire  on  the  Hamburg  barricades  reached 
the  border  area.  An  atmosphere  of  tension  hung  over  the  frontier.  Newspapers  were  read  with 
eager  expectation.  The  wind  of  revolution  blew  from  the  West.  Applications  poured  in  to  the 
Komsomol  District  Committee  from  Komsomols  volunteering  for  service  in  the  Red  Army. 
Korchagin  was  kept  busy  explaining  to  the  youngsters  from  the  cells  that  the  Soviet  Union  was 
pursuing a policy of peace and that it had no intentions of going to war with its neighbours. But this 
had little effect. Every Sunday Komsomol members from the entire district held meetings in the big 
garden of the priest's house, and one day at noon the Poddubtsy cell turned up in proper marching 
order in the yard of the District Committee. Korchagin saw them through the window and went out 
into  the  porch. Eleven  lads,  with  Khorovodko  at their  head,  all  wearing  top  boots,  and  with  large 
canvas knapsacks on their backs, halted at the entrance. 
 
"What's this, Grisha?" Korchagin asked in surprise. 
 
Instead  of  replying,  Khorovodko  signed  to  Pavel  with  his  eyes  and  went  inside  the 
building with him. Lida, Razvalikhin and two other Komsomol  members pressed around 
the newcomer demanding an explanation. Khorovodko closed the door and wrinkling his 
bleached eyebrows announced: 
"This is a sort of test mobilisation, Comrades. My own idea. I told the boys this morning a telegram 
had  come  from  the  district,  strictly  confidential  of  course,  that  we're  going to  war  with  the  German 
bourgeoisie,  and  we'll  soon  be  fighting  the Polish Pany  as  well.  All Komsomols  are called  up,  on 
orders from Moscow, I told them. Anyone who's scared can file an application and he'll be allowed 
to  stay  home.  I  ordered  them  not  to  say  a  word  about  the  war  to  anyone,  just  to  take  a  loaf  of 
bread  and  a  hunk  of  fatback  apiece,  and those  who  didn't  have  any  fatback c ould  bring  garlic  or 
onions. We were to meet secretly outside the village and go to the district centre and from there to 
the  area  centre  where  arms  would  be  issued.  You  ought  to  see  what  an  effect  that  had  on  the 
boys!  They  tried  hard  to  pump  me,  but  I  told  them  to  get  busy  and  cut  out  the  questions.  Those 
who  wanted  to stay  behind should say so. We  only  wanted  volunteers. Well,  my  boys  dispersed 
and  I  began  to  get  properly  worried.  Supposing  nobody  turned  up?  If  that  happened  I  would 
disband the  whole cell  and  move  to some  other  place.  I sat there  outside  the  village  waiting  with 
my  heart  in  my  boots.  After  a  while  they  began  coming,  one  by  one.  Some  of  them  had  been 
crying, you could see  by  their  faces, though  they tried  to  hide  it.  All  ten  of  them  turned  up,  not a 
single deserter. That's our Poddubtsy cell for you!" he wound up triumphantly. 
 
When the shocked Lida Polevykh began to scold him, he stared at her in amazement.  
 
"What  do you  mean?  This  is the  best  way  to  test them,  I  tell you. You can  see  right through  each 
one  of  them.  There's  no  fraud  there.  I  was  going  to  drag  them  to  the  area  centre  just  to  keep  up 
appearances,  but  the  poor  beggars  are  dog-tired.  You'll  have  to  make  a  little  speech  to  them, 
Korchagin.  You  will,  won't  you?  It  wouldn't  be  right  without  a  speech.  Tell  them  the  mobilisation 
has been called off or something, but say that we're proud of them just the same." 
 
 
 
第 203 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
Korchagin  seldom  visited the  area  centre,  for  the  journey  took several  days  and  pressure  of  work 
demanded  his constant  presence  in  the  district.  Razvalikhin,  on  the  other  hand,  was  ready to  ride 
off  to  town  on  any  pretext.  He  would  set  out  on  the  journey  armed  from  head  to  foot,  fancying 
himself one of Fenimore Cooper's heroes. As he drove through the woods he would take pot shots 
at crows  or  at some  fleetfooted  squirrel,  stop  lone  passersby  and  question them sternly  as to  who 
they  were,  where they  had come  from  and  whither they  were  bound.  On  approaching the town  he 
would  remove  his  weapons, stick  his  rifle  under  the  hay  in the cart  and,  hiding  his  revolver  in  his 
pocket, stroll into the office of the Komsomol Regional Committee looking his usual self. 
 
"Well,  what's  the  news  in  Berezdov?"  Fedotov,  Secretary  of  the  Regional  Committee, 
inquired as Razvalikhin entered his office one day. 
Fedot ov's  office  was  always  crowded  with  people  all  talking  at  once.  It  was  not   easy  to  work 
under  such  conditions,  listening  to  four  different  people,  while  replying  to  a  fifth  and  writing 
something at the same time. Although Fedotov was  very young  he had  been a Party member 
since 1919; it was only in those stormy times that a 15-year-old lad could have been admitted 
into the Party. "Oh, there's plenty of news," answered Raz valikhin nonchalantly. "Too much to 
tell all at once.  It's one long  grind  from morning till night. There's so much t o attend to. We've 
had t o start from t he  very beginning, you know. I set up t wo  new cells. Now, tell me what you 
called me here  for?" And he sat down in an armchair  with a businesslike air.  
 
Krymsky, the head of the economic department, looked up from the heap of papers on 
his desk for a moment. 
"We asked for Korchagin, not you," he said. Razvalikhin blew out a thick cloud of tobacco 
smoke.  "Korchagin  doesn't  like  coming  here,  so  I  have  to  do  it  on  top  of  everything 
else....  In  general,  some  secretaries  have  a  fine  time  of  it.  They  don't  do  anythi ng 
themselves.  It's  the donkeys  like  me  who  have  to  carry  the  load.  Whenever  Korchagin 
goes to the border he's gone for two or three weeks and all the work is left to me." 
Razvalikhin's broad hint that he was the better man for the job of district secretar y was 
not lost on his hearers. 
"That  fellow  doesn't  appeal  to  me  much,"  Fedotov  remarked  to  the  others  when 
Razvalikhin had gone. 
Raz valikhin's  trickery  was  exposed  quite  by  chance.  Lisitsyn  dropped  into  Fedotov's  office 
one  day to pick up the mail,  which  was the custom  for anyone coming from the district, and in 
the course of a conversation between the two men Raz valikhin was exposed.  
 
"Send Korchagin to us anyway," said Fedotov in parting. "We hardly know him here." 
"Very well. But don't try to take him away from us, mind. We shan't allow that." 
 
 
This  year  the  anniversary  of  the  October  Revolution  was  celebrated  on  the  border  with  even 
greater  enthusiasm  than  usual. Korchagin  was  elected chairman  of the committee  organising  the 
celebrations  in  the  border  villages. After  the  meeting  in Poddubtsy,  five  thousand  peasants  from 
three  neighbouring  villages marched to the  frontier in  a  procession  half  a kilometre long, carrying 
scarlet  banners  and  with  a military  band  and  the training  battalion  at the  head.  They marched  in 
perfect order on the Soviet side of the frontier, parallel to the border posts, bound for the villages 
 
第 204 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
that  had  been  cut  in  two  by  the  demarcation  line.  Never  before  had  the  Poles  witnessed  the 
like on their  frontier. Battalion  Commander Gavrilov and Korchagin  rode  ahead of the column 
on  horseback,  and  behind  them  the  band  played,  the  banners  rustled  in  the  breeze  and  the 
singing  of  the  people  resounded  far  and  wide.  The  peasant  youth  clad  in  their  holiday  best 
were  in  high  spirits,  the  village  girls  twittered  and  laughed  gaily,  the  adults  marched  along 
gravely, the  old  folk  with an air of solemn triumph. The  human stream stretc hed  as far as  eye 
could  see.  One  of  its  banks  was  the  frontier,  but  no  one  so  much  as  stepped  across  that 
forbidden  line.  Korc hagin  watched  the  sea  of  people  march  past.  The  strains  of  the 
Komsomol  song  "From  the  forests  dense  to  Britain's  seas,  the  Red  Army  is  strongest  of  all!" 
gave way to a girls' chorus singing "Up on yonder hillside the girls are a -mowing...." 
 
The  Soviet  sentries  greeted  the  procession  with  happy  smiles.  The  Polish  guards  look ed  on 
bewildered.  This  demonstration  on  the  frontier  caused  no  little  consternation  on  the  other 
side,  although  the  Polish  command  had  been  warned  of  it  in  advance.  Mounted  gendarme 
patrols moved restlessly back and forth, the  frontier guard had been strengthened fivefold and 
reserves  were  hidden  behind  the  nearby  hills  ready  for  any  emergency.  But  the  procession 
kept to its own territory, marching  along gaily, filling the air with its singing.  
 
A Polish sentry stood on a knoll. The column approached with measured tread. The first 
notes  of  a  march  rang  out.  The  Pole  brought  his  rifle  smartly  to  his  side  and  then 
presented arms, and Korchagin distinctly heard the words: "Long live the Commune!" 
The soldier's eyes told Pavel that it was he who had uttered the words. Pavel stared at 
him fascinated. 
A friend! Beneath the soldier's uniform a heart beat in sympathy with the demonstrators. 
Pavel replied softly in Polish: 
"Greetings, Comrade!" 
 
The  sentry  stood  in  the  same  position  while  the  demonstration  marched  past.  Pavel  turned 
round several times to look at the  dark little figure.  Here  was another Pole. His whiskers were 
touched  with grey and the eyes under the shiny peak of his cap ex pressed nothing. Pavel, still 
under the impression of  what he had just heard, murmured in Polish  as if to himself:  
 
"Greetings, Comrade!" 
But there was no reply. 
 
Gavrilov smiled. He had overheard what had passed. 
 
"You e xpect too much," he observed. "They aren't all plain infantrymen, you know. Some of them are 
gendarmes. Didn't you notice the chevron on his sleeve? That one was a gendarme for sure." The head 
of the column was already descending the hill toward a village cut in two by the frontier. The Soviet half 
of the village had prepared to meet the guests in grand style. All the inhabitants were waiting at the 
frontier bridge on the bank of the stream. The young folk were lined up on either side of the road. The  
roofs of cottages and sheds on the Polish side were covered with people who were watching the 
proceedings on the opposite bank with tense interest. There were crowds of peasants on the cottage 
steps and by the garden fences. When the procession entered th e human corridor the band struck up 
the Internationale. Later stirring speeches were delivered from a platform decorated with greenery. 
Young men and white-headed veterans addressed the crowd. Korchagin too spoke in his native 
Ukrainian. His words flew over the border and were heard on the other side of the river, whereupon the 
gendarmes over there began to disperse the villagers for 
 
第 205 页 共 259 页  
 
 
 
fear that those fiery words might inflame the hearts of those who listened. Whips whistled 
and shots were fired into the air. 
The  streets  emptied  out.  The  young  folk,  scared  off  the  roofs  by  gendarme  bullets, 
disappeared. Those on the Soviet side looked on and their faces grew grave. Filled with 
wrath by  what he had just witnessed, an aged shepherd climbed onto the platform with 
the help of some village lads and addressed the crowd in great agitation. 
"You've seen, my children? That's how we used to be treated too. But no more. Nobody dare whip 
us  peasants  any  more.  We've  finished  with  the  gentry  and  their  whippings.  We're  in  power  now 
and it's for you, my sons, to hold on firmly to that power. I'm an old man and I'm not much good at 
speech-making. But I'd tell you a lot if I could. I'd tell you how we used to toil like oxen in the days 
of the tsars. That's why it hurts to see those poor folks over there." He pointed with a shaking hand 
toward the other side of the river, and fell to weeping as old men do. 
 
Then  Grishutka  Khorovodko  spoke.  Gavrilov,  listening  to  his  wrathful  speech,  turned  his 
horse around  and scanned the opposite bank to see whether  anyone there was taking  notes. 
But the river bank was deserted. E ven the sentry by the bridge had  been removed. 
 
"Well, it looks as if there won't be any protest note to the Foreign Affairs Commissariat 
after all," he laughed. 
 
 
One rainy night in late autumn the bloody trail of Antonyuk and his seven men came to 
an end. The bandits were caught at a wedding party  in the house of a wealthy farmer in 
the  German  colony  in  Maidan-Villa.  It  was  the  peasants from  the  Khrolinsky  Commune 
who tracked him down. 
The  local  women  had  spread  the  news  about  these  guests  at  the  colony  wedding,  and  the 
Komsomols  got  together  at  once,  twelve  of  them,  and  armed  with  whatever  they  could  lay 
their hands on, set out for Maidan-Villa by cart, sending a messenger post-haste to Berezdov. 
At Semaki the messenger chanced t o meet Filatov's detachment, which rushed off hot  on the 
trail.  The  Khrolinsky  men  surrounded  the  farm  and  began  to  exchange  rifle  fire  with  the 
Antonyuk  band.  The  latter  entrenched  themselves  in  a  small  wing  of  the  farmhouse  and 
opened  fire  at  anyone  who  came  within  range.  They  tried  to  make  a  dash  for  it,  but  were 
driven  back inside the building  after losing one of their number. Antonyuk had been in many a 
tight  corner  like  this  and  had  fought  his  way  out  with  the  aid  of  hand  grenades  and  darkness. 
He  might  have  escaped  this  time  too,  for  the  Khrolinsky  Komsomols  had  already   lost  two 
men,  but  Filatov  arrived  in  the  nick  of  time.  Antonyuk  saw  that  the  game  was  up.  He 
continued  firing  back  till  morning  from  all  the  windows,  but  at  dawn  they  took  him.  Not  one  of 
the seven s urrendered.  It cost four lives to stamp  out the  viper's  nest. Three  of the casualties 
were lads  from the newly-organised Khrolinsky Komsomol group.  
 
Korchagin's  battalion  was  called  up  for  the  autumn  manoeuvres  of  the  territorial  forces.  The 
battalion covered the forty kilometres to the divisional camp in a single day's march under a driving 
rain.  They  set  out  early  in  the  morning  and  reached  their  destination  late  at  night.  Gusev,  the 
Battalion Commander, and his commissar rode on horseback. The eight hundred trainees reached 
the  barracks  exhausted  and  went  to  sleep  at  once.  The  manoeuvres  were  due  to  begin  the 
following morning; the headquarters of the territorial division had been late in summoning the 
 
第 206 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
battalion.  Lined  up  for  inspection,  the  battalion,  now  in  uniform  and  carrying  rifles, 
presented  an  entirely  different  appearance.  Both  Gusev  and  Korchagin  had  invested 
much time and effort in training these young men and they were confident that the unit 
would pass muster. After the official inspection had ended and the battalion had shown 
its  skill  on  the  drill  ground,  one  of  the  commanders,  a  man  with  a  handsome  though 
flaccid face, turned to Korchagin and demanded sharply: 
 
"Why are you mounted? The commanders and commissars of our training battalions are 
not entitled to horses. Turn your mount over to the stables and report for manoeuvres on 
foot." Korchagin knew that if he dismounted he would be unable to take part in the 
manoeuvres, for his legs would not carry him a single kilometre. But how could he 
explain the situation to this loud-mouthed coxcomb festooned with leather straps? 
"I shall not be able to take part in the manoeuvres on 
foot." "Why not?" 
Realising that he would have to give some explanation, Korchagin replied in a low voice:  
 
"My legs are swollen and I will not be able to stand a whole week of running and walking. 
But perhaps you will tell me who you are, Comrade?" 
"In the first place I am Chief of Staff of your regiment. Secondly, I order you once more to 
get off that horse. If you are an invalid you ought not to be in the army." 
Pavel felt as if he had been struck on the face with a whip. He jerked the reins, but Gusev's strong 
hand  checked  him.  For  a  few  moments  injured  pride  and  self-restraint  fought  for  supremacy  in 
Pavel.  But  Pavel  Korchagin  was  no  longer the  Red Army man  who could shift light -heartedly  from 
unit  to  unit.  He  was  a  Battalion  Commissar  now,  and  his  battalion stood there  behind  him. What a 
poor  example  of  discipline  he  would  be showing  his  men  if  he  disobeyed  the  order!  It  was  not  for 
this  conceited  ass  that  he  had  reared  his  battalion.  He  slipped  his  feet  out  of  the  stirrups, 
dismounted and, fighting the excruciating pain in his joints, walked over to the right flank. 
 
 
For several days the weather had been unusually fine. The manoeuvres were drawing to 
a  close.  On  the  fifth  day  the  troops  were  in  the  vicinity  of  Shepetovka,  where  the 
exercises  were  to  end.  The  Berezdov  Battalion  had  been  given  the  assignment  of 
capturing the station from the direction of Klimentovichi village. 
Korchagin,  who  was  now  on  homeground,  showed  Gusev  all  the  approaches.  The  battalion, 
divided  into  two  parts,  made  a  wide  det our  and  emerging  in  the  enemy  rear  broke  into  the 
station  building  with  loud  cheers.  The  operation  was  given  the  highest  appraisal.  The 
Berezdov  men  remained  in  possession  of  the  station  while  the  battalion  that  had  defended  it 
withdrew to the woods having been judged to have "lost" fifty per cent of its men.  
 
Korchagin  was  in  command  of  one  half  of  the  battalion.  He  had  ordered  his  men  to 
deploy  and  was  standing  in  the  middle  of  the  street  with  the  commander  and  political 
instructor of the third company when a Red Army man came running up to him.  
"Comrade  Commissar,"  he  panted,  "the  Battalion  Commander  wants  to  know  whether  the 
machine-gunners are holding the railway crossings. The commission's on its way here."  
 
Pavel  and  the  commanders  with  him  went  over  to  one  of  the  crossings.  The  Regimental 
Commander and his aides were there. Gusev was congratulated on the successful operations. 
 
第 207 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Representatives from the routed battalion looked sheepish and did not even try to justify 
themselves. 
Gusev said: "I can't take the credit for it. It was Korchagin here who showed us the way. 
He hails from these parts." 
The Chief of Staff rode up to Pavel and said with a sneer: "So you can run quite well after 
all,  Comrade.  The  horse  was  just  a  show-off,  I  suppose?"  He  was  about  to  say 
something else, but the look on Korchagin's face stopped him. 
"You don't happen to know his name, do you?" Korchagin asked Gusev when the higher 
commanders had gone. 
Gusev slapped him on the shoulder. 
 
"Now then, don't you pay any attention to that upstart. His name is Chuzhanin. A former 
ensign, I believe." 
Several times that day Pavel racked his brains in an effort to recall where he had heard 
that name before, but he could not remember. 
 
 
The  manoeuvres  were  over.  The  battalion,  having  been  highly  commended,  went  back  to 
Berezdov. Korchagin, utterly exhausted, remained behind to rest for a day or two at home. For two 
days  he  slept  round  the  clock,  and  on  the  third  day  he  went  to  see  Artem  down  at  the  engine 
sheds.  Here  in  this  grimy,  smoke-blackened  building Pavel  felt  at  home.  Hungrily  he  inhaled  the 
coal smoke.  This  was  where  he  really  belonged  and  it  was  here  he  wished  to  be.  He  felt  as  if  he 
had lost something infinitely dear to him. It was months since he had heard an engine whistle, and 
the  one-time  stoker  and  electrician  yearned  as  much  for  the  familiar  surroundings  as  the  sailor 
yearns  for  the  boundless sea  expanse  after  a  prolonged  stay  on  shore.  It  was  a  long  time  before 
he  could  get  over  this  feeling.  He spoke  little to  his  brother,  who  now  worked  at  a  portable  forge. 
He noticed a new furrow on Artem's brow. He was the father of two children now. Evidently Artem 
was having a hard time of it. He did not complain, but Pavel could see  for himself. 
 
They worked side by side for an hour or two. Then they parted. 
 
At  the  railway  crossing  Pavel  reined  in  his  horse  and  gazed  for  a  long  while  at  the 
station. Then he struck his mount and galloped down the road through the woods. 
The forest roads were now quite safe. All the bandits, big and small, had been stamped 
out by the Bolsheviks, and the villages in the area now lived in peace. 
Pavel reached Berezdov around noon. Lida Polevykh ran out into the porch of the District 
Committee to meet him.  
"Welcome home!" she said with a warm smile. "We have missed you here!" She put her 
arm around him and the two went in doors. 
"Where is Razvalikhin?" he asked her as he took off his coat. 
 
"I  don't  know,"  Lida  replied  rather  reluctantly.  "Oh  yes,  I  remembe r  now.  He  said  this 
morning he was going to the school to take the class in sociology instead of you. He says 
it's his job not yours." 
This was an unpleasant surprise for Pavel. He had never liked Razvalikhin. "That fellow 
may make a hash of things at the school," he thought in annoyance. 
"Never mind him," he said to Lida. "Tell me, what's the good  news here. Have you  been to  
 
 
 
第 208 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
Grushevka? How are things with the youngsters over there?" 
 
While Lida gave him the news, Pavel relaxed on the couch resting his aching limbs. 
 
"The  day  before  yesterday  Rakitina  was  accepted  as  candidate  member  of  the  Party.  That 
makes  our  Poddubtsy  cell  much  stronger.  Rakitina  is  a  good  girl,  I  like  her  very  much.  The 
teachers are beginning to come over to our side, some of them are with us already."  
 
 
Korchagin and Lychikov, the new Secretary of the Party District Committee, often met at 
Lisitsyn's place of an evening and the three would sit stud ying at the big desk until the 
early hours of the morning. 
The door leading to the bedroom where Lisitsyn's wife and sister slept would be tightly 
closed and the three bending over a small volume would converse in low tones. Lisitsyn 
had only time to study at night. Even so whenever Pavel returned from his frequent trips 
to the villages he would find to his chagrin that his comrades had gone far ahead of him.  
 
 
One day a messenger from Poddubtsy brought the news that Grishutka Khorovodko had 
been murdered the night before by unknown assailants. Pavel rushed off at once to the 
Executive  Committee  stables,  forgetting  the  pain  in  his  legs,  saddled  a  horse  with 
feverish haste and galloped off toward the frontier. 
Grishutka's body lay amid spruce branches on a table in the Village Soviet cottage, the 
red  banner  of  the  Soviet  draped  over  him.  A  frontier  man  and  a  Komsomol  stood  on 
guard at  the door  admitting  no one  until  the  authorities  arrived.  Korchagin  entered  the 
cottage, went over to the table and turned back the banner. 
Grishutka, his face waxen, his dilated eyes transfixed in agony of death, lay with his head 
to  one  side.  A  spruce  branch  covered  the  spot  where  the back  of  his  head  had  been 
bashed in by some sharp weapon. 
Who had taken the life of this young man? He was the only son of widow Khorovodko. His father, 
a mill hand and member of the Poor Peasants' Committee, had died fighting for the Revolution. 
The shock of her son's death had brought the old woman to her bed and neighbours were trying to 
comfort her. And her son lay cold and still preserving the secret of his untimely end. 
 
Grishutka's  murder  had  aroused  the  indignation  of  the  whole  village.  The  young 
Komsomol leader and champion of the poor peasants turned out to have far more friends 
in the village than enemies. Rakitina, greatly upset by the news, sat in her room weeping 
bitterly. She did not even look up when Korchagin came in. 
"Who do you think killed him, Rakitina?" Korchagin asked hoarsely, dropping heavily into 
a chair. 
"It must be that gang from the mill. Grisha had always been a thorn in the side of those 
smugglers." 
 
 
Two  villages  turned  up  for  Grisha  Khorovodko's  funeral. Korchagin  brought  his  battalion,  and  the 
whole Komsomol organisation came to pay its last respects to their comrade. Gavrilov mustered a 
 
第 209 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
company  of  two  hundred  and  fifty  border  guards  on  the  square  in  front  of  the  Village  Soviet. 
To  the  accompaniment  of  the  mournful  strains  of  the  funeral  march  the  coffin  swathed  in  red 
bunting  was brought  out and  placed o n the square  where a  fresh  grave had been dug  beside 
the graves of the Bolshevik partisans who had  fallen in the Civil War.  
 
Grishutka's death united all those whose interests he had so staunchly upheld. The young agricultural 
labourers and the poor peasants vowed to support the Komsomol, and all who spoke at the graveside 
wrathfully  demanded  that  the  murderers  be  brought  to  book,  that  they  be  tried  here  on  the  square 
beside the grave of their victim, so that everyone might see who the enemies were. 
 
Three  volleys  thundered  forth,  and  fresh  spruce  branches  were  laid  on  the  grave. That 
evening  the  cell  elected  a  new  secretary  ―  Rakitina.  A  message  came  for  Korchagin 
from the border post with the news that they were on the trail of the murderers. 
A week later, when the second District Congress of Soviets opened in the town theatre, 
Lisitsyn, gravely triumphant, announced: 
"Comrades,  I  am  happy  to  be  able  to  report  to  this  congress  that  we  have  accomplished  a 
great  deal  in  the  past  year.  Soviet  power  is  firmly  established  in  the  district,  banditism  has 
been  uprooted  and  smuggling  has  been  all  but  wiped  out.  Strong  organisations  of  peasant 
poor  have  come  into  being  in  the  villages,  the  Komsomol  organisations  are  ten  times  as 
strong  as  they  were  and  the  Party  organisations  have  expanded.  The  last  kulak  provocation 
in  Poddubtsy,  which  cost  us  the  life  of  our  comrade  Khorovodko,  has  been  expos ed.  The 
murderers, the miller and his son-in-law, have  been arrested and will be tried in a  few days by 
the  gubernia  assizes.  Several  delegations  from  the  villages  have  demanded  that  this 
congress pass a resolution demanding the supreme penalty for these bandits and terrorists." 
 
A storm of approval shook the hall. 
 
"Hear, hear! Death to the enemies of Soviet power!" 
 
Lida Polevykh appeared at one of the side doors. She beckoned to Pavel. 
 
Outside in the corridor she  handed him an  envelope marked "urgent". He opened it and  read:  
 
"To the Berezdov District Committee of the Komsomol. Copy to the District Committee of 
the  Party.  By  decision of  the  Gubernia  Committee  Comrade  Korchagin  is  recalled from 
the district to the Gubernia Committee for appointment to responsible Komsomol work."  
 
Pavel  took  leave  of  the  district  where  he  had  worked  for  the  past year.  There  were  two  i tems  on 
the  agenda  of  the  last  meeting  of  the  Party  District  Committee  held  before  his  departure:  1) 
Transfer  of  Comrade  Korchagin  to  membership  in  the  Communist  Party,  2)  Endorsement  of  his 
testimonial upon his release from the post of Secretary of the Komsomol District Committee. 
 
Lisitsyn  and  Lida  wrung  Pavel's  hand  on  parting  and  embraced  him  affectionately,  and  when 
his horse turned out of the courtyard onto the road, a dozen revolvers fired a parting salute.  
 
 
Chapter Five 
 
The  tramcar crawled  laboriously  up  Fundukleyevskaya Street,  its motors  groaning  with  the  effort. 
At the Opera House it stopped and a group of young people alighted. The car continued the climb. 
 
第 210 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
"We'd better get a move on," Pankratov urged the others, "or we'll be late 
for sure." Okunev caught up with him at the theatre entrance. 
"We  came  here  under  similar  circumstances  three  years  ago,  you remember,  Genka? 
That  was  when  Dubava  came  back  to  us  with  the  'Workers'  Opposition'.  A  grand 
meeting! And tonight we've got to grapple with him again!" 
They had presented their passes and been admitted into the hall before 
Pankratov replied: "Yes, history is repeating itself on the very same spot." 
They were hissed to silence. The evening session of the conference had already begun 
and they had to take the first seats they could find. A young woman was addressing the 
gathering from the rostrum. It was Talya. 
"We're  just  in  time.  Now  sit  quiet  and  listen  to  what  wifie  has  to  say,"  Pankratov 
whispered, giving Okunev a dig in the ribs. 
". . .It's true that we have spent much time and energy on this discussion, but I think that 
we  have  all  learned  a  great  deal  from  it.  Today  we  are  very  glad  to  note  that  in  our 
organisation  Trotsky's  followers  have  been  defeated.  They  cannot  complain  that  they 
were not given a hearing. On the contrary: they have had  every opportunity to express 
their point of view. As a matter of fact they have abused the freedom we gave them and 
committed a number of gross violations of Party discipline." 
 
Talya was nervous; you could tell by the way she kept tossing back a lock of hair that fell 
forward over her eyes as she spoke. 
"Many  comrades  from  the  districts  have  spoken  here,  and  they  have  all  had  something  to  say 
about  the  methods  the  Trotskyites  have  been  using.  There  are  quite  a  number  of  Trotskyites  at 
this  conference.  The  districts  deliberately  sent  them  here  to  give  us  another  opportunity  to  hear 
them  out  at  this  city  Party  conference.  It  is  not  our  fault  if  they  are  not  making  full  use  of  this 
opportunity. Evidently  their complete  defeat  in  the  districts  and  cells  has taught them something. 
They could hardly get up at this conference and repeat what they were saying only yesterday." 
 
A harsh voice from the right-hand corner of the hall interrupted Talya at 
this point: "We haven't had our say yet!" 
Talya turned in the direction of the voice: 
 
"All right, Dubava, come up here now and speak, we'll listen to you." 
Dubava stared gloomily back at her and his lips twisted in anger. 
 
"We'll talk when the time comes!" he shouted back. He thought of the crushing defeat he 
had sustained the day before in his own district. The memory still rankled. 
A low murmur passed over the hall. Pankratov, unable to restrain himself, 
cried out: "Going to try shaking up the Party again, eh?" 
Dubava  recognised  the  voice,  but  did not  turn round.  He  merely  dug  his  teeth  into his 
lower lip and bent his head. 
"Dubava  himself  offers  a  striking  example  of  how  the  Trotskyites  are  violating  Party  discipline," 
Talya went on. "He has worked in the Komsomol for a long time, many of us know him, the arsenal 
workers in particular. He is a student of the Kharkov Communist University, yet we all know that he 
has  been  here  with Shumsky  for the  past  three  weeks. What  has  brought  them  here in the  middle 
of the university term? There isn't a single district in town where they haven't addressed meetings. 
True, during the past few days Shumsky has shown signs of coming to his 
 
第 211 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
senses.  Who  sent  them  here?  Besides  them,  there  are  a  good  number  of  other 
Trotskyites  from  various  organisations.  They  all  worked  here  before  at  one  time  or 
another and now they have come back to stir up trouble within t he Party. Do their Party 
organisations know where they are? Of course not." 
The conference was expecting the Trotskyites to come forward and admit their mistakes. 
Talya,  hoping  to  persuade  them  to  take  this  step,  appealed  to  them  earnestly.  She 
addressed herself directly to them as if in comradely, informal debate: 
"Three years ago in this very theatre Dubava came back to us with the former 'Workers' 
Opposition'.  Remember?  And  do  you remember  what  he  said then:  'Never  shall  we  let 
the Party banner fall from our hands.' But hardly three years have passed and Dubava 
has done just that. Yes, I repeat, he has let the Party banner fall. 'We haven't had our say 
yet!' he just said. That shows that he and his fellow Trotskyites intend to go still further." 
"Let  Tufta  tell  us  about  the  barometer,"  came  a  voice  from  the  back  rows.  "He's  their 
weather expert." 
To which indignant voices responded: 
"This is no time for silly jokes!" 
 
"Are they going to stop fighting the Party or not? Let them answer 
that!" "Let them tell us who wrote that anti-Party declaration!" 
Indignation rose higher and higher and the chairman ra ng his bell long and insistently for 
silence. Talya's voice was drowned out by the din, and it was some time before she was 
able to continue. "The letters we receive from our comrades in the outlying localities 
show that they are with us in this and that is very encouraging. Permit me to read part of 
one letter we have received. It is from Olga Yureneva. Many of you here know her. She is 
in charge of the Organisational Department of an Area Committee of the Komsomol."  
 
Talya drew a sheet of paper out of a pile before her, ran her eye over it and began: 
 
"All  practical  work  has  been  neglected. For the  past  four  days  all  bureau  members  have  been  out 
in  the  districts  where  the  Trotskyites  have  launched  a  more  vicious  campaign  than  ever.  An 
incident occurred yesterday which aroused the indignation of the entire organisation. Failing to get 
a  majority  in  a single cell  in town,  the  opposition  decided to  rally  their  forces  and  put  up  a  fight  in 
the cell  of  the  Regional  Military  Commissariat,  which  also  includes  the  Communists  working  in  the 
Regional Planning Commission and Educational Department. The cell has forty -two members, but 
all  the  Trotskyites  banded  together  there.  Never  had  we  heard such  anti-Party speeches  as  were 
made  at  that meeting. One  of the Military  Commissariat  members  got  up  and  said  outright:  'If  the 
Party  apparatus  doesn't  give  in,  we  will  smash  it  by  force.'  The  oppositionists  applauded  that 
statement.  Then  Korchagin took  the  floor.  'How  can  you  applaud that  fascist  and  call yourselves 
Party members?'  he  said,  but  they  raised  such  a  commotion, shouting  and  banging  their  chairs, 
that  he  could  not  go  on.  The  members  who  were  disgusted  by  this  outrageous  behaviour 
demanded  that  Korchagin  be  given  a  hearing,  but  the  uproar  was  repeated  as soon  as  he  t ried  to 
make  himself  heard.  'So  this  is  what you call  democracy!'  he shouted  above  the  din.  'I'm  going  to 
speak just the same!' At that point several of them fell on him and tried to drag him off the platform. 
There  was  wild  confusion.  Pavel  fought  back  and  went  on speaking,  but they  dragged  him  off  the 
stage,  opened.  a  side  door  and  threw  him  onto  the  stairway,  his  face  was  bleeding.  After  that, 
nearly all the members left the meeting. That incident was an eye-opener for many. ..." 
 
第 212 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Talya left the platform. 
 
Segal,  who  had  been  in  charge  of  the  Agitation  and  Propaganda  Department  of  the 
Gubernia Party Committee for two months now, sat in the presidium next to Tokare v and 
listened  attentively  to  the  speeches of  the  delegates.  So  far  the  conference  had  been 
addressed exclusively by young people who were still in the Komsomol. 
"How they have matured these past few years!" Segal was thinking. 
 
"The opposition is already getting it hot," he remarked to Tokarev, "and the heavy artillery 
has not yet been brought into action. It's the youth who are routing the Trotskyites." 
Just then Tufta leapt onto the platform. He was met by a loud buzz of disapproval and a 
brief outburst  of laughter. Tufta turned to the presidium to protest against his reception, 
but the hall had already quieted down. 
"Someone  here  called  me  a  weather  expert.  So  that  is  how  you  mock  at  my  political 
views, Comrades of the majority!" he burst out in one breath. 
A roar of laughter greeted his words. Tufta appealed indignantly to the chairman: 
 
"You  can  laugh,  but  I  tell  you  once  again,  the  youth  is  a  barometer. Lenin  has  said  so 
time and again." 
In an instant silence reigned in the hall. 
 
"What did Lenin say?" came voices from the 
audience. Tufta livened up. 
"When preparations were being made for the October uprising Lenin iss ued instructions 
to  muster  the  resolute  working-class  youth, arm  them and  send  them  together  with  the 
sailors to the most important sectors. Do you want me to read you that passage? I have 
all the quotations down on cards." Tufta dug into his portfolio. 
"Never mind, we know it!" 
 
"But what did Lenin say about 
unity?" "And about Party discipline?"  
 
"When did Lenin ever set up the youth in opposition to the old guard?" Tufta 
lost the thread of his thoughts and switched over to another theme: 
 
"Lagutina here read a letter from Yureneva. We cannot be expected to answer for certain 
excesses that might occur in the course of debate." 
Tsvetayev, sitting next to Shumsky, hissed in fury: "Fools barge in. . . ." 
"Yes," Shumsky whispered back. "That idiot will ruin us completely." Tufta's 
shrill, high-pitched voice continued to grate on the ears of his hearers: 
 
"If you have organised a majority faction, we have the right to organise a minority 
faction." A commotion arose in the hall. 
Angry cries rained down on Tufta from all sides: 
"What's that? Again Bolsheviks and Mensheviks!" 
"The Russian Communist Party isn't a parliament!" 
 
"They're working for all sorts of factionists, from Myasnikov to Martov!" 
 
Tufta threw up his arms as if about to plunge into  a river, and ret urned an excited rapid -fire: 
 
"Yes, we must have  freedom to form groups. Otherwise how can we  who hold different  views  
 
 
 
第 213 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
fight for our opinions against such an organised, well-disciplined 
majority?" The uproar increased. Pankratov got up and shouted: 
"Let him speak. We might as well hear what he has to say. Tufta may blurt out what the 
others prefer to keep to themselves." 
The hall quieted down. Tufta realised that he had gone too far. Perhaps he ought not to have said 
that now. His thoughts went off at a tangent and he wound up his speech in a rush of words: 
 
"Of course you can  expel  us and shove us overboard.  That sort of t hing is  beginning  already. 
You've  already got me out of the Gubernia Committee of the Komsomol. But never mind, we'll 
soon see who  was right." And with that he jumped off the stage into the hall.  
 
Tsvetayev passed a note down to Dubava. "Mityai, you take the floor next. Of course it 
won't alter the situation, we are obviously getting the worst of it here. We must put Tufta 
right. He's a blockhead and a gas-bag." 
Dubava asked for the floor and his request was granted immediately. 
 
An  expectant  hush  fell  over  the  hall  as  he  mounted  the  platform.  It  was  the  usual  silence  that 
precedes  a  speech,  but  to  Dubava  it  was  pregnant  with  hostility.  The  ardour  with  which  he 
had  addressed  the  cell  meetings  had  cooled  off  by  now.  From  day  to  day  his  passion  had 
waned,  and  after  the  crushing  defeat  and  the  stern  rebuff  from  his  former  comrades,  it  was 
like  a  fire  doused  with  water,  and  now  he  was  enveloped  by  the  bitter  smoke  of  wounded 
vanity  made  bitterer  still  by  his stubborn  refusal  to  admit  himself  in  the  wrong.  He  resolved  to 
plunge  straight  in  although  he  knew  that  he  would  only  be  alienating  himself  still  further  from 
the majority. His voice  when he spoke was toneless, yet distinct. 
 
"Please do not interrupt me or annoy me by heckling. I want to set forth our position  in 
full, although I know in advance that it is no use. You have the majority." 
When  at  last  he  finished  speaking  it  was  as  if  a  bombshell  had  burst  in  the  hall.  A 
hurricane of angry shouts descended upon him, stinging him like whiplashes.  
"Shame!" 
 
"Down with the splitters!" 
"Enough mud-slinging!"  
 
To  the  accompaniment  of  mocking  laughter  Dubava  went  back  to  his  seat,  and  that  laughter 
cut like a knife-thrust. Had they stormed  and  railed at him he would have been  gratified, but to 
be jeered at like a third-rate  actor whose  voice had cracked on a false note  was too much.  
 
"Shumsky has the floor," announced the 
chairman. Shumsky got up. "I decline to speak." 
 
Then Pankratov's bass boomed from the back 
rows. "Let me speak!" 
Dubava  could  tell  by  his  voice  that  Pankratov  was  seething  inwardly.  His  deep  voice  always 
boomed  thus  when  he  was  mortally  insulted,  and  a  deep  uneasiness  seized  Dubava  as  he 
gloomily  watched  the  tall,  slightly  bent  figure  stride  swiftly  over  to  the  platform.  He  knew  what 
Pankratov  was  going  to  say.  He  thought  of  the  meeting  he  had  had  the  day  before  with  his  old 
friends  at Solomenka  and  how  they  had  pleaded  with  him  to  break  with the  opposition.  Tsvetayev 
and  Shumsky  had  been  with  him.  They  had  met  at  Tokarev's  place.  Pankratov,  Okunev,  Talya, 
Volyntsev,  Zelenova,  Staroverov  and  Artyukhin  had  been  present.  Dubava  had  remained  deaf  to 
this attempt to restore unity. In the middle of the discussion he had walked out with Tsvetayev,  
 
第 214 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
thus  emphasising  his  unwillingness  to  admit  his  mistakes.  Shumsky  had  remained.  And  now  he 
had  refused  to  take  the  floor.  "Spineless  intellectual!  Of  course  they've  won  him  over,"  Dubava 
thought  with  bitter  resentment.  He  was  losing  all  his  friends  in  this  frenzied  struggle.  At  the 
university  there  had  been  a  rupture  in  his  friendship  with  Zharky,  who  had sharply censured  the 
declaration  of  the  "forty-six"  at  a  meeting  of  the  Party  bureau.  And  later,  when  the  clash  grew 
sharper,  he  had ceased to  be  on speaking terms. Several  times  after that  Zharky  had come to  his 
place  to  visit  Anna.  It  was  a  year  since  Dubava  and  Anna  had  been  married.  They  occupied 
separate  rooms,  and  Dubava  believed  that  his  strained  relations  with  Anna,  who  did  not share  his 
views, had been aggravated by Zharky's frequent visits. It was not jealousy on his part, he assured 
himself,  but  under  the  circumstances  her  friendship  with  Zharky  irritated  him.  He  had  spoken  to 
Anna  about it  and  the  result  had  been  a  scene  which  had  by  no  means  improved  their  relations. 
He had left for the conference without telling her where he was going. 
 
The swift flight of his thoughts was cut short by Pankratov. 
 
"Comrades!" the word rang out as the speaker took up a position  at the very edge of the platform. 
"Comrades!  For  nine  days  we  have  listened  to  the  speeches  of  the  opposition,  and  I  must  say 
quite frankly that they spoke here not as fellow fighters, revolutionaries, our comrades in the class 
struggle.  Their  speeches  were  hostile,  implacable,  malicious  and  slanderous.  Yes,  Comrades, 
slanderous! They have tried to represent us Bolsheviks as supporters of a mailed-fist regime in the 
Party,  as  people  who  are  betraying  the  interests  of  their  class  and  the  Revolution.  They  have 
attempted  to  brand  as Party  bureaucrats  the  best, the  most  tried  and trusty  section  of  our  Party, 
the  glorious  old  guard  of  Bolsheviks, men  who  built  up  the  Russian  Communist Party, men  who 
suffered  in  tsarist  prisons,  men  who  with  Comrade  Lenin  at  their  head  have  waged  a  relentless 
struggle  against  world  Menshevism  and  Trotsky.  Could  anyone  but  an  enemy  make  such 
statements?  Is the Party  and  its  functionaries  not  one single  whole?  Then  what  is  this  all  about,  I 
want  to  know? What  would  we  say  of men  who  would  try  to  incite  young  Red  Army men  against 
their commanders and commissars, against army headquarters ― and at a time when the unit was 
surrounded  by the  enemy?  According to  the  Trotskyites, so  long  as  I  am  a  mechanic  I'm  'all  right', 
but if tomorrow I should become the secretary of a Party Committee I would be a 'bureaucrat' and 
a  'chairwarmer'!  Isn't  it  a  bit  strange,  Comrades,  that  among  the  oppositionists  who  are  fighting 
against  bureaucracy  and  for  democracy  there  should  be  men  like  Tufta,  for  example,  who  was 
recently  removed  from  his  job  for  being  a  bureaucrat?  Or  Tsvetayev,  who  is  well  known  to  the 
Solomenka  folks  for  his  'democracy';  or Afanasyev,  who  was taken  off  the  job three  times  by  the 
Gubernia Committee for his highhanded way of running things in Podolsk District? It turns out that 
all those whom the Party has punished have united to fight the Party. Let the old Bolsheviks tell us 
about  Trotsky's  'Bolshevism'.  It  is  very  important  for  the  youth  to  know  the  history  of  Trotsky's 
struggle  against  the  Bolsheviks,  about  his  constant  shifting  from  one  camp  to  another.  The 
struggle  against  the  opposition  has  welded  our  ranks  and  it  has  strengthened  the  youth 
ideologically.  The  Bolshevik  Party  and  the  Komsomol  have  become  steeled  in  the  fight  against 
petty-bourgeois  trends.  The  hysterical  panic-mongers  of  the  opposition  are  predicting  complete 
economic  and  political collapse. Our  tomorrow  will show  how  much these  prophecies  are  worth. 
They are demanding that we send old Bolsheviks like Tokarev, for  instance, back to the bench and 
replace him by some weather-vane like Dubava who imagines his struggle against the Party to be 
a sort of heroic feat. No, Comrades, we won't agree to that. The old Bolsheviks will get 
 
第 215 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
replacement, but not from among those who violently attack the Party line whenever we 
are  up  against  some  difficulty.  We  shall  not  permit  the  unity  of  our  great  Party  to  be 
disrupted.  Never  will  the  old  and  young  guard  be  split.  Under  the  banner  of  Lenin,  in 
unrelenting struggle against petty-bourgeois trends, we shall march to victory!" 
Pankratov descended the platform amid thunderous applause. 
The following day a group of ten met at Tufta's place. 
 
"Shumsky and I  are leaving today for Kharkov,"  Dubava said. " There is nothing more  for us to 
do here. You must try to keep together. All we can do now is to wait and see what happens. It 
is  obvious  that  the  All-Russia  Conference  will  condemn  us,  but  it  seems  to  me  t hat  it  is  too 
soon  to  expect  any  repressive  measures  to  be  taken  against  us.  The  majority  has  decided  to 
give  us another chance.  To carry on the struggle openly now, es pecially after the conference, 
means  getting kicked  out of the Party, and that does not  enter into  our plans. It is hard to say 
what the  future holds for us. I think that's all there is to be said." Dubava got up to go.  
 
The gaunt, thin-lipped Staroverov also rose. 
 
"I  don't  understand  you,  Mityai,"  he  said,  rolling  his r's  and  slig htly  stammering.  "Does 
that mean that the conference decision is not binding on us?" 
"Formally, it is," Tsvetayev cut him short. "Otherwise you'll lose your Party card. But we'll 
wait and see which way the wind blows and in the meantime we'll disperse." 
Tufta stirred uneasily in his chair. Shumsky, pale and downcast, with dark circles under 
his  eyes,  sat  by  the  window  biting  his  nails.  At  Tsvetayev's  words  he  abandoned  his 
depressing occupation and turned to the meeting. 
"I'm opposed to such manoeuvres," he said in sudden anger. "I personally consider that 
the decision of the conference is binding on us. We have fought for our convictions, but 
now we must submit to the decision that has been taken." 
Staroverov looked at him with approval. 
"That is what I wanted to say," he lisped. 
 
Dubava fixed Shumsky with his eyes and said with a sneer: 
 
"Nobody's  suggesting  that  you  do  anything.  You  still  have  a  chance  to  'repent'  at  the 
Gubernia Conference." 
Shumsky leapt to his feet. 
 
"I resent your tone, Dmitri! And to be quite frank, what you say disgusts me and forces 
me to reconsider my position." 
Dubava waved him away.  
 
"That's exactly what I thought you'd do. Run along and repent before it is too late." With 
that  Dubava  shook  hands  with  Tufta  and  the  others  and  left.  Shumsky  and  Staroverov 
followed soon after. 
 
 
Cruel  cold  marked  the  advent  in  history  of  the  year  one  thousand  nine  hundred  and 
twenty-four. January fastened its icy grip on the snowbound land, and from the second 
half of the month howling storms and blizzards raged. 
The Southwestern Railway was snowed up. Men fought the maddened elements. The steel screws of 
snowploughs cut into the drifts, clearing a path for the trains. Telegraph wires weighted down 
 
第 216 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
with ice snapped under the impact of frost and blizzard, and of the twelve lines only three 
functioned ― the Indo-European and two government lines. 
In  the  telegraph  office  at  Shepetovka  station  three  apparatuses  continued  their 
unceasing chatter understandable only to the trained ear. 
The  girl  operators  were  new  at  the  job;  the  length  of  the  tape  they  had  tapped  out  would  not 
have  exceeded  twenty  kilometres,  but  the  old  telegrapher  who  worked  beside  them  had 
already  passed  the  two-hundred-kilometre  mark.  Unlike  his  younger  colleagues  he  did  not 
need to read the tape in order to make out the message, nor did  he puzzle with  wrinkled brow 
over  difficult  words  or  phrases.  Instead  he  wrote  down  the  words  one  after  the  other  as  the 
apparatus ticked them out. Now his ear caught the  words "To all, to all, to all!"  
 
"Must  be  another  of those circulars  about clearing  away the  snow,"  the  old  telegrapher thought  to 
himself  as  he  wrote  down  the  words.  Outside,  the  blizzard  raged,  hurling  the  snow  against  the 
window.  The  telegrapher  thought  someone  was  knocking  at the  window,  his  eyes strayed  in  the 
direction of the sound and for a moment were arrested by the intricat e pattern the frost had traced 
on the panes. No engraver could ever match that exquisite leaf-and-stalk design! 
 
His  thoughts  wandered  and  for  a  while  he  stopped  listening  to  the  telegraph.  But 
presently he looked down and reached for the tape to read the  words he had missed. 
The telegraph had tapped out these words: 
 
"At  6.50  in  the  afternoon  of  January  21.  .  .."  Quickly  writing  down  the  words,  the 
telegrapher dropped the tape and resting his head on his hand returned to listening. 
"Yesterday in Gorki the death occurred...." Slowly he put the letters down on paper. How 
many messages had he taken down in his long life, joyous messages as  well as tragic 
ones, how often had he been the first to hear of the sorrows or happiness of others! He 
had  long  since  ceased  to  ponder  over  the  meaning  of  the  terse,  clipped  phrases,  he 
merely caught the sounds and mechanically set them down on paper. 
Now too someone had died, and someone was being notified of the  fact. The telegrapher  had 
forgotten the initial words: "To  all, to all, to all."  The  apparatus clicked out the letters "V -1-a-d-
i-m-i-r  I-1-y-i-c-h  ',  and  the  old  telegrapher  translat ed  the  hammer  taps  into  words.  He  sat 
there  unperturbed,  a  trifle  weary.  Someone  named  Vladimir  Ilyich  had  died  somewhere, 
someone  would  receive  the  message  with  the  tragic  tidings,  a  cry  of  grief  and  anguish  would 
be  wrung  from someone, but it was  no concern of his, for  he  was  only a chance  witness.  The 
apparatus  tapped  out  a  dot,  a  dash,  more  dots,  another  dash,  and  out  of  the  familiar  sounds 
he  caught  the  first  letter  and  set  it  down  on  the  telegraph  form.  It  was  the  letter  "L".  Then 
came  the  second  letter,  "E";  next  to  it  he  inscribed  a  neat  "N",  drawing  a  heavy  slanting  line 
between the two uprights, hastily added an "I" and absently  picked up the last letter ― "N". 
 
The apparatus tapped out a pause, and for the fraction of a second the telegrapher's eye 
rested on the word he had written: "LENIN".  
The apparatus went on tapping, but the familiar name now pierced the telegrapher's consciousness. He 
glanced once more at the last words of the message  ― "LENIN". What? Lenin? The entire text of the 
telegram flashed before his mind's eye. He stared at the telegraph form, and for the first time in all his 
thirty-two years of work he could not believe what he had written. 
 
He ran his eye swiftly thrice over the lines, but the words obstinately refused to change: "the death 
occurred of Vladimir Ilyich Lenin." The old man leapt to his feet, snatched up the spiral of tape 
 
第 217 页 共 259 页  
 
 
 
and  bored  it  with  his  eyes.  The  two-metre  strip  confirmed  that  which  he  refused  to 
believe!  He  turned a  deathlike face to  his  fellow  workers,  and  his  frightened  cry fell  on 
their ears: "Lenin is dead!" 
 
 
The  terrible  news  slipped  through  the  wide  open  door  of  the  telegraph  office  and  with  the 
speed  of a  hurricane swept over the station and into the blizzard, whipped over the tracks and 
switches and along  with the icy blast tore through the ironbound gates of the  railway shops.  
 
A  current  repair  crew  was  busy  overhauling  an  engine  standing  over  the  first  pit.  Old 
Polentovsky himself  had crawled down under the belly of  his engine  and was pointing  out the 
ailing  spots  to  the  mechanics.  Zakhar  Bruzzhak  and  Artem  were  straightening  out  the  bent 
bars of the fire grate.  Zakhar held the  grating on the anvil and Artem  wielded the hammer.  
 
Zakhar had aged. The past few years had left a deep furrow on his forehead and touched 
his temples with silver. His back was bent and there were shadows in his sunken eyes. 
The  figure  of  a man  was silhouetted  for  a  moment  in  the  doorway,  and then  the  evening  shadows 
swallowed  him  up.  The  blows  of  the  hammer  on  iron  drowned  out  his  first  cry,  but  when  he 
reached the men working at the engine Artem paused with his hammer poised to strik e. 
 
"Comrades! Lenin is dead!" 
 
The hammer slid slowly from Artem's shoulder and his hands lowered it noiselessly onto 
the concrete floor. 
"What's that? What did you say?" Artem's hand clutched convulsively at the sheepskin of 
the man who had brought the fearful tidings. 
And he, gasping for breath, covered with snow, repeated in a low, 
broken voice: "Yes, Comrades, Lenin is dead." 
And because the man did not shout, Artem realised that the terrible news was true. Only 
now did he recognise the man ― it was the secretary of the local Party organisation. 
Men climbed out of the pit and heard in silence of the death of the man with whose name 
the whole world had rung. 
Somewhere  outside  the  gates  an  engine  shriek ed,  sending  a  shudder  through  the  group  of 
men.  The  anguished  sound  was  echoed  by  another  engine  at  the  far  side  of  the  station,  then 
by  a  third.  Their  mighty  chorus  was  joined  by  the  siren  of  the  power  station,  high-pitched  and 
piercing  like  the  flight  of  shrapnel.  Then  all  was  drowned  out  by  the  deep  sonorous  voice  of 
the handsome engine of the  passenger train about to leave  for Kiev.  
 
A  GPU  agent started  in surprise  when the  driver  of  the  Polish  engine  of the Shepetovka-Warsaw 
express,  on  learning  the  reason  for  the  alarming  whistles,  listened  for  a  moment,  then  slowly 
raised his hand and pulled at the whistle cord. He knew that this was the last time he would do so, 
that he would never be allowed to drive this train again, but his hand did not let go of the cord, and 
the shriek of his engine roused the startled Polish couriers and diplomats from their soft couches. 
 
People crowded into the railway shops. They poured through all the gates and  when the 
vast  building  was  filled  to  overflowing  the  funeral  meeting  opened  amid  heavy  silence. 
The  old  Bolshevik  Sharabrin,  Secretary  of  the  Shepetovka  Regional  Committee  of  the 
Party, addressed the gathering. 
"Comrades! Lenin, the leader of the world proletariat, is dead. The Party has suffered an 
 
第 218 页 共 259 页  
 
 
 
irreparable  loss,  for  the  man  who  created  the  Bolshevik  Party  and  taught  it  to  be 
implacable  to  its  enemies  is  no  more....  The  death of  the  leader  of  our  Party  and  our 
class is a summons to the best sons of the proletariat to join our ranks...." 
The strains of the  funeral march  rang out, the men bared their  heads, and Artem,  who had not 
wept  for  fifteen years, felt a lump rising in  his throat and his powerful shoulders shook.  
 
The  very  walls  of  the  railwaymen's  club seemed to  groan  under the  pressure  of  the  human mass. 
Outside it was bitterly cold, the two tall fir-trees at the entrance to the hall were garbed in snow and 
icicles,  but inside  it  was suffocating  from  the  heated stoves  and  the  breath  of six  hundred  people 
who had gathered to the memorial meeting arranged by the Party organisation. 
 
The usual hum of conversation was stilled. Overpowering grief muffled men's voices and 
they  spoke  in  whispers, and  there  was  sorrow  and  anxiety  in  the  eyes  of  many.  They 
were like the crew of a ship that had lost her helmsman in a storm. 
Silently the members of the bureau took their seats on the platform. The stocky Sirotenko 
carefully lifted the bell, rang it gently and replaced it on the table. This was enough for an 
oppressive hush to settle over the hall. 
 
 
When  the  main  speech  had  been  delivered,  Sirotenko,  the  Secretary  of  the  Party 
organisation, rose to speak. And although the announcement he made was unusual for a 
memorial meeting, it surprised no one. 
"A number of workers," he said, "have asked this meeting to consider an application for 
membership  in  the  Party.  The  application  is  signed  by  thirty-seven  comrades."  And  he 
read out the application: 
 
"To the railway organisation of the Bolshevik Party at Shepetovka Station, Southwestern 
Railway. "The death of our leader is a summons to us to join the ranks of the Bolsheviks, 
and we ask that this meeting judge of our worthiness to join the Party of Lenin." 
 
Two columns of signatures were affixed to this brief statement. 
 
Sirotenko read them aloud, pausing a few seconds after each name to allow the meeting 
to memorise them. 
"Stanislav Zigmundovich Polentovsky, engine driver, thirty-six years of 
service." A murmur of approval rippled over the hall. 
"Artem Andreyevich Korchagin, mechanic, seventeen years of servic e." 
"Zakhar Filippovich Bruzzhak, engine driver, twenty-one years of service." 
 
The  murmur  increased  in  volume  as  the  man  on  the  platform  continued  to  call  out  the 
names of veteran members of the horny-palmed fraternity of railwaymen.  
Silence again reigned when Polentovsky, whose name headed the list, stood before the 
meeting. The old engine driver could not but betray his agitation as he told the story of his life. 
 
". . . What can I tell you, Comrades? You all know what the life of a workingman was like in the old 
days. Worked  like  a slave  all my  life  and  remained  a  beggar  in my  old  age. When the  Revolution 
came, I confess I considered myself an old man burdened down by family cares, and I did not see 
my way into the Party. And although I never sided with the enemy I rarely took part in 
 
第 219 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
the struggle myself. In nineteen hundred and five I was a member of the strike committee 
in the Warsaw railway shops and I was on the side of the Bolsheviks. I was young then 
and full of fight. But what's the use of recalling the past! Ilyich's death has struck right at 
my heart; we've lost our friend and champion, and it's the last time I'll ever speak about 
being old. I don't know how to put it, for I never was much good at speech making. But let 
me say this: my road is the Bolsheviks' road and no other." 
 
The engine driver tossed his grey head and his eyes under his white brows looked out 
steadily and resolutely at the audience as if awaiting its decisive words. 
Not a single  voice  was raised in opposition to the little grey -haired man's application, and no 
one abstained during the  voting in  which the non-Party people too were invited to take part. 
Polentovsky walked away from the presidium table a member of the Communist Party.  
 
Everyone  was  conscious  that  something  momentous  was  taking  place.  Now  Artem's  great  bulk 
loomed  where  the  engine  driver  had  just  stood.  The  mechanic  did  not know  what  to  do  with  his 
hands,  and  he  nervously  gripped  his  shaggy  fur  cap.  His  sheepskin  jacket,  threadbare  at  the 
edges,  was  open,  but  the  high-necked  collar  of  his  grey  army  tunic  was  fastened  on  two  brass 
buttons lending  his  whole  figure  a  holiday  neatness. Artem  turned  to  face  the  hall  and  caught a 
fleeting  glimpse  of  a  familiar  woman's  face.  It  was  Galina,  the stonemason's  daughter, sitting  with 
her workmates from the tailor shop. She was gazing at him with a forgiving smile, and in that smile 
he read approval and something he could not have put into words. 
 
"Tell them about yourself, Artem!" he heard Sirotenko say. 
 
But it was not easy for Artem to begin his tale. He was not accustomed to addressing such a large 
audience,  and  he  suddenly  felt  that  to  express  all  that  life  had stored  within  him  was  beyond  his 
powers. He fumbled painfully for words, and his nervousness made it all the harder for him. Never 
had he experienced the like. He felt that this was a vital turning point for him, that he was about to 
take a step that would bring warmth and meaning into his harsh, warped life. 
 
"There were four of us," Artem began. 
 
The  hall  was  hushed.  Six  hundred  people  listened  eagerly  to  this  tall  worker  with  the 
beaked nose and the eyes hidden under the dark fringe of eyebrows. 
"My mother worked as cook for the rich folk. I hardly remember my father; he and mother didn't get 
along. He drank too much. So mother had to take care of us kids. It was hard for her with so many 
mouths to feed. She slaved from morning till night and got four rubles a month and her grub. I was 
lucky  enough to  get two  winters  of school.  They  taught  me to  read  and  write,  but  when  I  turned 
nine  my  mother  had  to  send  me to  work  as  an  apprentice  in  a  machine shop.  I  worked  for  three 
years for nothing but my grub. . .. The shop owner was a German named Foerster. He didn't want 
to take me at first, said I was too young. But I was a sturdy lad, and my mother added on a couple 
of years. I worked three years for that German, but instead of learning a trade I had to do odd jobs 
around  the  house,  and  run  for  vodka.  The  boss  drank  like  a  fish. . .  .  He'd  send  me  to  fetch  coal 
and  iron  too.. .  .  The  mistress made  a  regular slave  out  of  me:  I  had to  peel  potatoes  and scour 
pots.  I  was  always  getting  kicked  and cuffed,  most times  for  no  reason,  just  out  of  habit.  If  I  didn't 
please  the  mistress  ―  and  she  was  always  on  the  rampage  on  account  of  her  husband's  drinking 
―  she  would  beat  me.  I'd  run  away  from  her  out  into the street,  but  where could  I  go,  who  was 
there to complain to? My mother was forty miles away, and she couldn't keep me anyway.... And in 
the shop it wasn't any better. The master's brother was in charge, a swine of a 
 
第 220 页 共 259 页  
 
 
 
man who used to enjoy playing tricks on me. 'Here boy,' he'd say, 'fetch me that washer from over 
there,' and he'd point to the corner by the forge. I'd run over and grab the washer and let out a yell. 
It  had  just come  out  of  the  forge;  and though it  looked  black  lying  there  on  the  ground,  when  you 
touched  it,  it  burned  right through the  flesh.  I'd stand there screaming  with the  pain  and  he'd  burst 
his sides laughing. I couldn't stand any more of this and I ran away home to mother. But she didn't 
know what to do with me, so she brought me back. She cried all the way there, I remember. In my 
third  year  they  began  to  teach  me  something  about  the  trade,  but  the  beatings  continued.  I  ran 
away  again,  this time to  Starokonstantinov.  I  found  work  in  a  sausage  factory  and  wasted more 
than  a year  and  a  half  washing casings.  Then  our  boss  gambled  away  his  factory,  didn't  pay  us a 
kopek  for  four  months  and  disappeared.  I  got  out  of that  hole, took  a train to  Zhmerinka  and  went 
to look for work. I was lucky enough to meet a railwayman there who took pity on me. When I told 
him I was a mechanic of sorts, he took me to his boss and said I was his nephew and asked him to 
find some work for me. By my size they took me for seventeen, and so I got a job as a mechanic's 
helper. As for my present job, I've been working here for more than eight years. That is all I can tell 
you about my past. You all know about my present life here." 
 
Artem wiped his brow with his cap and heaved a deep sigh. He had not yet said the chief 
thing. This was the hardest thing of all to say, but he had to say it before anyone asked 
the inevitable question. And knitting his bushy eyebrows, he went on with his story: 
"Why did I not join the Bolsheviks before? That is a question you all have the right to ask me. How 
can  I  answer?  After  all,  I'm  not  an  old man yet.  How  is  it  I  didn't  find  the  road  here  until today?  I'll 
tell  you  straight,  for  I've  nothing  to  hide.  I  missed  that  road,  I  ought  to  have  taken  it  back  in 
nineteen  eighteen  when  we  rose  against  the  Germans.  Zhukhrai,  the  sailor,  told  me  so  many  a 
time.  It  wasn't  until  1920  that  I  took  up  a  rifle. When  the storm  was  over  and  we  had  driven  the 
Whites into the Black Sea, we came back home. Then came the family, children. ... I got all tied up 
in  family  life.  But  now  that  our  Comrade  Lenin  is  gone  and  the  Party  has  issued  its  call,  I  have 
looked  back  at my  life  and seen  what  was lacking.  It's  not  enough to  defend  your  own  power,  we 
have  to  stick together  like  one  big  family, in  Lenin's  place,  so  that the S oviet  power  should stand 
solid like a mountain of steel. We must become Bolsheviks. It's our Party, isn't it?" 
 
When he finished, a little abashed at having made such a long speech, he felt as though 
a  great  weight  had  been  lifted  from  his  shoulders,  and,  pulling  himself  up  to  his  full 
height, he stood waiting for the questions to come. 
"Any questions?" Sirotenko's voice broke the ensuing silence. 
 
A stir ran over the gathering, but no one responded at first to the chairman's call. Then a 
stoker, straight from his engine and black as a beetle, said with finality: 
"What's there to ask? Don't we know him? Vote him in and be done with it!" 
 
Gilyaka, the smith, his face scarlet from the heat and the excitement, cried out hoarsely: 
 
"This comrade's the right sort, he won't jump the rails, you can depend on him. Vote him, 
Sirotenko!" 
At the very back of the hall where the Komsomols were sitting, someone, invisible in the 
semidarkness, rose and said: 
"Let Comrade Korchagin explain why he has settled on the land and how he reconciles 
his peasant status with his proletarian psychology." 
A light rustle of disapproval passed over the hall and a voice rose in protest: 
 
第 221 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
"Why don't you talk so us plain folks can understand? A fine time to show 
off...." But Artem was already replying: 
"That's  all  right,  Comrade. The  lad  is right about  my  having  settled on  the  land. That's 
true, but I haven’t betrayed my working-class conscience. Anyhow, that's over and done 
with from today. I'm moving my family closer to the sheds. It's better here. That cursed bit 
of land has been sticking in my throat for a long time." 
Once again Artem's heart trembled when he saw the forest of hands raised in his favour, 
and with head held high he walked back to his seat. Behind him he heard Sirotenko 
announce: "Unanimous." 
The  third  to  take  his  place  at  the  presidium  table  was  Zakhar  Bruzzhak,  Polentovsky's 
former  helper.  The  taciturn  old  man  had  been  an  engine  driver  himself  now  for  some 
time. When he finished his account of a lifetime of labour and brought his story up to the 
present, his voice dropped and he spoke softly but loud enough for all to hear: 
"It is my duty to finish  what my children began. They wouldn't have wanted me to hide 
away in a corner with my grief. That isn't what they died for. I haven't tried to fill the gap 
left by their death, but now the death of our leader has opened my eyes. Don' t ask me to 
answer for the past. From today our life starts anew." 
Zakhar's face clouded and looked stern as painful memories stirred within him. But when 
a sea of hands swept up, voting for his acceptance into the Party, his eyes lit up and his 
greying head was no longer bowed. 
Far  into  the  night  continued  this  review  of  the  new  Party  replacements.  Only  the  best 
were admitted, those whom everyone knew well, whose lives were without blemish.  
The  death  of  Lenin  brought  many  thousands  of  workers  into  the  Bolshevik  Party.  The 
leader was gone but the Party's ranks were unshaken. A tree that has thrust its mighty 
roots deep into the ground does not perish if its crown is severed. 
 
 
Chapter Six 
 
Two men stood at the entrance to the hotel concert hall. The taller of the two wore pince -
nez and a red armband marked "Commandant". 
"Is the Ukrainian delegation meeting here?" Rita inquired. 
"Yes," the tall man replied coldly. "Your business, Comrade?" 
 
The tall man blocked the entrance and examined Rita from head 
to foot. "Have you a delegate's mandate?" 
Rita produced her card with the gilt-embossed words "Member of the Central Committee" 
and the man unbent at once. 
"Pass in, Comrade," he said cordially. "You'll find some vacant seats over to 
the left." Rita walked down the aisle, saw a vacant seat and sat down. 
The meeting was evidently drawing to a close, for the chairman was summing up. His 
voice struck Rita as familiar. 
"The council of the All-Russia Congress has now been elected. The Congress opens in 
two hours' time. In the meantime permit me to go over the list of delegates once more." 
 
第 222 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
It was Akim! Rita listened with rapt attention as he hurriedly read out the list. As his name 
was called, each delegate raised his hand showing his red or white pass. 
Suddenly Rita caught a familiar name: Pankratov. 
 
She  glanced round  as  a  hand  shot  up  but  through  the  intervening  rows  she  could  not 
glimpse the stevedore's face. The names ran on, and again Rita heard one she knew  ― 
Okunev, and immediately after that another, Zharky. 
Scanning  the  faces  of  the  delegates  she  caught  sight  of  Zhar ky.  He  was  sitting  not  far 
away  with Kis face half turned towards her. Yes, it was Vanya all right. She had almost 
forgotten that profile. After all, she had not seen him for several years. 
The roll-call continued. And then Akim read out a name that caused Rita to start 
violently: "Korchagin." 
Far away in one of the front rows a hand rose and fell, and, strange to say, Rita was seized with a 
painful  longing  to  see  the  face  of  the  man  who  bore  the  same  name  as  her  lost  comrade.  She 
could not tear her eyes away from the spot where the hand had risen, but all the heads in the rows 
before  her  seemed  all  alike.  She  got  up  and  went  down  the  aisle  toward  the  front  rows.  At  that 
moment Akim  finished  reading.  Chairs  were  pushed  back  noisily  and  the  hall  was  filled  with  the 
hum of voices and young laughter. Akim, trying to make himself heard above the din, shouted": 
 
"Bolshoi Theatre ... seven o'clock. Don't be late!" 
 
The delegates crowded to the single exit. Rita saw that she would never be able to find 
any of her old friends in this throng. She must try to catch Akim before he left; he would 
help her find the others. Just then a group of delegates passed her in the aisle on their 
way to the exit and she heard someone say: 
"Well, Korchagin old man, we'd better be pushing off too!" 
And a well-remembered voice replied: "Good, let's go." 
 
Rita  turned  quickly.  Before  her  stood  a  tall,  dark-complexioned  young  man  in  a  khaki 
tunic with a slender Caucasian belt, and blue riding breeches. 
Rita stared at him. Then she felt his arms around her and heard his trembling voice say 
softly: "Rita", and she knew that it was Pavel Korchagin. "So you're alive?" 
These words told him all. She had not known that his reported death was a mistake. 
 
The  hall  had  emptied  out  long  since,  and  the  din  and  bustle  of  Tverskaya,  that  mighty 
artery of the city, poured through the open window. The clock struck six, but to both of 
them it seemed that they had met only a moment ago. But the clock summoned them to 
the Bolshoi Theatre. As they walked down the broad staircase to the exit she surveyed 
Pavel  once  more.  He  was  a  head  taller  than  her  now  and  more  mature  and  self -
possessed. But otherwise he was the Pavel she had always known. 
 
"I haven't even asked you where you are working," she said. 
 
"I am Secretary of the Regional Committee of the Komsomol, what Dubava would call a 
'penpusher'," Pavel replied with a smile. 
"Have you seen him?" 
 
"Yes, and I have the most unpleasant memories of that meeting." 
 
They  stepped  into  the  street.  Automobiles  hooted,  noisy  bustling  througs  filled  the  pavements. 
They  hardly  exchanged  a  word  on  the  way to the  theatre,  their minds  full  of  the same  thoughts. 
They found the theatre besieged by a surging, tempestuous sea of people which tossed itself 
 
第 223 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
against the stone bulk of the theatre building in an effort to break through the line of Red 
Army  men guarding the entrances. But the sentries gave admittance only to delegates, 
who passed through the cordon, their credentials proudly displayed. 
It was a Komsomol sea that surrounded the theatre, a sea of  young people who had been un able to 
obtain tickets to the opening of the Congress but who were determined to get in at all costs. Some of the 
more  agile  youngsters  managed  to  work  their  way  into  the  midst  of  groups  of  delegates  and  by 
presenting some slip of red paper sometimes contrived to get as far as the entrance. 
 
A  few  even  managed  to  slip  through  the  doors  only  to  be  stopped  by  the  Central 
Committee  man on duty, or the commandant who directed the guests and delegates to 
their  appointed  places.  And  then,  to  the  infinite  satisfaction  of  all  the  rest  of  the 
"ticketless" fraternity, they were unceremoniously ejected. 
The theatre could not hold a fraction of all who wished to be present. 
 
Rita and Pavel pushed their way with difficulty to the entrance. The delegates continued 
to  pour  in,  some  arriving  by  tram,  others  by  car.  A  large  knot  of them  gathered at  the 
entrance  and  the  Red  Army  men,  Komsomols  themselves,  were  pressed  back  against 
the wall. At that moment a mighty shout arose from the crowd near the entrance: 
"Bauman District, here goes!" 
"Come on, lads, our side's 
winning!" "Hurray!" 
Through the doorway along with Pavel and Rita slipped a sharp -eyed youngster wearing 
a  Komsomol  badge,  and  eluding  the  commandant,  made  a  beeline  for  the  foyer.  A 
moment later he was swallowed up by the crowd. 
"Let's sit here," Rita said, indicating two seats in a corner at the back of the stalls. 
 
"There  is one  question  I  must  ask  you,"  said  Rita  when  they  were  seated.  "It  concerns 
bygone days, but I am sure you will not refuse to answer it. Why did you break off our 
studies and our friendship that time?" 
And  though  Pavel  had  been  expecting  this  question  ever  since  they  had  met,  it 
disconcerted him. Their eyes met and Pavel saw that she knew. 
"I think you know the answer yourself, Rita. That happened three years ago, and now  I 
can only condemn Pavel for what he did. As a matter of fact Korchagin has committed 
many a blunder, big and small, in his life. That was one of them." 
Rita smiled. 
 
"An excellent preamble. Now for the answer!" 
 
"It  is  not  only  I  who  was  to  blame,"  Pavel  began  in  a  low  voice.  "It  was  the  Gadfly 's  fault  too, 
that revolutionary romanticism of his. In t hose days I  was  very much influenced  by books with 
vivid  descriptions  of  staunch,  courageous  revolutionaries  consec rated  to  our  cause.  Those 
men  made  a  deep  impression  on  me  and  I  longed  to  be  like  them.  I  allowed  The  Gadfly  to 
influence my feeling for you.  It seems absurd to me now, and I regret it more than I can say."  
 
"Then you have changed your mind about The Gadfly?" 
 
"No, Rita, not fundamentally. I have only discarded the needless tragedy of that painful process of 
testing one's will. I still stand for what is most important in the Gadfly, for his courage, his supreme 
endurance,  for the type  of man  who  is capable  of  enduring suffering  without  exhibiting  his  pain  to 
all and sundry. I stand for the type of revolutionary whose personal life is nothing as 
 
第 224 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
compared with the life of society as a whole." 
 
"It is a pity, Pavel, that you did not tell me this three years ago," said Rita with a smile 
that showed her thoughts to be far away. 
"A pity, you mean, because I have never been more to you than a 
comrade, Rita?" "No, Pavel, you might have been more." 
"But surely that can be remedied." 
 
"No, Comrade Gadfly, it is too late for that. You see, I have a little daughter now," Rita 
smilingly  explained.  "I  am  very  fond  of  her  father.  In  general,  the  three of  us  are  very 
good friends, and so far our trio is inseparable." 
Her  fingers  brushed  Pavel's hand.  The  gesture  was  prompted  by  anxiety  for  him,  but she  realised at 
once that it was unnecessary. Yes, he had matured in these three years, and not only physically. She 
could tell by his eyes that he was deeply hurt by her confession, but all he said was: 
 
"What I have left is still incomparably more than what I have just lost." And Rita knew that 
this was not merely an empty phrase, it was the simple truth. 
It  was  time  to  take  their  places  nearer  to  the  stage.  They  got  up  and  went  forward  to  the  row 
occupied  by  the  Ukrainian  delegation.  The  band struck  up.  Scarlet streamers  flung  across  the  hall 
were emblazoned with the words: "The Future Is Ours!" Thousands  filled the stalls, the boxes and 
the tiers of the great theatre. These thousands merged here in one mighty organism throbbing with 
inexhaustible  energy.  The  flower  of  the  young  guard  of  the  country's  great  industrial  brotherhood 
was gathered here. Thousands of pairs of eyes reflected the glow of those words traced in burning 
letters over the heavy curtain: "The Future Is Ours!" And still the human tide rolled in. Another few 
moments  and  the  heavy  velvet  curtain  would  move  aside,  and  the  Secretary  of  the  Central 
Committee  of  the  Russian  Young  Communist  League,  overwhelmed  for  a  moment  by  the 
solemnity of the occasion, would announce with a tremor in his voice: 
 
"I declare the Sixth Congress of the Russian Young Communist League open." 
 
Never  before  had  Pavel  Korchagin  been  so  profoundly,  so  stirringly  conscious  of  the 
grandeur and might of the Revolution, and an indescribable surge of pride and joy swept 
over him at the thought that life had brought him, a fighter and builder, to this tr iumphant 
rally of the young guard to Bolshevism. 
The  Congress  claimed  all  of  his  time  from  early  morning  until  late  at  night,  so  that  it  was  not 
until one  of the final sessions that Pavel met Rita again. She  was with a group of Ukrainians.  
 
"I  am  leaving  tomorrow  as  soon  as  the  Congress  closes,"  she  told  him.  "I  don't  know 
whether  we  will  have  another  chance  for  a  talk,  and  so  I  have  prepared  two  old 
notebooks of my diary for you, and a short note. Read them and send them back to me 
by post. They will tell you all that I have not told you." 
He pressed her hand and gave her a long look as if committing her features to memory.  
 
They  met  as  agreed  the  following  day  at  the  main  entrance  and  Rita  handed  him  a  package 
and  a  sealed  letter.  There  were  people  all  around  and  s o  their  leave-taking  was  restrained, 
but in her slightly misted eyes Pavel read  a deep tenderness tinged with sadness.  
 
The next day their trains bore them away in different directions. The Ukrainian delegation occupied 
several  carriages  of  the  train  in  which  Pavel  travelled.  He  shared  a  compartment  with  some 
delegates  from  Kiev.  In  the  evening,  when  the  other  passengers  had  retired  and  Okunev  on  the 
neighbouring berth was snoring peacefully, Pavel moved the lamp closer and opened the letter. 
 
第 225 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Pavel, my  darling!  I  might  have  told you  all  this  when  we  were  together,  but  it  is  better  this  way.  I 
wish only one thing: that what we spoke of before the Congress should leave no scar on your life. I 
know you  are  strong  and  I  believe  that you  meant  what  you said.  I  do  not  take  a  formal  attitude  to 
life,  I  feel  that  one  may  make  exceptions  ―  though  rarely  ―  in  one's  personal  relationships, 
provided  they  are  founded  on  a  genuine  and  deep  attachment. For  you  I  would  have  made  that 
exception,  but  I  rejected  my impulse to  pay  tribute to  our  youth.  I  feel that  there  would  be  no true 
happiness in it for either of us. Still, you ought not to be so harsh to yourself, Pavel. Our l ife is not 
all struggle, there is room in it for the happiness that real love brings. 
 
"As for the rest, the main purport of your life, I have no fears for you. I press your hand 
warmly. "Rita." 
 
Pavel tore up the letter reflectively; he thrust his hand ou t of the window and felt the wind 
tearing the scraps of paper out of his hand. 
By morning  he  had  read  both  notebooks  of  Rita's  diary,  wrapped them  up  and  tied them  ready  for 
posting.  At  Kharkov  he  left  the  train  with  Okunev  and  Pankratov  and  several  other  delegates. 
Okunev  was  going  to  Kiev  to  fetch  Talya,  who  was staying  with Anna. Pankratov,  who  had  been 
elected  member  of  the  Central  Committee  of  the  Ukrainian Komsomol,  also  had  business  in  Kiev. 
Pavel decided to go on with them to Kiev and pay a visit to Dubava and Anna. 
 
By the time he emerged from the post-office at the Kiev station after sending off the parcel to Rita, 
the  others  had  gone, so  he set  off  alone.  The  tram  stopped  outside  the  house  where  Anna  and 
Dubava  lived.  Pavel  climbed  the  stairs  to  the  second  floor  and  knocked  at  the  door  on  the  left, 
Anna's  room.  No  one  answered.  It  was  too  early  for  her  to  have  gone  to  work.  "She  must  be 
sleeping,"  he  thought.  The  door  of  the  neighbouring  room  opened  and  a  sleepy -eyed  Dubava 
came  out  on  the  landing.  His  face  was  ashen  and  there  were  dark  circles  under  his  eyes.  He 
exuded  a  strong  smell  of  onions  and  Pavel's  sharp  nose  caught  a  whiff  of  alcohol.  Through  the 
half-open door he caught a glimpse of the fleshy leg and shoulders of some woman on the bed. 
 
Dubava, noticing the direction of his glance, kicked the door shut. 
 
"You've  come  to  see  Comrade  Borhart,  I  suppose?"  he  inquired  hoarsely,  evading 
Pavel's eyes. "She doesn't live here any more. Didn't you know that?" 
Korchagin, his face stern, looked searchingly at 
Dubava. "No, I didn't. Where has she gone?" 
Dubava suddenly lost his temper. 
 
"That's no concern of mine!" he shouted. He belched and added with suppressed malice: "Come to 
console  her,  eh? You're  just  in time to  fill  the  vacancy.  Here's your chance.  Don't  worry, she  won't 
refuse you. She told me many a time how much she liked you ... or however those silly women put 
it. Go on, strike the iron while it's hot. It will be a true communion of soul and body." 
 
Pavel felt the blood rushing to his cheeks. Restraining himself with difficulty, he said in a 
low voice: 
"What are you doing to yourself, Mityai! I never thought you'd fall so low. You weren't a 
bad fellow once. Why are you letting yourself go to the dogs?" 
Dubava leaned back against the wall. The cement floor evidently felt cold to his bare feet, for he 
 
 
 
第 226 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
shivered. 
 
The door opened and a woman's face with swollen eyes and puffy cheeks 
appeared. "Come back in, duckie, what're you standing out there for?" 
Before she could say any more, Dubava slammed the door to and stood against it. 
 
"A fine beginning," Pavel observed. "Look at the company you're keeping. Where will it 
all end?" But Dubava would hear no more. 
"Are you going to tell me who I should sleep with?" he shouted. "I've had enough of your 
preaching. Now get back where you came from! Run along and tell them all that Dubava 
has taken to drinking and whoring." 
Pavel went up to him and said in a voice of suppressed emotion: 
"Mityai, get rid of that woman. I want to talk to you, for the last time...." 
 
Dubava's face darkened. He turned on his heel and went back into the room without 
another word. "The swine!" Pavel muttered and walked slowly down the stairs. 
 
 
Two  years  went  by.  Time counted  off  the  days  and  months,  but the swift colourful  pageant  of  life 
filled  its seeming  monotony  with  novelty, so that  no  two  days  were  alike.  The  great  nation  of  one 
hundred and sixty million people, the first people in the world to have taken the destiny of their vast 
land  with  its  untold  riches  into  their  own  hands,  were  engaged  in  the  Herculean  task  of  reviving 
their  war-ravaged  economy.  The  country  grew stronger,  new  vigour  flowed  into  its  veins,  and  the 
dismal spectacle of smokeless abandoned factories was no longer to be seen. 
 
For  Pavel  those  two  years  fled  by  in  ceaseless  activity.  He  was  not  one  to  take  life 
calmly, to greet each day with a leisurely yawn and retire at the stroke of ten. He lived at 
a swift tempo, grudging himself and others every wasted moment. 
He allowed a bare minimum of time for sleep. Often the light burned in his window late 
into  the  night,  and  within,  a  group  of  people  would  be  gathered  around  the  table 
engrossed  in  study.  They  had  made  a thorough  study  of  Volume  III  of  Capital  in  these 
two years and the subtle mechanics of capitalist exploitation were now revealed to them. 
Razvalikhin had turned up in the area where Korchagin now worked. He had been sent 
by the Gubernia Committee with the recommendation that he be appointed Secretary of 
a district Komsomol organisation. Pavel happened to be away when Razvalikhin arrived 
and  in  his  absence  the  Bureau  had  sent  the  newcomer  to  one  of  the  districts.  Pavel 
received the news on his return without comment. 
A  month  later  Pavel  made  an  unexpected  visit  to  Razvalikhin's  district.  There  was  not  much 
evidence,  but  what  there  was turned  out  to  be  sufficiently  damning:  the  new secretary  drank,  he 
had  surrounded  himself  with  toadies  and  was  suppressing  the  initiative  of  the  conscientious 
members. Pavel submitted the evidence to the Bureau, and when the meeting voted administering 
Razvalikhin a severe reprimand, Pavel surprised everyone by getting up and saying: 
 
"I move that he be expelled and that his expulsion be final." 
 
The others were taken aback by the motion. It seemed too severe a measure under the 
circumstances. But Pavel insisted. 
"The  scoundrel  must  be  expelled.  He  had  every  chance  to  become  a  decent  human  being,  but  he 
has remained an outsider in the Komsomol." And Pavel told the Bureau about the Berezdov 
 
第 227 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
incident. 
 
"I  protest!"  Razvalikhin  shouted.  "Korchagin  is  simply  trying  to  settle  personal  scores. 
What  he  says  is  nothing  but  idle  gossip.  Let  him  back  up  his  charges  with  facts  and 
documents. Suppose I were to come to you with a story th at Korchagin had gone in for 
smuggling, would you expel him on the strength of that? He's got to submit written proof." 
"Don't worry, I'll submit all the proofs necessary," Korchagin replied. 
 
Razvalikhin  left  the  room.  Half  an  hour  later  Pavel  persuaded  the  Bureau  to  adopt  a 
resolution expelling Razvalikhin from the Komsomol as an alien element. 
 
 
Summer  came  and  with  it  the  vacation  season.  Pavel's  fellow  workers  left  for  their  well -earned 
holiday one after another. Those whose health demanded it went to the seaside and Pavel helped 
them  to  secure  sanatorium  accommodations  and  financial  assistance.  They  went  away  pale  and 
worn,  but  elated  at the  prospect  of  their coming  holiday.  The  burden  of  t heir  work  fell  on  Pavel's 
shoulders and he bore the added load without a murmur. In due time they returned sunburned and 
full  of  life  and  energy,  and  others  went  off.  Throughout  the summer  the  office  was  short -handed. 
But life did not lessen its swift pace, and Pavel could not afford to miss a single day's work. 
 
The  summer  passed.  Pavel  dreaded  the  approach  of  autumn  and  winter  for  they 
invariably brought him much physical distress. 
He had looked forward with particular eagerness to the coming of summer th at year. For 
painful though it was for him to admit it even to himself he felt his strength waning from 
year  to  year.  There  were  only  two  alternatives:  to  admit  that  he  could not  endure  the 
intensive effort his work demanded of him and declare himself an invalid, or remain at his 
post as long as he could. He chose the latter course. 
One day at a meeting of the Bureau of the Regional Committee of the Party Dr. Bartelik, 
an old Party underground worker now in charge of public health in the region, came over 
and sat down beside him. 
"You're looking  rather seedy, Korchagin.  How's your health? Have you  been  examined by the 
Medical Commission? You  haven't?  I thought as much. But you look as if you were in need of 
an overhauling, my friend. Come over  on  Thursday evening and we'll have  a look at you." 
 
Pavel did not go. He was too busy. But Bartelik did not forget him and some time later he 
came  for  Pavel  and  took  him  to  the  commission  in  which  he  participated  as 
neuropathologist.  The  Medical  Commission  recommended "an  immediate  vacation  with 
prolonged treatment in the Crimea, to be followed by regular medical treatment. Unless 
this is done serious consequences are unavoidable." 
From  the  long  list  of  ailments  in  Latin  that  preceded  this  recommendation  Pavel 
understood  only  one  thing  ―  the  main  trouble  was  not  in  his  legs,  but  in  his  central 
nervous system, which was seriously impaired. 
Bartelik put the commission's decision before the Bureau, and the motion that Korchagin 
be  released  at  once  from  work  evoked  no  opposition.  Korchagin  himself,  however, 
suggested  that  his  vacation  be  postponed  until  the  return  of  Sbitnev,  Chief  of  the 
Organisational Department. He did not want to leave the Committee without leadership. 
The Bureau agreed, although Bartelik objected to the delay. 
 
第 228 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
And  so  in  three  weeks'  time  Pavel  was  to  leave  for  his  holiday,  the  first  in  his  life. 
Accommodation  had  already  been  reserved  for  him  in  a  Yevpatoria  sanatorium  and a 
paper to that effect lay in his desk drawer. 
He  worked  at  even  greater  pressure  in  this  period;  he  held  a  plenary  meeting  of  the 
Regional  Komsomol  and  drove  himself relentlessly  to  tie  up  all  loose  ends  so as  to  be 
able to leave with his mind at rest. 
And  on  the  very  eve  of  his  departure  for  his  first  glimpse  of  the  sea,  a  revolting, 
unbelievable thing happened. 
Pavel had gone to the Party propaganda section after work that day to attend a meeting. 
There was no one in the room when he arrived and so he had sat down on the windowsill 
by the open window behind the bookcase to wait for the others  to assemble. Before long 
several  people  came  in.  He  could  not  see  them  from  behind  the  bookcase  but  he 
recognised one voice. It belonged to Failo, the man in charge of the Regional Economic 
Department,  a  tall,  handsome  fellow  with  a  dashing  military  bearing,  who  had  earned 
himself a reputation for drinking and running after women. 
 
Failo had once been a partisan and never missed an opportunity to brag laughingly of the 
way he had sliced off the heads of Makhno men by the dozen. Pavel could not stand the 
man. One day a Komsomol girl had come weeping to Pavel with the story that Failo had 
promised to marry her, but after living with her for a week had left her and now did not 
even  greet  her  when  they  met.  When  the  matter  came  up  before  the  Control 
Commission,  Failo  wriggled  out  of  it  since the girl  could  give  no proofs.  But  Pavel  had 
believed her. He now listened while the others, unaware of his presence, talked freely. 
 
"Well, Failo, how goes it? What have you been up to lately?" 
 
The speaker was Gribov, one  of Failo's boon companions. For some reason Gribov was 
considered  a  propagandist  although  he  was  ignorant,  narrow-minded  and  stupid. 
Nevertheless he prided himself on being called a propaganda worker and made a point 
of reminding everyone of the fact on all and every occasion. 
"You  can  congratulate  me,  my  boy.  I  made  another  conquest  yesterday.  Korotayeva.  You 
said not hing  would c ome  of it.  That's  where y ou  were mistaken, my lad.  If  I  go  after a woman 
you may be sure I'll get her sooner or later," Failo boasted, adding some  obscenities.  
 
Pavel felt the nervous chill that always seized him when he was deeply roused. Korotayeva was in 
charge of the Women's Department and had come to the Regional Committee at the same time as 
he  had.  Pavel  knew  her  for  a  pleasant,  earnest  Party  worker, kind  and considerate to the  women 
who came to her for help and advice, and respected by her fellow workers in the Committee. Pavel 
knew that she was not married, and he had no doubt that it was of her that Failo had spoken. 
 
"Go on, Failo, you're making it up! It doesn't sound like her." 
 
"Me, making it  up? What do you take me  for?  I've broken in  harder cases than that. You  only 
have  to  know  how.  Got  to  have  the  right  approach.  Some  of  them  will  give  in  right  away,  but 
that  kind  aren't  worth  the  trouble.  Others  take  a  whole  month  to  come  to  heel.  The  important 
thing  is  to  understand  their  psychology.  The  right  approach,  that's  the  thing.  Why,  man,  it's  a 
whole science, but I'm a regular professor in such matters. Ho! Ho!  Ho!"  
 
Failo was positively slobbering with self-satisfaction. His listeners egged him on, all agog 
for more juicy details. 
 
 
 
第 229 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
Korchagin got up. He clenched his fists, feeling his heart pounding wildly in his chest. 
 
"I knew there wasn't much hope of catching Korotayeva with the usual bait, but I didn't want to give 
up  the  game,  especially  since  I'd  wagered  Gribov  a  dozen  of  port  wine  that  I'd  do  it.  So  I  tried 
subversive  tactics,  so  to  speak.  I  dropped  into  her  office  once  or  twice,  but  I  could  see  I  wasn't 
making much of an impression. Besides, there's all sorts of silly talk going on about me and some 
of it must have reached her ears.... Well, to cut a long story short, the frontal attack failed, so I tried 
flanking  tactics.  Ho!  Ho!  Pretty  good  that,  eh!  Well,  I  told  her my  sad story,  how  I'd  fought  at  the 
front,  wandered  about  the  earth  and  had  plenty  of  hard  knocks,  but  I'd  never  been  able to  find  the 
right sort of woman and so here I was a lonely cuss with nobody  to love me. ... And plenty more of 
the same sort of tripe. I was striking at her weak spots, see? I must admit I had a lot of trouble with 
her. At one point I thought I'd send her to hell and drop the whole silly business. But by now it was 
a  matter  of  principle,  and  so  out  of  principle  I  had  to  stick  it  out.  And  finally  I  broke  down  her 
resistance, and what do you think? She turned out to be a virgin! Ha! Ha! What a lark!"  
 
And Failo went on with his revolting story. 
 
Pavel, seething with rage, found himself beside 
Failo. "You swine!" he roared. 
"Oh, I'm a swine, am I, and what about you eavesdropping?" 
 
Pavel evidently said something else, because Failo who was a bit tipsy seized him by the 
front of his tunic. 
"Insult me, eh?" He shouted and struck Pavel with his fist. 
 
Pavel s natched a  heavy oak stool and knocked the  other down wit h one blow. Fortunately  for 
Failo, Pavel did not happen to have his revolver on him, or he would have been a dead man.  
 
But  the  senseless,  incredible  thing  had  happened,  and  on  the  day  scheduled  for  his 
departure to the Crimea, Pavel stood before a Party court. 
The  whole  Party  organisation  had  assembled  in  the  town  theatre.  The  incident  had 
aroused  much  feeling,  and  the  hearing  developed  into  a  serious  discussion  of  Party 
ethics, morals and personal relationships. The case served as a signal for the discussion 
of the general issues involved, and the incident itself was relegated to the background. 
Failo  behaved  in  the  most  insolent  manner,  smiling  sardonically  and  declaring  that  he 
would  take  the  case  to  the  People's  Court and  that  Korchagin  would  get  a  hard  labour 
sentence for assaulting him. He refused categorically to answer any questions. 
 
"You want to have a nice little gossip at my expense? Nothing doing. You can accuse me 
of  anything  you  like,  but  the  fact  remains  that  the  women  here  have  their  knife  in  me 
because  I  don't  pay  any  attention  to  them.  And  this  whole  case  of  yours  isn't  worth  a 
damn. If this was 1918 I'd settle scores with that madman Korchagin in my own way. And 
now you can carry on without me." And he left the hall. 
The chairman then asked Pavel to tell what had happened. Pavel began calmly enough, 
though he restrained himself with difficulty. 
"The  whole  thing  happened  because  I  was  unable  to control myself.  But the  days  when  I  worked 
more  with  my  hands  than  with  my  head  are  long  since  gone.  What  happened  this  time  was  an 
accident.  I  knocked  Failo  down  before  I  knew  what  I  was  doing.  This  is  the  only  instance  of 
'partisan'  action  I  have  been  guilty  of  in the  past  few  years,  and  I condemn  it,  although  I think  that 
the blow was well deserved. Failo's type is a disgusting phenomenon. I cannot understand, I shall 
 
第 230 页 共 259 页  
 
 
 
never believe that a revolutionary, a Communist, can be at the same time a dirty beast 
and a scoundrel. The only positive aspect of the whole business is that it has focussed 
our attention on the behaviour of our fellow Communists in private life." 
The overwhelming majority of the membership voted in favour of expelling Failo from the 
Party.  Gribov  was  administered  a  severe  reprimand  for  giving  false  evidence  and  a 
warning that the next offence would mean expulsion. The others who had taken part in 
the conversation admitted their mistake and got off with a word of censure. 
Bartelik  then  told  the  gathering  about  the  state  of  Pavel's  nerves  and  the  meeting  protested 
violently  when  the  comrade  who  had  been  appointed  by the Party to  investigate  the  case moved 
that Korchagin be reprimanded. The investigator withdrew his motion and Pavel was acquitted. 
 
 
A few days later Pavel was on his way to Kharkov. The Regional Committee of the Party 
had  finally  granted his  insistent request  to  be released  from  his  job  and  placed  at  the 
disposal  of  the  Central  Committee  of  the  Ukrainian  Komsomol.  He  had  been  given  a 
good testimonial. Akim was one of the secretaries of the Central Committee. Pavel went 
to see him as soon as he arrived in Kharkov and told him the whole story. 
Akim looked over Pavel's testimonial. It declared him to be "boundlessly devoted to the Party", but 
added:  "A levelheaded  Party  worker,  on  the  whole,  he  is,  however,  on  rare  occasions  apt  to  lose 
his self-control. This is due to the serious condition of his nervous system." 
 
"Spoiled a good testimonial with that fact, Pavel," said Akim. "But never mind, boy, such 
things happen to the strongest of us. Go south and build up your health and when you 
come back we'll talk about work." 
And Akim gave him a hearty handshake. 
 
 
 
The  Kommunar  Sanatorium  of  the  Central  Committee.  White  buildings  overgrown  with 
vines set amid gardens of rose bushes and sparkling fountains, and vacationers in white 
summer  clothes  and  bathing  suits....  A  young  woman  doctor  entered  his  name  in  the 
register and he found himself in a spacious room in the corner building. Dazzling  white 
bed linen, virginal cleanliness and peace, blessed undisturbed peace. 
After a refreshing bath and a change of clothes, Pavel hurried down to the beach. 
 
The sea lay before him calm, majestic, a blue-black expanse of polished marble, spreading all the 
way  to  the  horizon.  Far  away  in  the  distance  where  sea  met  sky  a  bluish  haze  hovered  and  a 
molten  sun  was  reflected  in  a  ruddy  glow  on  its  surface.  The  massive  contours  of  a  mountain 
range were dimly seen through the morning mist. Pavel breathed the invigorating freshness of the 
sea breeze deep into his lungs and feasted his eyes on the infinite calm of the blue expanse. 
 
A wave rolled lazily up to his feet, licking the golden sand of the beach. 
 
 
 
Chapter Seven 
 
The garden of the central poly clinic adjoined the grounds of the Central Committee Sanatorium. 
 
 
 
第 231 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
The patients used it as a short cut on their way home from the beach. Pavel loved to rest 
here  in  the  shade  of a  spreading plane  tree  which  grew  beside  a  high  limestone  wall. 
From this quiet nook he could watch the lively movement of the crowd strolling al ong the 
garden paths and listen to the music of the band in the evenings without being jostled by 
the gay throngs of the large health resort. 
Today too he had sought his favourite retreat. Drowsy from the sunshine and the bath he 
had just taken, he stretched himself out luxuriously on the chaise-lounge and fell into a 
doze.  His bath towel and the book he was reading, Furmanov's Insurrection, lay on the 
chair beside him. His first days in the sanatorium had brought no relief to his nerves and 
his  headaches  continued.  His  ailment  had  so  far  baffled  the  sanatorium  doctors,  who 
were  still  trying  to  get  to  the  root  of  the  trouble.  Pavel  was  sick  of  the  perpetual 
examinations. They wearied him and he did his best to avoid his ward doctor, a pleasant 
woman with the curious name of Yerusalimchik, who had a difficult time hunting for her 
unwilling patient and persuading him to let her take him to some specialist or other. 
 
"I'm tired of the whole business," Pavel would plead with her. "Five times a day I have to 
tell the same story and answer all sorts of silly questions: was your grandmother insane, 
or did your great-grandfather suffer with rheumatism? How the devil should I know what 
he suffered from? I never saw him in my life! Every doctor tries to induce me to con fess 
that  I  had  gonorrhea  or  something  worse,  until  I  swear  I'm  ready  to  punch  their  bald 
heads. Give me a chance to rest, that's all I want. If I'm going to let myself be diagnosed 
all the six weeks of my stay here I'll become a danger to society." 
 
Yerusalimchik would laugh and joke with him, but a few minutes later she would take him 
gently by the arm and lead him to the surgeon, chattering volubly all the way.  
But  today  there  was  no  examination  in  the  offing,  and  dinner  was  an  hour  away. 
Presently,  through  his  doze,  he  heard  steps  approaching.  He  did  not  open  his  eyes. 
"They'll think I'm asleep and go away," he thought. Vain hope! He heard the chair beside 
him creak as someone sat down. A faint  whiff of perfume told him it  was a  woman.  He 
opened his eyes. The first thing he saw was a dazzling white dress and a pair of bronzed 
feet encased in soft leather slippers, then a boyish bob, two enormous eyes, and a row of 
white teeth as sharp as a mouse's. She gave him a shy smile. 
 
"I haven't disturbed you, I hope?" 
 
Pavel made no reply, which was not very polite of him, but he still hoped that she 
would go. "Is this your book?" She was turning the pages of Insurrection. 
"It is." 
 
There was a moment of silence. 
 
"You're from the Kommunar Sanatorium, aren't you?" 
 
Pavel stirred impatiently. Why couldn't she leave him in peace? Now she would start 
asking about his illness. He would have to go. 
"No," he replied curtly. 
 
"I was sure I had seen you there." 
 
Pavel was on the point of rising when a deep, pleasant woman's voice behind 
him said: "Why, Dora, what are you doing here?'' 
A plump, sunburned, fair-haired girl in a beach costume seated herself on the edge of a chair. She 
 
 
 
第 232 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
glanced quickly at Korchagin. 
 
"I've seen you somewhere, Comrade. You're from Kharkov, aren't 
you?" "Yes." 
"Where do you work?" 
 
Pavel decided to put an end to the conversation. 
 
"In the garbage disposal department," he replied. The laugh this sally evoked  made 
him jump. "You're not very polite, are you, Comrade?" 
That is how their friendship began. Dora  Rodkina turned out to be  a member of the B ureau  of 
the  Kharkov  City  Committee  of  the  Party  and  later,  when  they  came  to know  each  other  well, 
she often teased him about the amusing incident with  which their acquaintance had started.  
 
 
One  aft ernoon  at  an  open-air  concert  in  t he  grounds  of  the  Thalassa  Sanatorium  Pavel  ran 
across his old friend Zharky. And curious to relate, it was a foxtrot that brought them together.  
 
After  the  audience  had  been  treated  to  a  highly  emotional  rendering  of  Oh,  Nights  of  Burning 
Passion  by  a  buxom  soprano,  a  couple  sprang  onto  the  stage.  The  man,  half-naked  but  for  a 
red  top  hat,  some  shiny  spangles  on  his  hips,  a  dazzling  white  shirt  front  and  bow  tie,  in 
feeble  imitation  of  a  savage,  and  his  doll-fac ed  partner  in  voluminous  skirts.  To  the 
accompaniment  of  a  delighted  buzz  from  the  crowd  of  beefy -necked  shopowners  standing 
behind the armchairs and cots occupied by the sanatorium patients, the couple gyrated  about 
the  stage  in  the  intric ate  figures  of  a  foxtrot.  A  more  revolting  spectacle  could  scarcely  be 
imagined.  The  fleshy man in  his idiotic top  hat, with  his partner pressed tightly to him, writhed 
on the stage in suggestive poses. Pavel heard the stertorous breathing of some  fat carcass at 
his back. He turned to go  when someone in the front row  got up and shouted:  
 
"Enough of this brothel show! To hell with 
it!" It was Zharky. 
The pianist stopped playing and the violin subsided with a squeak. The couple on the 
stage ceased writhing. The crowd at the back set up a vicious hissing. 
"What impudence to interrupt a 
number!" "All Europe is dancing 
foxtrot!" "Outrageous!" 
But Seryozha Zhbanov, Secretary of the Cherepovets Komsomol organisation and one of 
the  Kommunar  patients,  put  four  fingers  into  his  mouth  and  emitted a  piercing  whistle. 
Others followed his example and in an instant the couple vanished from the stage, as if 
swept off by a gust of wind. The obsequious compere who looked like nothing so much 
as an old-time flunkey, announced that the concert troupe was leaving. 
"Good riddance to bad rubbish!" a lad in a sanatorium bathrobe shouted amid general 
laughter. Pavel went over to the front rows and found Zharky. The two friends had a long 
chat in Pavel's room. Zharky told Pavel that he was working in the propaganda section of 
one of the Party's regional committees. 
"You didn't know I was married, did you?" said Zharky. "I'm expecting a son or a daughter 
before long." 
"Married, eh?" Pavel was surprised. "Who is your wife?" 
 
第 233 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Zharky took a photograph out of his pocket and showed it to 
Pavel. "Recognise her?" 
It was a photo of himself and Anna Borhart. 
 
"What happened to Dubava?" Pavel asked in still greater surprise. 
 
"He's  in  Moscow.  He  left  the  university  after  he  was  expelle d  from  the  P arty.  He's  at  the 
Bauman  Technical  Institute  now.  I  hear  he's  been  reinstated.  Too  bad,  if  it's  true.  He's  rotten 
through and through. ... Guess what Pankrat ov is doing? He's assistant director  of  a shipyard. 
I  don't  know  much  about  the  others.  We've  lost  touch  lately.  We  all  work  in  different  parts  of 
the country. But it's nice to get together occasionally and recall the old times."  
 
Dora came in bringing several other people with her. She glanced at the decoration on 
Zharky's jacket and asked Pavel: 
"Is your comrade a Party member? Where does he 
work?" Puzzled, Pavel told her briefly about Zharky. 
"Good," she said. "Then he can remain. These comrades have just come from Moscow. 
They are going to give us the latest Party news. We decided to come to your room and 
hold a sort of closed Party meeting," she explained. 
With  the  exception  of  Pavel  and  Zharky  all  the  newcomers  were  old  Bolsheviks. 
Bartashev,  a  member  of  the  Moscow  Control  Commission,  told  them  about  the  new 
opposition headed by Trotsky, Zinoviev and Kamenev. 
"At this critical moment we ought to be at our posts," Bartashev said in conclusion.  "I am 
leaving tomorrow." 
Three days after that meeting in Pavel's room the sanatorium was deserted. Pavel too left 
shortly afterward, before his time was up. 
The  Central  Committee  of  the  Komsomol  did  not  detain  him.  He  was  given  an 
appointment as Komsomol Secretary in one of the industrial regions, and within a week 
he was already addressing a meeting of the local town organisation. 
Late  that autumn  the  car  in  which  Pavel  was  travelling  with  two  other  Party  workers  to 
one of the remote districts, skidded into a ditch and overturned. 
All the occupants were injured. Pavel's right knee was crushed. A few days later he was 
taken to the surgical institute in Kharkov. After an examination and X-ray of the injured 
limb the medical commission advised an immediate operation. 
Pavel gave his consent. 
 
"Tomorrow morning then," said the stout professor, who headed the commission. He got 
up and the others filed out after him. 
A small bright ward with a single cot. Spotless cleanliness and the peculiar hospital smell 
he  had  long  since  forgotten.  He  glanced  about  him.  Beside  the  cot  stood  a  small  table 
covered with a snow-white cloth and a white-painted stool. And that was all. 
The nurse brought in his supper. Pavel sent it back. Half-sitting in his bed, he was writing 
letters. The pain in his knee interfered with his thoughts and robbed him of his appetite. 
When the fourth letter had been written the door opened softly and a young woman in a 
white smock and cap came over to his bed. 
In the twilight he made out a pair of arched eyebrows and large eyes that seemed black. 
In one hand she held a portfolio, in the other, a sheet of paper and a pencil. 
 
第 234 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
"I am your ward doctor," she said. "Now I am going to ask you a lot of questions and you 
will have to tell me all about yourself, whether you like it or not." 
She  smiled  pleasantly  and  her  smile  took  the edge  off  her  "cross-examination".  Pavel 
spent  the  better  part  of  an  hour  telling  her  not  only  about  himself  but  about  all  his 
relatives several generations back. 
 
 
...  The  operating  theatre.  People  with  gauze  masks  over  noses  and  mouths.  Shining 
nickel instruments, a long narrow table with a huge basin beneath it. 
The professor was still washing his hands when Pavel lay down on the operating table. 
Behind  him  swift  preparations  were being  made  for  the  operation.  He  turned  his head. 
The nurse was laying out pincets and lancets. 
look,  Comrade  Korchagin,"  said  Bazhanova,  his  ward  doctor,  who  was 
"Don't 
unbandaging his leg. "It is bad for the nerves." 
"For whose nerves, doctor?" Pavel asked with a mocking smile. 
 
A few minutes later a heavy mask covered his face and he heard the professor's voice 
saying: "We are going to give you an anaesthetic. Now breathe in deeply through your 
nose and begin counting." 
"Very  well,"  a  calm  voice  muffled  by  the  mask replied.  "I  apolog ise  in  advance  for  any 
unprintable remarks I am liable to make." 
The professor could not suppress a smile. 
 
The first drops of ether. The suffocating loathsome smell. 
 
Pavel took a deep breath and making an effort to speak distinctly began counting. The 
curtain had risen on the first act of his tragedy. 
 
 
Artem tore open the envelope and trembling inwardly unfolded the letter. His eyes bored 
into the first few lines, then ran quickly over the rest of the page. 
 
"Artem!  We  write  to  each  other  so  seldom,  once,  or  at  best  twice  a  year!  But  is  it  quantity  that 
matters? You write that you and your family have moved from Shepetovka to Kazatin railway yards 
because  you  wished  to  tear  up  your  roots.  I  know  that  those  roots  lie  in  the  backward,  petty -
proprietor  psychology  of  Styosha  and  her  relatives.  It is  hard to  remake  people  of  Styosha's  type, 
and  I  am  very  much  afraid you  will  not  succeed. You say you  are  finding  it  hard  to  study  'in your 
old  age', yet you seem  to  be  doing  not so  badly. You  are  wrong  in  your  stubborn  refusal  to  leave 
the  factory  and  take  up  work  as  Chairman  of  the  Town  Soviet. You  fought  for  the  Soviet  power, 
didn't you? Then take it! Take over the Town Soviet tomorrow and get to work! 
 
"Now  about  myself.  Something  is  seriously  wrong  with  me.  I  have  become  a  far  too 
frequent inmate in hospitals. They have cut me up twice. I have lost quite a bit of blood 
and strength, but nobody can tell me yet when it will all end. 
"I am no longer fit for work. I have acquired a new profession, that of 'invalid'. I am enduring much 
pain, and the net result of all this is loss of movement in the joint of my right knee, several scars in 
various parts of my body, and now the latest medical discovery: seven years ago I injured 
 
第 235 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
my spine and now I am told that this injury may cost me dearly. But I am ready to endure 
anything so long as I can return to the ranks. 
"There is nothing more terrible to me in life than to fall out of the ranks. That is a possibility I refuse 
to  contemplate.  And  that  is  why  I  let  them  do  anything  they  like  with  me.  But  there  is  no 
improvement and the clouds grow darker and thicker all the time. After the first operation I returned 
to work as soon as I could walk, but before long they brought me back again. Now I am being sent 
to  a  sanatorium  in  Yevpatoria.  I  leave  tomorrow.  But  don't  be  downhearted,  Artem,  you  know  I 
don't  give  in  easily.  I  have  life  enough  in  me  for  three.  You  and  I  will  do  some  good  work  yet, 
brother.  Now  take care  of  your  health,  don't try to  overtax  your  strength,  because  health  repairs 
cost the Party far too much. All the experience we gain in work, and the knowledge we acquire by 
study is far too precious to be wasted in hospitals. I shake your hand. 
 
"Pavel." 
 
While Artem, his heavy brows knitted, was reading his brother's letter, Pavel was taking 
leave of Dr. Bazhanova in the hospital. 
"So you are leaving for the Crimea tomorrow?" she said as she gave him her hand. "How 
are you going to spend the rest of the day?" 
"Comrade  Rodkina  is  coming  here  soon,"  Pavel  replied.  "She  is  taking  me  to  her  place  to 
meet her family. I shall spend the night there  and tomorrow she will take me to the station."  
 
Bazhanova knew Dora for she had often visited Pavel in the hospital. 
 
"But,  Comrade  Korchagin,  have  you  forgotten  your  promise  to  let  my  father  see  you 
before you go? I have given him a detailed account of your illness and I should like him 
to examine you. Perhaps you could manage it this evening." 
Pavel agreed at once. 
 
That evening Bazhanova showed Pavel into her father's spacious office. 
 
The  famous  surgeon  gave  Pavel  a  careful  examination.  His  daughter  had  brought  all  the  X-ray 
pictures and analyses from the clinic. Pavel could not help noticing how pale she turned when her 
father  made  some  lengthy  remark  in  Latin.  Pavel  stared  at  the  professor's  large  bald  head  bent 
over him and searched his keen eyes, but Bazhanov's expression was inscrutable. 
 
When  Pavel  had  dressed,  the  professor  took  leave  of  him  cordially,  explaining  that  he  was 
due at a conference, and left his daughter to inform Pavel of the result of his examination.  
 
Pavel  lay  on  the  couch  in  Bazhanova's  tastefully  furnished  room  waiting  for  the  doctor  t o 
speak.  But  she  did  not  know  how  to  begin.  She  could  not  bring  herself  to  repeat  what  her 
father  had  told  her  ―  that  medicine  was  so  far  unable  to  check  the  disastrous  inflammatory 
process  at  work  in  Pavel's  organism.  The  professor  had  been  opposed  to  an  operation.  "This 
young man is fated to lose the use of his limbs and we are powerless to avert the tragedy." 
 
She did not consider it wise either as doctor or friend to tell him the whole truth and so in 
carefully chosen words she told him only part of the truth. 
"I am certain, Comrade Korchagin, that the Yevpatoria mud will put you right and that by 
autumn you will be able to return to work." 
But she had forgotten that his sharp eye had been watching her all the time.  
 
"From  what  you  say,  or  rather  from  what  you  have  n ot  said,  I  see  that  the  situation  is  grave. 
Remember I  asked you always to be perfectly frank with me. You need  not hide anything from  
 
 
第 236 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
me, I shan't faint or try to cut my throat. But I very much want to know what is in store for 
me." Bazhanova evaded a direct answer by making some cheerful remark and Pavel did 
not learn the truth about his future that night. 
"Do not forget that I am your friend, Comrade Korchagin," the doctor said softly in parting. 
"Who knows what life has in store for you. If ever you need my help or my advice please 
write to me. I shall do everything in my power to help you." 
Through the window she  watched the tall leather-clad figure, leaning heavily on a stick, 
move painfully from the door to the waiting cab. 
 
 
Yevpatoria  again.  The  hot  southern  sun.  Noisy  sunburned  people  in  embroidered 
skullcaps.  A  ten-minute  drive  brought  the  new  arrivals  to  a  two-storey  grey  limestone 
building ― the Mainak Sanatorium. 
The  doctor  on  duty,  learning  that  Pavel's  accommodation  had  been  reserved  by  the 
Central Committee of the Ukrainian Communist Party, took him up to room No. 11.  
"I shall put you in with Comrade Ebner. He is a German an d he has asked for a Russian 
room-mate,"  he  explained  as  he  knocked  at  the  door.  A  voice  with  a  heavy  German 
accent sounded from within. "Come in." 
Pavel  put  down  his  travelling  bag  and  turned  to  the  fair-haired  man  with  the  lively  blue 
eyes who was lying on the bed. The German met him with a warm smile.  
"Guten  Morgen,  Genosse.  I  mean,  good  day,"  he  corrected  himself,  stretching  a  pale, 
long-fingered hand to Pavel. 
A  few  moments  later  Pavel  was  sitting  by  his  bed  and  the  two  were  engrossed  in  a  lively 
conversation  in  that  "international  language"  in  which  words  play  a  minor  role,  and 
imagination, gestures and mimicry, all the media  of the unwritten Esperanto, fill in the gaps.  
 
Pavel learned that Ebner was a German worker who had been wounded in the hip during 
the Hamburg uprising of 1923. The old wound had re-opened and he was confined to his 
bed. But he bore his sufferings cheerfully and that won Pavel's respect for him at once . 
Pavel could not have wished for a better room-mate. This one would not talk about his 
ailments from morning till night and bemoan his lot. On the contrary, with him one could 
forget one's own troubles. 
"Too bad I don't know any German, though," Pavel thought ruefully. 
 
 
 
In a corner of the sanatorium grounds stood several rocking-chairs, a bamboo table and two bath-
chairs.  It  was  here  that  the  five  patients  whom  the  others  referred  to  as  the  "Executive  of  the 
Comintern" were in the habit of spending their time after the day's medical treatments were over. 
 
Ebner  half  reclined in  one  of  the  bath-chairs.  Pavel,  who  had  also  been  forbidden  to  walk,  in  the 
other.  The three  other members  of  the  group  were Weiman,  a  thickset Estonian,  who  worked  at a 
Republican Commissariat of Trade, Marta Laurin, a young, brown-eyed Lettish woman who looked 
like  a  girl  of  eighteen,  and  Ledenev,  a  tall,  powerfully -built  Siberian  with  greying  temples.  This 
small  group  indeed  represented  five  different  nationalities  ― German, Estonian,  Lettish,  Russian 
and Ukrainian. Marta and Weiman spoke German and Ebner used them as interpreters. 
 
第 237 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Pavel and Ebner were friends because they shared the same room; Marta, Weiman and Ebner, 
because they shared a common language. The bond between Ledenev and Korchagin was chess. 
Before Ledenev arrived, Korchagin had been the sanatorium chess "champion". He had won the 
title from Weiman after a stiff struggle. The phlegmatic Estonian had been somewhat shaken by 
his defeat and for a long time he could not forgive Korchagin for having worsted him. But one day 
a tall man, looking remarkably young for his fifty years, turned up at the sanatorium and sugges ted 
a game of chess with Korchagin. Pavel, having no inkling of danger, calmly began with a Queen's 
Gambit, which Ledenev countered by advancing his central pawns. As "champion", Pavel was 
obliged to play all new arrivals, and there was always a knot of interested spectators around the 
board. After the ninth move Pavel realised that his opponent was cramping him by steadily 
advancing his pawns. Pavel saw now that he had a dangerous opponent and began to regret that 
he had treated the game so lightly at the start. 
 
After  a  three-hour  struggle  during  which  Pavel  exerted  all  his  skill  and  ingenuity  he  was 
obliged  to  give  up.  He  foresaw  his  defeat  long  before  any  of  the  onlookers.  He  glanced  up  at 
his opponent and saw  Ledenev looking  at him with  a kindly smile.  It was clear that he too saw 
how  the  game  would  end.  The  Estonian,  who  was  following  the  game  tensely  and  making  no 
secret of his desire to see Korc hagin defeated, was still unaware  of  what was happening.  
 
"I always hold out to my last pawn," Pavel said, and Ledenev nodded approvingly. 
 
Pavel  played  ten  games  with  Ledenev  in  five  days,  losing  seven,  winning  two  and 
drawing one. Weiman was jubilant. 
"Thank  you,  Comrade  Ledenev,  thank  you!  That  was  a  wonderful  thrashing  you  gave 
him! He deserved it! He knocked out all of us old chess players and now he's been paid 
back by an old man himself. Ha! Ha!" 
"How does it feel to be the loser, eh?" he teased the now vanquished victor. 
 
Pavel lost the title of "champion" but won in Ledenev a friend who was later to beco me 
very  precious  to  him.  He  saw  now  that  his  defeat  on  the  chessboard  was  only  to  have 
been expected. His knowledge of chess strategy had been purely superficial and he had 
lost to an expert who knew all the secrets of the game. 
Korchagin and Ledenev found that they had one important date in common: Pavel  was 
born the year Ledenev joined the Party. Both were typical representatives of the young 
and  old  guard  of  Bolsheviks.  The  one  had  behind  him  a  long  life  of  intensive  political 
activity, years of work in  the underground movement and tsarist imprisonment, followed 
by  important  government  work;  the  other  had  his  flaming  youth and  only eight  years  of 
struggle, but years that could have burnt up more than one life. And both of them, the old 
man and the young, were avid of life and broken in health. 
 
In  the  evenings  the  room  shared  by  E bner  and  K orchagin  became  a  sort  of  club.  All  the 
political  news  emanated  from  here.  The  room  rang  with  laughter  and  talk.  Weiman  usually 
tried  to  insert  a  bawdy  anec dote  into  the  c onversation  but  invariably  found  himself  attacked 
from  two  sides,  by  Marta  and  Korc hagin.  As  a  rule  Marta  was  able  to  restrain  him  by  some 
sharp sarcastic remark, but when this did  not help Korchagin  would intervene.  
 
"Your particular brand of 'humour' is not exactly to our taste, you know, Weiman," Marta 
would say. 
"I can't understand how you can stoop to that sort of thing," Korchagin would begin. 
 
 
 
第 238 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
Weiman would stick out his thick underlip and survey the gathering with a mocking glint 
in his small eyes. 
"We shall have to set up a department of morals under the Political Enlightenment Department and 
recommend  Korchagin  as  chief  inspector.  I  can  understand  why  Marta  objects,  she  is  the 
professional feminine opposition, but Korchagin is just trying to pose as a young innocent, a sort of 
Komsomol babe-in-arms. . . . What's more, I object to the egg trying to teach the hen." 
 
After  one  heated  debate  on  the  question  of  communist  ethics,  the  matter  of  obscene  jokes 
was  discussed  from  the  standpoint  of  principle.  Marta  t ranslat ed  to  Ebner  the  various  views 
expressed. "Die erotische Anekdot e" he said, "is no good. I agree with Pavel."  
 
Weiman  was obliged to retreat. He laughed the matter off as best he could, but told no 
more smutty stories. 
Pavel  had taken Marta for a K omsomol member, judging her to be  no more than nineteen. He 
was much surprised when he learned that she had been in the Party since 1917, that she  was 
thirty-one  and  an  active  member  of  the  Lat vian  Communist  Party.  In  1918  the  Whites  had 
sentenced her to  be shot, but she had eventually been turned over to the Soviet  Government 
along  with  some  other  comrades  in  an  exchange  of  prisoners.  She  was  now  working  on  the 
editorial staff of the Pravda and taking a university course at the same time.  
 
Before Pavel was aware of it, a friendship sprang up between them, and the little Lettish 
woman who often dropped in to see Ebner, became an inseparable member of the "five". 
Eglit, a Latvian underground worker, liked to tease her on this score. "What about poor 
Ozol pining away at home in Moscow? Oh Marta, how can you?" 
Every morning, just before the bell to rise sounded, a lusty cockcrow would ring out over 
the  sanatorium.  The  puzzled  attendants  would  run  hither  and  thither  in  search  of  the 
errant bird. It never occurred to them that Ebner, who could give a perfect imitation of a 
cockcrow, was having a little joke at their expense. Ebner enjoyed himself immensely.  
Toward the end of his month's stay in the sanatorium Pavel's condition took a tu rn for the 
worse. The doctors ordered him to bed. Ebner was much upset. He had grown very fond 
of this courageous young Bolshevik, so full of life and energy, who had lost his health so 
early  in  life.  And  when  Marta  told  him  of  the  tragic  future  the  doctor s  predicted  for 
Korchagin, Ebner was deeply distressed. 
Pavel  was  confined  to  his  bed  for  the  remainder  of  his  stay  in  the  sanatorium.  He 
managed to hide his suffering from those around him, and Marta alone guessed by his 
ghastly pallor that he must be in pain. A week before his departure Pavel received a letter 
from the Ukrainian Central Committee informing him that his leave had been prolonged 
for two months on the advice of the sanatorium doctors who declared him unfit for work. 
Money to cover his expenses arrived along with the letter. 
 
Pavel  took  this  first  blow  as  years  before  during  his  boxing  lessons  he  had  taken 
Zhukhrai's punches. Then too he had fallen only to rise again at once. 
A  letter  came  from  his  mother  asking  him  to  go and  see an  old  friend   of hers,  Albina 
Kyutsam, who lived in a small port town not far from Yevpatoria. Pavel's mother had not 
seen her friend for fifteen years and she begged him to pay her a visit while he was in the 
Crimea. This letter was to play an important role in Pavel' s life. 
A week later his sanatorium friends gave him a warm send-off at the pier. Ebner embraced him 
 
 
 
第 239 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
and kissed him like a brother. Marta was away at the time and Pavel left without saying 
good-bye to her. 
The  next  morning  the  horse  cab  which  brought  Pavel  from  the  pier  drove up  to  a  little 
house fronted by a small garden. 
The Kyutsam family consisted of  five people: Albina the mother, a plump elderly woman 
with dark, mournful eyes and traces of beauty on her aging face, her two daughters, Lola 
and Taya, Lola's little son, and old Kyutsam, the head of the house, a burly, unpleasant 
old man resembling a boar. 
Old Kyutsam worked in a co-operative store. Taya, the younger girl, did any odd job that 
came along, and Lola, who had been a typist, had recently separated from her husband, 
a drunkard and a bully, and now stayed at home to look after her little boy an d help her 
mother with the housework. Besides the two daughters, there was a son named George, 
who was away in Leningrad at the time of Pavel's arrival. 
The family gave Pavel a warm welcome. Only the old man eyed the visitor with hostility 
and suspicion. 
Pavel patiently told Albina all the family news, and in his turn learned a good deal about 
the life of the Kyutsams. 
Lola  was  twenty-two.  A  simple  girl,  with  bobbed  brown  hair  and  a  broad-featured,  open  face, 
she  at  onc e  took  Pavel  int o  her  confidence  and  initiated  him  int o  all  the  family  secrets.  She 
told  him  that  the  old  man  ruled  the  whole  family  with  a  despotic  hand,  suppressing  the 
slightest  manifestation  of  independence  on  the  part  of  the  others.  Narrow-minded,  bigoted 
and captious, he kept the  family in a  permanent state of terror.  This had  earned him the deep 
dislike  of  his  children  and  the  hatred  of  his  wife  who  had  fought  vainly  against  his  despotism 
for  twenty-five  years.  The  girls  always  took  their  mother's  side.  These  incessant  family 
quarrels were poisoning their lives. Days passed in endless bickering and strife.  
 
Another source of family trouble, Lola told Pavel, was her brother George, a typical good -
for-nothing, boastful, arrogant, caring for nothing but good food, strong drink and smart 
clothes.  When  he  finished  school,  George,  who  had  been  his  mother's  favourite, 
announced that he was going to the university and demanded money for the trip. 
"Lola can sell her ring and you've got some things you can raise money on too. I need 
the money and I don't care how you get it." 
George  knew  very  well  that  his  mother  would  refuse  him  nothing  and  he  shamelessly  took 
advantage of her affection for him. He looked down on his sisters. The mother sent her son all the 
money  she  could  wheedle  out  of  her  husband,  and  whatever  Taya  earned  besides.  In  the 
meantime  George,  having  flunked  the  entrance  examinations,  had  a  pleasant  time  in  Leningrad 
staying with his uncle and terrorising his mother by frequent telegraphic demands for more money. 
 
Pavel did not meet Taya until late in the evening of his arrival. Her mother hurried out to 
meet her in the hallway and Pavel heard her whispering the news of his coming. The girl 
shook  hands  shyly  with  the  strange  young  man,  blushing  to  the  tips  of  her  small  ears, 
and Pavel held her strong, calloused little hand for a few moments before releasing it. 
Taya was in her nineteenth year. She was not beautiful, yet with her large brown eyes, 
and her slanting, Mongolian brows, fine nose and full fresh lips she was very attractive. 
Her firm young breasts stood out under her striped blouse. 
 
第 240 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
The  sisters  had  two  tiny  rooms  to  themselves.  In  Taya's  room  there  was  a  narrow  iron  cot,  a 
chest  of  drawers  covered  with  knick-knacks,  a  small  mirror,  and  dozens  of  photographs  and 
postcards  on  the  walls.  On  the  windowsill  stood  two  flower  pots  wit h  scarl et  geraniums  and 
pale pink asters. The lace curtain was caught up  by a pale blue ribbon.  
 
"Taya does not usually admit members of the male sex to her room. She is making an 
exception for you," Lola teased her sister. 
The  next  evening  the  family  was  seated  at  tea  in  the  old  couple's  half  of  the  house. 
Kyutsam stirred his tea busily, casting hostile glances over his spectacles at the visitor. 
"I  don't  think  much  of  the  marriage  laws  nowadays,"  he  said.  "Married  one  day, 
unmarried the next. Just as you please. Complete freedom." 
The old man choked and spluttered. When he recovered his breath he pointed to Lola. 
 
"Look at her, she and that fine fellow of hers got married without asking anyone's 
permission and separated the same way. And now it's me who's got to feed her and her 
brat. An outrage I call it!" Lola blushed painfully and hid her tear-filled eyes from Pavel. 
"So you think she ought to live with that scoundrel?" Pavel asked, his eyes 
flashing. "She should have known whom she was marrying." 
Albina intervened. Barely repressing her wrath, she said quickly: "Why must you discuss 
such things before a stranger? Can't you find anything else to talk about?" 
The old man turned and pounced on her: 
 
"I know what I'm talking about! Since when have you begun to tell me what to do!" 
 
That  night  Pavel  lay  awake  for  a  long  time  thinking  about  the  Kyutsams. Brought  here  by chance, 
he  had  unwittingly  become  a  participant  in  this  family  drama.  He  wondered  how  he could  help  the 
mother  and  daughters  to  free  themselves  from  this  bondage.  His  own  life  was  far  from  settled, 
many problems remained to be solved and it was harder than ever before to take resolute action. 
 
There  was  clearly  but  one  way  out:  the  family  had  to  break  up,  the  mother  and  daughters 
must leave the old man. But this was not so simple. Pavel was in no  position to undertake this 
family revolution, for  he  was due to leave in a few  days and he might never see these people 
again.  Was  it  not  better  to  let  things  take  their  course  instead  of  trying  to  stir  these  turbid 
backwaters? But the repulsive image  of the old man gave him no  rest. Several plans occurred 
to Pavel but on second thoughts he discarded them all as impracticable.  
 
The next day was Sunday and when Pavel returned from a walk in town he found Taya 
alone at home. The others were out visiting relatives. 
Pavel went to her room and dropped wearily onto a chair. 
"Why don't you ever go out and enjoy yourself?" he asked her. 
"I don't want to go anywhere," she replied in a low voice. 
 
He remembered the plans he had thought of during the night and decided to put them before 
her. Speaking quickly so as to finish before the others returned, he went straight to the point. 
 
"Listen,  Taya, you  and  I  are  good  friends. Why  should  we stand  on  ceremony  with  each  other?  I 
am going away soon. It is a pity that I should have come to know your family just at the time when 
I  myself  am  in  trouble,  otherwise  things might  have  turned  out  differently.  If  this  happened  a year 
ago  we  could  all  leave  here  together.  There  is  plenty  of  work  everywhere  for  people  like you  and 
Lola. It's useless to expect the old man to change. The only way out is for you to leave home. But 
that is impossible at present. I don't know yet what is going to happen to me. I am going t o 
 
第 241 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
insist  on  being  sent  back  to  work.  The  doctors  have  written  all  s orts  of  nonsens e  about  me 
and  the  comrades  are  trying  to  make  me  cure  myself  endlessly.  But  we'll  see  about  that....  I 
shall  write  to  mother  and  get  her  advice  about  your  trouble  here.  I  can't  let  things  go  on  this 
way.  But  you  must  realise,  Tay a,  that  this  will  mean  wrenching  yourself  loose  from  your 
present life. Would you want that, and  would you have the strength to go through wit h it?" 
 
Taya looked up. 
 
- "I do want it," she said softly. "As for the strength, I don't 
know." Pavel could understand her uncertainty. 
"Never mind, Taya! So long as the desire is there everything will be all right. Tell me, are 
you very much attached to your family?" 
Taya hesitated for a moment. 
 
"I  am  very  sorry  for  mother,"  she  said  at  last.  "Father  has  made  her  life  miserable  and 
now  George  is  torturing  her.  I'm  terribly  sorry for her,  although  she  never  loved  me  as 
much as she does George...." 
" They had a long heart to heart talk. Shortly before the rest of the family returned, Pavel 
remarked jokingly: 
"It's surprising the old man hasn't married you off to someone by 
now." Taya threw up her hands in horror at the thought. 
"Oh no, I'll never marry. I've seen what poor Lola has been through. I shan't get married 
for anything." 
Pavel laughed. 
 
"So you've settled the matter for the rest of your life? And what if some fine, handsome 
young fellow comes along, what then?" 
"No, I won't. They're all fine while they're courting." 
Pavel laid his hand conciliatingly on her shoulder. 
 
"That's all right, Taya. You can get along quite well without a h usband. But you needn't 
be so hard on the young men. It's a good thing you don't suspect me of trying to court 
you, or there'd be trouble," and he patted her arm in brotherly fashion. 
"Men like you marry girls of a different sort," she said softly. 
 
 
 
A  few  days  later  Pavel  left  for  Kharkov.  Taya,  Lola  and  Albina  with  her sister  Rosa came  to  the 
station to see him off. Albina made him promise not to forget her daughters and to help them all to 
find  some  way  out  of  their  plight.  They  took  leave  of  him  as   of someone  near  and  dear to them, 
and  there  were  tears in  Taya's  eyes.  From  the  window  of  his carriage Pavel  watched  Lola's  white 
kerchief and Taya's striped blouse grow smaller and smaller until they finally disappeared. 
 
In Kharkov he put up at his friend Petya Novikov's place, for he did not want to disturb 
Dora.  As  soon  as  he  had  rested  from  the  journey  he  went  to  the  Central  Committee. 
There he waited for Akim, and when at last the two were alone, he asked to be sent at 
once to work. Akim shook his head. 
"Can't be done, Pavel! We have the decision of the Medical Commission and the Central 
Committee  says  your  condition  is  serious.  You're  to  be  sent  to the  Neu -ropathological 
Institute for treatment and not to be permitted to work." 
 
第 242 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
"What do I care what they say, Akim! I am appealing to you. Give me a chance to work! 
This moving about from one hospital to another is killing me." 
Akim  tried  to  refuse.  "We  can't  go  against  the  decision.  Don't  you  see  it's  for  your  own  good, 
Pavel?" he argued. But Pavel pleaded his cause so fervently that Akim finally gave in.  
 
The  very  next  day  Pavel  was  working  in  the  Special  Department  of  the  Central  Committee 
Secretariat. He believed that he had only to begin working for his lost strength to return to him. But 
he  soon  saw  that  he  had  been  mistaken.  He sat  at  his  desk  for  eight  hours  at  a  stretch  without 
pausing  for  lunch  simply  because  the  effort  of  going  down  three  flights  of  stairs  to  the  canteen 
across the way was too much for him. Very often his hand or his leg would suddenly go numb, and 
at  times  his  whole  body  would  be  paralysed  for  a  few  moments.  He  was  nearly  always  feverish. 
On  some  mornings  he  found  himself  unable  to  rise  from  his  bed,  and  by  the  time  the  attack 
passed,  he  realised  in  despair that  he  would  be  a  whole  hour  late  for  work. Finally the  day came 
when  he  was  officially  reprimanded  for  reporting  late  for  work  and  he  saw  that  this  was  the 
beginning of what he dreaded most in life ― he was falling out of the ranks. 
 
Twice  Akim  helped  him  by  shifting  him  to  other  work,  but  the  inevitable  happened.  A 
month  after  his  return  to  work  he  was  confined  to  his  bed  again.  It  was  then  that  he 
remembered Bazhanova's parting words. He  wrote to her and she came the same day. 
She told him what he had wanted to know: that hospitalisation was not imperative. 
"So I don't need any more treatment? That's fine!" he said cheerfully, but the joke fell flat. 
 
As soon as he felt a little stronger he went back to the Central Committee. This time Akim 
was adamant. He insisted on Pavel's going to the hospital. 
"I'm not going," Pavel said wearily. "It's useless. I have it on excellent authority. There is 
only  one  thing  left  for  me  ―  to  retire  on  pension.  But  that  I  shall  never  do!  You  can't 
make me give up my work. I am only twenty-four and I'm not going to be a labour invalid 
for the rest of my life, moving from hospital to hospital, knowing that it won't do me any 
good. You must give me something to do, some work suitable to my condition. I can work 
at home, or I can live in the office. Only don't give me any paper work. I've got to have 
work that will give me the satisfaction of knowing that I can still be useful." 
 
Pavel's voice, vibrant with emotion, rose higher and higher. 
 
Akim  felt  keenly  for  Pavel.  He  knew  what  a  tragedy  it  was  for  this passionate -hearted 
youth, who had given the whole of his short life to the Party, to be torn from the ranks and 
doomed to a life far from the battlefront. He resolved to do all he could to help him.  
"All right, Pavel, calm yourself. There will be a meeting of the Secretariat tomorrow and 
I'll put your case before the comrades. I promise to do all I can." 
Pavel rose heavily and seized Akim's hand. 
 
"Do you really think, Akim, that life can drive me into a corner and crush me? So long as 
my heart beats here"  ― and he pressed Akim's hand to his chest so that he could feel 
the dull pounding of his heart ― "so long as it beats, no one will be able to tear me away 
from the Party. Death alone can put me out of the ranks. Remember that, my friend." 
Akim said nothing. He knew that this was not an empty phrase. It was the cry of a soldier mortally 
wounded in battle. He knew that men like Korchagin could not speak or feel otherwise. 
 
Two days later Akim told Pavel that he was to be given an opportunity to work on the staff of a big 
newspaper, provided, of course, it was found that he could be used for literary work. Pavel 
 
第 243 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
was courteously received at the editorial office and was intervie wed by the assistant 
editor, an old Party worker, and member of the Presidium of the Central Control 
Committee of the Ukraine. "What education have you had, Comrade?" she asked him.  
"Three years of elementary school." 
 
"Have you been to any of the Party political 
schools?" "No." 
"Well, one can be a good journalist without all that. Comrade Akim has told us about you. 
We can give you work to do at home, and in general, we are prepared to provide you with 
suitable  conditions  for  work.  True,  work  of  this  kind  requires  considerable  kn owledge. 
Particularly in the sphere of literature and language." 
This  was  by  no  means  encouraging.  The  half-hour  interview  showed  Pavel  that  his 
knowledge was inadequate, and the trial article he wrote was returned to him with some 
three dozen stylistic and spelling mistakes marked in red pencil. 
"You  have  considerable  ability,  Comrade  Korchagin,"  said  the  editor,  "and  with  some  hard 
work  you  might  learn  to  write  quit e  well.  But  at  the  present  time  your  grammar  is  faulty.  Your 
article  shows  that  you  do  not  know  the  Russian  language  well  enough.  That  is  not surprising 
considering that you have had no time to learn it. Unfort unat ely we can't use you, although as 
I  said  before,  you  have  ability.  If  y our  article  were  edited,  without  alt ering  the  contents,  it 
would be  excellent. But, you see, we haven't enough editors as it is." 
 
Korchagin rose, leaning heavily on his stick. His right eyebrow twitched. 
 
"Yes, I see your point. What sort of a journalist would I make? I was a good stoker once, 
and not a bad electrician. I rode a horse well, and I knew how to stir up the Komsomol 
youth, but I can see I would cut a sorry figure on your front." 
He shook hands and left. 
 
At a turning in the corridor he stumbled and would have fallen had he not been caught by 
a woman who happened to be passing by. 
"What's the matter, Comrade? You look quite ill!" 
 
It took Pavel several seconds to recover. Then he gently released himself and walked on, 
leaning heavily on his stick. 
From  that  day  Pavel  felt  that  his  life  was  on  the  decline.  Work  was  now  out  of  the 
question.  More  and  more  often  he  was  confined  to  his  bed.  The  Central  Committee 
released  him  from  work  and  arranged  for  his  pension.  In  due  time  the  pension  came 
together with the certificate of a labour invalid. The Central Committ ee gave him money 
and issued him his papers, giving him the right to go wherever he wished. 
He received a letter from Marta inviting him to come to visit her in Moscow and have a 
rest.  Pavel  had  intended  going  to  Moscow  in  any  case,  for he  cherished  the  di m  hope 
that the All-Union Central Committee would help him to find work that would not require 
moving around. But in Moscow too he was advised to take medical treatment and offered 
accommodation in a good hospital. He refused. 
The  nineteen  days spent  in the  flat  Marta shared  with  her  friend  Nadya  Peterson  flew  quickly  by. 
Pavel  was  left  a  great  deal  to  himself,  for the two young  women  left  the  house  in the morning  for 
work  and  did  not  return till  evening. Pavel  spent  his  time  reading  books  from Marta's  well-stocked 
library. The evenings passed pleasantly in the company of the girls and their friends. 
 
第 244 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Letters  came  from  the  Kyutsams  inviting  him  to  come  and  visit  them.  Life  there  was 
becoming unendurable and his help was wanted. 
And  so  one  morning  Korchagin  left  the quiet  little  flat on  Gusyatnikov  Street. The  train 
bore him swiftly south to the sea, away from the damp rainy autumn to the warm shores 
of the southern Crimea. He sat at the window  watching the telegraph poles fly past. His 
brows were knit and there was an obstinate gleam in his dark eyes. 
 
 
Chapter Eight 
 
Down  below,  the  sea  broke  on  the jagged  chaos  of  rock.  A  stiff  dry  breeze  blowing  from  distant 
Turkey fanned his face. The harbour, protected from the sea by a concrete mole, thrust itself in an 
irregular  arc  into  the shore-line.  And  overlooking  it  all  were  the tiny  white cottages  of  the  town's 
outskirts perched on the slopes of the mountain range which broke off abruptly at the sea. 
 
It  was quiet here in the old park outside of the town. Yellow maple leaves floated slowly 
down onto its grass-grown paths. 
The old Persian cabby who had driven Pavel out here from town could not help asking as 
his strange fare alighted: 
"Why come here of all places? No young ladies, no amusements. Nothing but the jackals. . . . 
 
What will you do here? Better let me drive you back to town, mister 
tovarish!" Pavel paid him and the old man drove away. 
The park was indeed a wilderness. Pavel found a bench on a cliff overlooking the sea, 
and sat down, lifting his face to the now mild autumn sun. 
He had come to this quiet spot to think things over and consider  what to do with his life. 
The time had come to review the situation and take some decision. 
His  second  visit  to  the Kyutsams  had  brought  the  family strife to  a  head.  The  old  man  on learning 
of his arrival had flown into a rage. It fell naturally to Korchagin to lead the resistance. The old man 
unexpectedly  encountered  a  vigorous  rebuff  from  his  wife  and  daughters,  and  from  the  first  day  of 
Pavel's  arrival  the  house  split  into  two  hostile camps.  The  door  leading to the  parents'  half  of  the 
house was locked and one of the small side rooms was rented to Korchagin. Pavel paid the rent in 
advance and the old man was somewhat mollified by the arrangement; now that his daughters had 
cut themselves off from him he would no longer be expected to support them. 
 
For diplomatic reas ons Albina remained  with  her  husband. As for the  old man, he kept strictly 
to  his  side  of  the  house  and  avoided  meeting  the  man  he  so  heartily  detested.  But  outside  in 
the yard he made as much nois e as possible to show that he  was still the m aster. 
 
Before  he  went  to  work  in  the  co -operative  shop,  old  Kyutsam  had  earned  his  living  by 
shoemaking  and carpentry  and had  built himself  a small  workshop in the backyard.  To  annoy 
his  lodger,  he  shifted  his  work  bench  from  the  shed  to  a  spot  in  the  yar d  right  under  Pavel's 
window  where he hammered  furiously for hours on end, deriving  a malicious satisfaction  from 
the knowledge that he was interfering with Korchagin's reading. 
 
"Just you wait," he hissed to himself, "I'll get you out of here. .. ." 
 
Far away a steamer laid a small dark trail of smoke over the sea at the very horizon. A 
flock of gulls skimmed the waves with piercing cries. 
 
第 245 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Pavel,  his  chin  resting  in  his  hand,  sat  lost  in thought.  His  whole  life  passed  swiftly  before  his 
mind's  ey e,  from  his  childhood  to  the  pres ent.  How  had  these  twenty -four  years  of  his  been 
lived?  Worthily  or  unworthily?  He  went  over  them  again,  year  by  year,  subjecting  them  to 
sober, impartial judgement, and he  found to  his immense relief that he had  not done so badly 
with  his  life.  Mistakes  there  had  been,  the  mistakes  of  youth,  and  chiefly  of  ignorance.  But  in 
the  stormy  days  of  struggle  for  Soviet  power  he  had  been  in  the  thick  of  the  fighting  and  on 
the crimson banner of Revolution there were  a few drops of his own life's blood.  
 
He  had  remained  in the  ranks  until  his strength  had  failed  him. And  now, struck  down  and  unable 
to  hold  his  place  in  the  firing  lines,  there  was  nothing  left  for  him  but  the  field  hospital.  He 
remembered the time when they had stormed Warsaw and how, at the height of battle, one of the 
men had been hit. He fell to the ground under his horse's hooves. His comrades quickly bandaged 
his  wounds,  turned  him  over  to  the  stretcher-bearers  and  sped  onward  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy. 
The squadron had not halted its advance for the sake of one fallen soldier. Thus it was in the fight 
for  a  great  cause  and  thus  it  had  to  be.  True,  there  were  exceptions.  He  had  seen  legl ess 
machine-gunners  on  gun carriages  in  battle.  These men  had struck terror  into  the  enemy's  ranks, 
their  guns  had  sown  death  and  destruction,  and  their  steel-like  courage  and  unerring  eye  had 
made them the pride of their units. But such men were few. 
 
What was he to do now that defeat had overtaken him and there was no longer any hope 
of returning to the ranks? Had he not extracted from Bazhanova the admission that the 
future held  even  worse  torment  in  store  for  him?  What  was  to be  done? The question 
was like a yawning abyss spreading at his feet. 
What  was  there  to  live  for  now  that  he  had  lost  what  he  prized  most  ―  the  ability  to  fight? 
How  was  he  to  justify  his  existence  today  and  in  the  cheerless  tomorrow?  How  was  he  to  fill 
his days? Exist merely to breathe, to eat and to drink?  Remain  a helpless bystander  watching 
his  comrades  fight  their  way  forward?  Be  a  burde n  to  the  detachment?  No,  better  to  destroy 
his  treacherous  body !  A  bullet  in  the  heart  ―  and  be  done  with  it!  A  timely  end  to  a  life  well 
lived. Who  would condemn the soldier for putting himself out of his agony?  
 
He felt the flat body of his Browning in his pocket. His fingers closed over the grip, and 
slowly he drew out the weapon. 
"Who would have thought that you would come to this?" 
 
The muzzle stared back at him with cold contempt. Pavel laid the pistol on his  knee and 
cursed bitterly. 
"Cheap  heroics,  my  lad!  Any  fool  can  shoot  himself.  That  is  the  easiest  way  out,  the 
coward's way. You can always put a bullet through your head when life hits you too hard. 
But have you tried getting the better of life? Are you sure you have done everything you 
can to break out of the steel trap? Have you forgotten the fighting at Novograd -Volynsky 
when  we  went  into  the  attack  seventeen  times  in  one  day  until  finally,  in  spite  of 
everything,  we  won  through?  Put  away  that  gun  and  never  breathe  a  word  of  this  to 
anyone. Learn how to go on living when life becomes unbearable. Make your life useful." 
 
He  got  up  and  went  down  to the  road. A  passing mountaineer  gave  him  a  lift  on  his cart. When 
they reached town he got off and bought a newspaper and read the announcement of a meeting of 
the city Party group in the Demyan Bedny Club. It was very late when he returned home that night. 
He had made a speech at the meeting, little suspecting that it was the last he was ever to 
 
第 246 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
make at a large public gathering. 
 
Taya  was  still  awake  when  he  got  home.  She  had  been  worried  at  Pavel's  prolonged 
absence.  What  had  happened  to  him?  She  remembered  the  grim,  cold  look  she  had 
observed that morning in his eyes, always so live and warm. He never liked to talk about 
himself, but she felt that he was under some severe mental strain. 
As the clock in her mother's room chimed two she heard the gate creak and, slipping on her jacket, 
she  went  to  open the  door.  Lola,  asleep  in  her  own  room, murmured  restlessly  as  Taya  passed 
her. "I was beginning to get worried," Taya whispered with relief when Pavel came in. 
 
"Nothing is going to happen to me as long as I live, Taya," he whispered. "Lola's asleep? 
I  am  not  the  least  bit  sleepy  for  some reason.  I  have  something  to  tell  you.  Let's  go   to 
your room so as not to wake Lola." 
Taya  hesitated.  It  was  very  late.  How  could  she  let  him  come  to  her  room  at  this  late 
hour? What would mother think? But she could not refuse for fear of offending him. What 
could he have to say to her, she wondered, as she led the way to her room. 
"This  is  how  it  is,  Taya,"  Pavel  began  in  a  low  voice.  He  sat  down  opposite  her  in  the 
dimly-lighted room, so close that she could feel his breath. "Life takes such strange turns 
that you begin to wonder sometimes. I have had a bad time of it these past few days. I 
did not know how I could go on living. Life had never seemed so black. But today I held a 
meeting  of  my  own  private  'political  bureau'  and  adopted  a  decision  of  tremendous 
importance. Don't be surprised at what I have to say." 
 
He  told  her  what  he  had  gone  through  in  the  past  few  months  and  much  of  what  had 
passed through his mind during his visit to the park. 
"That  is  the  situation.  Now  for  the  most  important  thing.  The  storm  in  this  family  is  only 
beginning.  We  must  get  out  of  here  into  the  fresh  air  and  as  far  away  from  this  hole  as 
possible.  We  must  start  life  afresh.  Once  I  have  taken  a  hand  in  this  fight  I'm  going  to  see  it 
through.  Our  life,  yours  and  mine,  is  none  too  happy  at  present.  I  have  decided  to  breat he 
some warmth into it. Do you know  what I mean? Will you be my life's companion, my wife?"  
 
Taya was deeply moved by his confession, but these last words startled her. 
 
"I  am  not  asking  you  for  an  answer  tonight,"  he  went  on.  "You  must  think  it  over  caref ully.  I 
suppose  you  cannot  understand  how  such  t hings  can  be  put  so  bluntly  without  the  usual 
courting.  But  you  and  I  have  no  need  of  all  that  nonsense.  I  give  you  my  hand,  little  girl,  here 
it  is.  If  you  will  put  your  trust  in  me  you  will  not  be  mistaken.   We  can  both  give  each  other  a 
great deal.  Now, here is what I have  decided: our compact will be in  force until you  grow up to 
be a  real  human being, a true Bolshevik. If I can't help you in that  I am not worth a kopek. We 
must  not  break  our  compact  until  then.  But  when  you  grow  up  you  will  be  freed  of  all 
obligations. Who knows  what may happen?  I may  become a c omplet e physical wreck, and in 
that case, remember, you must not consider yourself bound to me in any way."  
 
He fell silent for a few moments, then he went on in tender, caressing voice: "And for the 
present, I offer you my friendship and my love." 
He held her fingers in his, feeling at peace, as if she had already given her consent. 
 
"Do you  promise  never  to  leave  me?" "I  can  only  give  you  my  word,  Taya.  It  is  for  you  to  believe 
that  men like me  do  not  betray their  friends. .  . .  I  only  hope they  will  not  betray me,"  he  added 
bitterly. "I can't give you an answer tonight. It is all very sudden," she replied. Pavel got up. 
 
第 247 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
"Go to bed, Taya. It will soon be morning." He went to his own room and lay down on the 
bed without undressing and was asleep as soon as his head touched the pillow. 
The  desk  by  the  window  in  Pavel's  room  was  piled  high  with  books  from  the  Party  library, 
newspapers  and  several  notebooks  filled  with  notes. A  bed, two chairs  and  a  huge  map  of  China 
dotted  with  tiny  black  and  red  flags  pinned  up  over  the  door  between  his  room  and  Taya's, 
completed  the  furnishings.  The  people  in  the  local Party  Committee  had  agreed  to  supply Pavel 
with  books  and  periodicals  and  had  promised  to  instruct  the  manager  of  the  biggest  public  library 
in town to send him whatever he needed. Before long large parcels of books began to arrive. Lola 
was amazed at the way he would sit over his books from early morning, reading and making notes 
all  day  long  with  only  short  breaks  for  breakfast  and  dinner.  In  the  evenings,  which  he  always 
spent with the two sisters, he would relate to them what he had read. 
 
Long past midnight old Kyutsam would see a chink of light between the shutters of the 
room occupied by his unwelcome lodger.  He  would creep over to the window on tipt oe 
and peer in through the crack at the head bent over the books. 
"Decent folks are in their beds at this hour but he keeps the light burning all night long. 
He  behaves  as  if  he  were  the  master  here.  The  girls  have  got  altogether  out  of  hand 
since he came," the old man would grumble to himself as he retired to his own qu arters. 
For the first time in eight years Pavel found himself with plenty of time on his hands, and 
no duties of any kind to attend to. He made good use of his time, reading with the avid 
eagerness of the newly-enlightened. He studied eighteen hours a day. How much longer 
his health could have withstood the strain is hard to say, but a seemingly casual remark 
from Taya one day changed everything. 
"I have moved the chest of drawers away from the door leading to your room. If ever you 
want to talk to me you can come straight in. You don't need to go through Lola's room." 
The blood rushed to Pavel's cheeks. Taya smiled happily. Their compact was sealed. 
 
 
 
The old man no longer saw the chink of light through the shuttered window of the corner room, and 
Taya's  mother  began to  notice  a  glow  in  her  daughter's  eyes  that  betrayed  a  happiness she  could 
not  conceal.  The  faint  shadows  under  her  eyes  spoke  of  sleepless  nights.  Often  now  Taya's 
singing and the strumming of a guitar echoed through the little house. 
 
Yet  Taya's  happiness  was  not  unmarred;  her  awak ened  womanhood  rebelled  against  the 
clandestine  relationship.  She  trembled  at  every  sound,  fancying  that  she  heard  her  mot her's 
footsteps. What if they asked her  why she  had taken to closing  her door on the latch at  night ? 
The thought torment ed her. Pavel noticed  her  fears and tried to comfort her.  
 
"What  are  you  afraid  of?"  he  would  say  tenderly.  "After  all,  you  and  I  are  grown -up 
people. Sleep in peace. No one shall intrude on our lives." 
Comforted,  she  would  press  her  cheek  against  his  breast,  and  fall  asleep,  her  arms 
around her loved one. And he would lie awake, listening to her steady breathing, keeping 
quite still lest he disturb her slumber, his whole being flooded with a deep tenderness for 
this girl who had entrusted her life to him. 
Lola was the first to discover the reason for the shining light in Taya's eyes, and from that day the 
shadow of estrangement fell between the two sisters. Soon the mother too found out, or rather, 
 
第 248 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
guessed. And she was troubled. She had not expected it of Korchagin. 
 
"Taya is not the wife for him," she remarked to Lola. "What will come of it, I wonder?" 
Alarming thoughts beset her but she could not muster the courage to speak to Korchagin. 
 
Young people began visiting Pavel, and sometimes his little room could barely hold them 
all.  The  sound  of  their  voices  like  the  beehive's  hum  reached  the  old  man's  ears  and 
often he could hear them singing in chorus: 
 
Forbidding is this sea of ours, 
 
Night and day its angry voice is heard. . . 
 
and Pavel's favourite: 
 
The whole wide world is drenched with tears.... 
 
It  was  the  study  circle  of  young  workers  which  the  Party  Committee  had  assigned  to 
Pavel in response to his insistent request for propaganda work. 
Once more he had gripped the helm firmly with both hands, and the ship of life, having 
veered dangerously a few times, was now steering a new course. His dream of returning 
to the ranks through study and learning was on the way to being realised. 
But life continued to heap obstacles in his path, and bitterly he saw each obstacle as a 
further delay to the attainment of his goal. 
One day the ill-starred student George turned up from Moscow, bringing a wife with him. 
He put up at the house of his father-in-law, a lawyer, and from there continued to pester 
his mother with demands for money. 
George's coming widened the rift in the Kyutsam  family. George  at once sided  with his father, 
and  together  with  his  wife's  family,  which  was  inclined  to  be  anti -S oviet,  he  sought  by 
underhand means to drive Korc hagin out of the house and induce  Taya to break with him.  
 
Two  weeks  after  George's  arrival  Lola  got  a  job  in  another  town  and  she  left,  taking  her  mother 
and her little son with her. Soon afterward, Pavel and Taya moved to a distant seaside town. 
 
 
Artem did not often receive letters from his brother and the sight of an envel ope with the 
familiar handwriting waiting for him on his desk in the City Soviet always made his heart 
beat faster. Today too as he opened the envelope he thought tenderly: 
"Ah, Pavel! If only you lived nearer to me. I could do with your advice, lad." 
 
"Artem," he read. "I am writing to tell you all that has happened to me lately. I do not write 
such  things  to  anyone  but  you.  But  I  know  I  can  confide  in  you because  you  know  me 
well and you will understand. 
"Life  continues  to  press  down  on  me  on  the  health  front,  dealing  me  blow  upon  blow.  I  hardly 
managed  to struggle to  my  feet  after  one  blow  when  another,  more merciless  than the  last,  lays 
me low. The most terrible thing is that I am powerless to resist. First I lost the power of my left arm. 
And now, as if that were not enough, my legs have failed me. I could barely move about (within 
 
第 249 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
the  limits  of  the  room,  of  cours e)  as  it  was,  but  now  I  have  difficulty  in  crawling  from  bed  to 
table. And I  daresay there is worse to come. What tomorrow  will bring me no one knows.  
 
"I  never  leave  the  house  now,  and  only  a  tiny  fragment  of  the  sea  is  vis ible  from  my 
window. Can there be a greater tragedy than that of a man who combines in himself a 
treacherous body that refuses to obey him, and the heart of a Bolshevik, a Bolshevik who 
passionately yearns to work, to be with all of you in the ranks of the  fighters advancing 
along the whole front in the midst of the stormy avalanche? 
"I still believe that I shall return to the ranks, that in time my bayonet will take its place in 
the attacking columns. I must believe that, I have no right not to. For ten ye ars the Party 
and the Komsomol taught me to fight, and the leader's words, spoken to all of us, apply 
equally to me: 'There are no fortresses Bolsheviks cannot take.' 
"My  life  now  is spent  entirely  in  study.  Books,  books  and  more  books.  I  have  accomplished   a 
great deal, Artem. I have  read and studied all the classics, and have passed my examinations 
in  the  first  year  of  the  correspondence  course  at  the  Communist  University.  In  the  evenings  I 
lead  a study circle  of  Communist youth.  These young comrades are m y link with the practical 
life  of  the  Party  organisation.  Then  there  is  Taya's  educ ation,  and  of  course  love,  and  the 
tender  caresses  of  my  little  wife.  Taya  and  I  are  the  best  of  friends.  Our  household  is  very 
simply  run  ―  with  my  pension  of  thirty-t wo  rubles  and  Taya's  earnings  we  get  along  quite 
well.  Taya is following the path  I myself took to the Party: for a time she worked  as a domestic 
servant, and  now has a job  as a dishwasher in a canteen (there is no industry in this town).  
 
"The  other  day  she  proudly  showed  me  her  first  delegate's  credentials  issued  by  the 
Women's Department. This is not simply a strip of cardboard to her. In her I see the birth 
of the new woman, and I am doing my best to help in this birth. The time will come when 
she  will  work  in  a  big  factory,  where  as  part  of  a  large  working  community  she  will 
become politically mature. But she is taking the only possible course open to her here. 
"Taya's mother has visited us twice. Unconsciously she is trying to drag Taya back to a 
life of petty, personal selfish cares. I tried to make Albina see that she ought not to allow 
the shadow of her own unhappy past to darken the path her daughter has chosen. But it 
was no use. I feel that one day the mother will try to stand in her daughter's way and  then 
a clash will be unavoidable. I shake your hand. 
 
"Your Pavel." 
 
Sanatorium  No.  5  in  Old  Matsesta.... A  three-storey  brick  building standing  on  a  ledge  hewed  into 
the mountain-side.  Thick  woods  all  around  and  a  road  winding  down  to the sea.  The  windows  are 
open  and  the  breeze  carries  the  smell  of  the  sulphur  springs  into  the  room.  Pavel  Korchagin  is 
alone in the room. Tomorrow new patients will arrive and then he will have a room -mate. He hears 
steps  outside  the  window  and  the sound  of  a  familiar  voice.  Several  people  are talking. But  where 
has  he  heard  that  deep  bass  voice  before?  From the  dim  recesses  of  his  memory,  hidden  away 
but not forgotten, comes the name: "Ledenev. He and none other." 
 
Pavel  confidently  called  to  his  friend,  and a  moment  later Ledenev  was  beside  his  bed 
shaking his hand warmly. 
"So Korchagin is still going strong? Well, and what have you got to say for yourself? Don't tell me 
 
第 250 页 共 259 页  
 
 
 
you  have  decided  to  get  sick  in  real  earnest? That  will  never  do!  You  should  take  an 
example from me. The doctors have tried to put me on the shelf too, but I keep going just 
to spite them." And Ledenev laughed merrily. 
But Pavel felt the sympathy and distress hidden behind that laughter. 
 
They  spent  two  hours  together.  Ledenev  told  Pavel  all  the  latest  news  from  Moscow.  From 
him  Pavel  first  heard  of  the  important  decisions  taken  by  the  Party  on  the  c ollectivisation  of 
agriculture and the  reorganisation of life in the  village and he eagerly drank in every word.  
 
"Here  I  was  thinking  you  were  busy  stirring  things  up  somewhere  at  home  in  the  Ukraine,"  said 
Ledenev. "You disappoint me. But never mind, I was in an even worse way. I thought I'd be tied to 
my  bed  for  good,  and  now  you see  I'm  still  on my  feet.  There's  no  taking  life  easy  nowadays.  It 
simply  won't  work!  I must confess  I  find  myself thinking sometimes  how  nice  it  would  be t o  take a 
little  rest, just  to  catch your  breath.  After  all,  I'm  not  as young  as  I  was,  and  ten  and  twelve  hours' 
work  a  day  is  a  bit  hard  on me  at  times. Well,  I think  about it  for  a  while  and  even  try  to  ease  the 
load  a  little,  but  it's  no  use. Before  you know it, you're  up  to your  ears  again,  never  getting  home 
before midnight. The more powerful the machine, the faster the wheels run, and with us the speed 
increases every day, so that we old folk simply have to stay young." 
 
Ledenev passed a hand over his high forehead and said in a kindly 
manner: "And now tell me about yourself." 
Pavel gave Ledenev an account of his life since they had last met, and as he talked he 
felt his friend's warm approving glance on him. 
 
 
Under the shade of spreading trees in one corner of the  terrace a group of sanatorium patients were 
seated  around  a small  table.  One  of  them  was  reading  the  Pravda,  his  bushy  eyebrows  knitted.  The 
black Russian shirt, the shabby old cap and the unshaved face with deep -sunken blue eyes all bespoke 
the  veteran  miner.  It  was  twelve  years  since  Khrisanf  Chernokozov  had  left  the mines  to  take  up  an 
important post in the government, yet he seemed to have just come up from the pit. Everything about 
him, his bearing, his gait, his manner of speaking, betrayed his profession. 
 
Chernokozov  was  a  member  of the Territorial  Party  Bureau besides.  A  painful  disease 
was  sapping  his  strength:  Chernokozov  hated  his  gangrenous  leg  which  had  kept  him 
tied to his bed for nearly half a year now. 
Opposite  him,  puffing  thoughtfully  on  her  cigarette,  was  Zhigareva  ―  Alexandra  Alexeyevna 
Zhigareva,  who  had  been  a  Party  member  for  nineteen  of  her  thirty -seven  years.  "Shuroc hka 
the  metalwork er",  as  her  comrades  in  the  P etersburg  underground  movement  used  to  call 
her, had been hardly more than a girl when she was exiled to Siberia. 
 
The  third  member  of  the  group  was Pankov.  His  handsome  head  with  the sculptured  profile  was 
bent over a German magazine, and now and then he raised his hand to adjust his enormous horn-
rimmed  spectacles.  It  was  painful  to  see  this  thirty-year-old  man  of  athletic  build  dragging  his 
paralysed  leg  after  him.  An  editor  and  writer,  Pankov  worked  in  the  People's  Commissariat  of 
Education. He was an authority on Europe and knew several foreign languages. He was a man of 
considerable erudition and even the reserved Chernokozov treated  him with great respect. 
 
"So that is your room-mate?" Zhigareva whispered to Chernokozov, nodding toward the 
chair in which Pavel Korchagin was seated. 
 
第 251 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Chernokozov looked up from his newspaper and his brow cleared at once. 
 
"Yes! That's Korchagin. You ought to know him, Shura. It's too bad illness has put many 
a  spoke  in his  wheel,  otherwise  that  lad  would  be  a  great  help  to  us  in  tight  spots.  He 
belongs to the first Komsomol generation. I am convinced that if we give him our  support 
― and that's what I have decided to do ― he will still be able to work." 
Pankov too listened to what Chernokozov was saying. 
"What is he suffering from?" Shura Zhigareva asked softly. 
 
"The aftermath of the Civil War. Some trouble with his spine.  I spoke to the doctor here 
and he told me there is a danger of total paralysis. Poor lad!" 
"I shall go and bring him over here," said Shura. 
 
That was the beginning of their friendship. Pavel did not know then that Zhigareva and 
Chernokozov were to become  very dear to him and that in the years of illness ahead of 
him they were to be his mainstays. 
 
 
Life  flowed  on  as  before.  Taya  worked  and Pavel  studied.  Before  he  had  time  to  resume  his  work 
with  the study  groups  another  disaster  stole  upon  him  unawares.  Both  his  legs  were completely 
paralysed.  Now  only  his  right  hand  obeyed  him.  He  bit  his  lips  until  the  blood  came  when  after 
repeated  efforts  he  finally  realised  that  he  could  not  move.  Taya  bravely  hid  her  despair  and 
bitterness at being powerless to help him. But he said to her with an apologetic smile: 
 
"You and I must separate, Taya. After all, this was not in our compact. I shall think it over 
properly today, little girl!" 
She would not let him speak. The sobs burst forth and she hid her face against hi s chest 
in a paroxysm of weeping. 
When  Artem  learned  of  his  brother's  latest  misfortune  he  wrote  to  his  mother.  Maria 
Yakovlevna  left everything  and  went  at  once  to her  son.  Now  the  three  lived  together. 
Taya and the old lady took to each other from the first. 
Pavel carried on with his studies in spite of everything. 
 
One  winter's  evening  Taya  came  home  to  report  her  first  victory  ― she  had  been  elected to  the 
City  Soviet.  After  that Pavel  saw  very  little  of  her. When  her  day's  work  in  the  sanatorium  kitchen 
was  over  Taya  would  go  straight  to  the  Soviet,  returning  home  late  at  night  weary  but  full  of 
impressions. She was about to apply for candidate membership in the Party and was preparing for 
the  long-awaited  day  with  eager  anticipation.  And  then  misfortune  struck  another  blow.  The 
steadily  progressing  disease  was  doing  its  work.  A  burning  excruciating  pain  suddenly  seared 
Pavel's right eye, spreading rapidly to the left. A black curtain fell, blotting out all about him, and for 
the first time in his life Pavel knew the horror of total blindness. 
 
A  new  obstacle  had  moved  noiselessly  onto  his  path  barring  his  way.  A  terrifying, 
seemingly insurmountable obstacle. It plunged Taya and his mother into despair. But he, 
frigidly calm, resolved: 
"I  must  wait  and  see  what  happens.  If  there  is  really  no  possibility  of  advancing,  if  everything  I 
have done to return to the ranks has been swept away by this blindness I must put an end to it all." 
Pavel wrote to his friends and they wrote back urging him to take courage and carry on the fight. 
 
It was in these days of grim struggle for him that Tay a came home radiant and  announced:  
 
 
 
第 252 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
"I am a candidate to the Party, Pavel!" 
 
Pavel  listened  to  her  excited  account  of  the  meeting  at  which  her  application  was 
accepted and remembered his own initial steps in the Party. 
"Well, Comrade Korchagina, you and I are a Communist faction now," he said, squeezing 
her hand. 
The next day he wrote to the secretary of the District Party Committee asking the latter to 
come and see him. The same evening a mud-spattered car drew up outside the house 
and in a few moments Volmer, a middle-aged Lett with a spreading beard that reached to 
his ears, was pumping Pavel's hand. 
"Well, how goes it? What do you mean by behaving like this, eh? Up with you and we'll 
send you off to work in the village at once," he said with a breezy laugh. He stayed for 
two hours, forgetting all about the conference he was to have attended. He paced up and 
down the room, listening to Pavel's impassioned appeal for work. 
"Stop  talking  about  study  groups,"  he  said  when  Pavel  had  finished.  "You've  got  to  rest.  And 
we  must  see  about  your  eyes.  It  may  still  be  possible  to  do  something.  What  about  going  to 
Moscow and consulting a specialist? You ought to think it over.. . ." But Pavel interrupted him:  
 
"I  want  people,  Comrade  Volmer,  live,  flesh-and-blood  people!  I  need  them  now  more 
than ever before. I cannot go on living alone. Send the youth to me, those with the least 
experience. They're  veering  too  much  to the  left out  there  in  the  villages,  the  collective 
farms  don't  give  them  enough  scope,  they  want  to  organise  communes.  You  know  the 
Komsomols, if you don't hold them back they're liable to try and dash forward ahead of 
the lines. I was like that myself." Volmer stopped in his tracks. 
 
"How  do  you  come to  know  about that?  They  only  brought  the  news  in  today from  the 
district." Pavel smiled. 
"My wife told me. Perhaps you remember her? She was admitted to the Party yesterday." 
"Korchagina, the dishwasher? So that's your wife! I didn't know that!" He fell silent for a few 
moments, then he slapped his forehead as an idea occurred to him. "I know whom we'll send you. 
Lev Bersenev. You couldn't wish for a better comrade. He's a man after your own heart, the two of 
you ought to get along famously. Like two high-voltage transformers. I was an electrician once, 
you know. Lev will rig up a wireless for you, he's an expert at that sort of thing. I often sit up till two 
in the morning at his place with those earphones. The wife actually got suspicious. Wanted to 
know what I meant by coming home so late." Korchagin smiled. "Who is Bersenev?" he asked. 
Volmer ceased his pacing and sat down. "He's our notary public, although he's no more notary 
public really than I am a ballet dancer. He held an important post until quite recently. Been in the 
movement since 1912 and a Party member since the Revolution. Served in the Civil War on the 
revolutionary tribunal of the Second Cavalry Army; that was the time they were combing out the 
Whiteguard lice in the Caucasus. He was in Tsaritsyn too, and on the Southern Front as well. 
Then for a time he was a member of the Supreme Military Court of the Far Eastern Republic. Had 
a very tough time of it there. Finally tuberculosis got him. He left the Far East and came down here 
to the Caucasus. At first he worked as chairman of a gubernia court, and vice-chairman of a 
territorial court. And then his lung trouble knocked him out completely. It was a matter of coming 
down here and taking it easy or giving up the ghost. So that's how we come to have such a 
remarkable notary. It's a nice quiet job too, just the thing for him. Well, gradually the people here 
 
第 253 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
got  him to  take  up  a  group.  After that  he  was  elected  to the  District  Committee, then,  before  he 
knew  it,  he  had charge  of  a  political  school,  and  now they've  put  him  on  the  Control  Commission. 
He's a permanent member on all important commissions appointed to unravel nasty tangles. Apart 
from  all  that  he  goes  in  for  hunting,  he's  a  passionate  radio  fan,  and  although  he  has  only  one 
lung, you wouldn't believe it to look at him. He is simply bursting with energy. When he dies it'll be 
somewhere on the way between the District Committee and the court." 
 
Pavel cut him short. 
 
"Why do you load him down like that?" he asked sharply. "He is doing more  work here 
than before!" 
Volmer gave him a quizzical look:  
 
"And if I give you a study circle and something else Lev would be sure to say: 'Why must 
you load him down like that?' But he himself says he'd rather have one year of intensive 
work  than  five  years on  his  back  in  hospital.  It  looks  as  if  we'll  have  to  build  socialism 
before we can take proper care of our people." 
"That's true. I too prefer one year of life to five years of stagnation, but we are sometimes 
criminally wasteful of our energies. I know now that this is less a sign of heroism than of 
inefficiency and irresponsibility. Only now have I begun to see that I had no right to be so 
stupidly careless about my own health. I see now that there was nothing heroic about it at 
all.  I  might  have  held  out  a  few  more  years  if  it  hadn't  been  for  that  misguided 
Spartanism. In other words, the infantile disease of leftism is one of the chief dangers." 
 
"That's  what  he  says now,"  thought  Volmer,  "but  let  him  get back  on  his  feet  and  he'll 
forget everything but work." But he said nothing. 
The following evening Lev Bersenev came. It was midnight before he left Pavel. He went 
away feeling as if he had found a brother. 
In the morning a wireless antenna was set up on the roof of Korchagin's house, while Lev 
busied  himself  inside  the  house  with  the  receiving  set,  regaling  Pavel  the  while  with 
interesting stories from his past. Pavel could not see him, but from  what Taya had told 
him  he  knew  that  Lev  was  a  tall,  fair-haired,  blue-eyed  young  man  with  impulsive 
gestures, which was exactly as Pavel had pictured him the moment they had first met. 
When  evening  came  three  valves  began  to  glow  in  the  room.  Lev  triumphantly  handed  Pavel 
the earphones. A chaos of sounds  filled the  ether.  The transmitters in t he  port chirped like so 
many  birds,  and  somewhere  not  far  out  at  sea  a  ship's   wireless  was  sending  out  an  endless 
stream  of  dots  and  dashes.  But  in  this  vortex  of  noises  and  sounds  jostling  one  another  the 
tuning coil picked out and clung to a calm and confident  voice: 
 
"This is Moscow calling...." 
 
The  tiny  wireless  set  brought  sixty  broadcasting  stations  in  different  parts  of  the  world 
within  Pavel's  reach.  The  life  from  which  he  had  been  debarred  broke  through  to  him 
from the earphone membranes, and once again he felt its mighty pulse. 
Noticing the  glow of  pleasure in Pavel's eyes, the weary Bersenev smiled wit h satisfaction.  
 
 
 
The  big  house  was  hushed.  Taya  murmured  restlessly  in  her  sleep.  Pavel  saw  little  of  his  wife 
these days. She came home late, worn out and shivering from cold. Her work claimed more and 
 
第 254 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
more  of  her  time  and  seldom  did  she  have  a  free  evening.  Pavel  remembered  what 
Bersenev had told him on this score: 
"If a Bolshevik has a wife who is his Party comrade they rarely see one another. But this 
has two advantages: they never get tired of each other, and there's no time to quarrel!" 
And  indeed,  how could  he  object?  It  was  only to  be  expected.  There  was  a  time  when  Taya  had 
devoted all her evenings to him. There had been more warmth and tenderness in their relationship 
then. But she had been only a wife, a mate to him; now she was his pupil and his Party comrade. 
 
He knew that the more Taya matured politically, the less time she would be able to give 
him, and he bowed to the inevitable. 
He  was  given  a  study  group  to  lead  and  once  again  a  noisy  hum  of  voices  filled  the  house  in 
the evenings. These hours spent with the yout h infused Pavel  with new energy and  vigour. 
 
The rest of the time went in listening to the radio, and his mother had difficulty in tearing 
him away from the earphones at mealtimes. 
The  radio  gave  him  what  his  blindness  had  taken  from  him  ―  the  opport unity  to  acquire 
knowledge, and this consuming  passion  for learning  helped him to  forget the pain that racked 
his body, the fire that seared his eyes and all the misery an unkind fate had heaped upon him.  
 
When  the  radio  brought  the  news  from  Magnitostroi  of  the  exploits  of  the  Komsomols 
who had succeeded Pavel's generation he was filled with happiness. 
He  pictured the cruel  blizzards, the  bitter  Urals  frosts  as  vicious  as  a  pack  of  hungry  wolves.  He 
heard  the  howling  of  the  wind  and  saw  amid  the  whirling  of  the  snow  a  detachment  of  second-
generation Komsomols working in the light of arc lamps on the roof of the giant factory buildings to 
save  the  first sections  of  the  huge  plant  from  the  ravages  of snow  and  ice.  Compared  to  this,  how 
tiny  seemed  the  forest  construction  job  on  which  the  first  generation  of  Kiev  Komsomols  had 
battled with the elements! The country had grown, and with it, the people. 
 
And on the Dnieper, the water had burst through the steel barriers and swept away men 
and  machines.  And  again  the  Komsomol  youth  had  hurled  themselves  into  the  breach, 
and  after  a  furious  two-day battle had brought  the  unruly  torrent  back  under  control.  A 
new  Komsomol  generation  marched  in  the  van  of  this  great  struggle.  And  among  the 
heroes Pavel heard with pride the name of his old comrade Ignat Pankratov. 
 
 
Chapter Nine 
 
They  spent  the  first  few  days  in  Moscow  with  a  friend  who  was  arranging  for  Pavel  to 
enter a special clinic. 
Only  now  did  Pavel  realise  how  muc h  easier  it  had  been  to  be  brave  when  he  had  his  youth 
and a strong body. Now that life held him in its iron grip to hold out was a matter of honour.  
 
 
It was a year and a half since Pavel Korchagin had come to Moscow. Eig hteen months of 
indescribable anguish. 
In  the  eye  clinic  Professor  A verbach  had  t old  Pavel  quite  frankly  that  there  was  no  hope  of 
recovering his sight. Some time in the  future, when the inflammation disappeared it might be  
 
 
第 255 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
possible  to  operate  on  the  pupils.  In  the  meantime  he  advised an  operation  to  halt  the 
inflammatory process. 
Pavel gave his consent; he told his doctors to do everything they thought necessary. 
 
Three times he felt the touch of Death's bony fingers as he lay for hours at a time on the 
operating  table  with  lancets  probing  his  throat  to remove  the  parathyroid  gland.  But  he 
clung  tenaciously  to  life  and,  after  long  hours  of  anguished  suspense,  Taya  would  find 
him deathly pale but alive and as calm and gentle as always. 
"Don't worry, little girl, it's not so easy to kill me. I'll go on living and kicking up a fuss if 
only to upset the calculations of the learned doctors. They are right in everything th ey say 
about  my health,  but  they  are gravely  mistaken  when  they  try  to  write  me  off  as  totally 
unfit for work. I'll show them yet." 
Pavel was determined to resume his place in the ranks of the builders of the new life. He 
knew now what he had to do. 
 
 
Winter was over, spring had burst through the open windows, and Pavel, having survived 
another operation, resolved that, weak as he was, he would remain in hospital no longer. 
To live so many months in the midst of human suffering, to have to listen to the gro ans of 
the incurably sick was far harder for him than to endure his own anguish. 
And so when another operation was proposed, he refused. 
 
"No," he said firmly. "I've had enough. I have shed enough blood for science. I have other 
uses for what is left." 
That day Pavel wrote a letter to the Central Committee, explaining that since it was now 
useless for him to continue his wanderings in search of medical treatment, he wished to 
remain in Moscow where his wife was now working. It was the first time he had t urned to 
the  Party  for  help.  His  request  was  granted  and  the  Moscow  Soviet  gave  him  living 
quarters. Pavel left the hospital with the fervent hope that he might never return. 
The modest room in a quiet side lane off Kropotkinskaya Street seemed to him the  height 
of luxury. And often, waking at night, Pavel would find it hard to believe that hospital was 
indeed a thing of the past for him now. 
Taya was a full-fledged Party member by now. She was an excellent worker, and in spite 
of the tragedy of her personal life, she did not lag behind the best shock workers at the 
factory. Her fellow  workers soon showed their respect for this quiet, unassumin g young 
woman by electing her a member of the factory trade-union committee. Pride for his wife, 
who was proving to be a true Bolshevik, made Pavel's sufferings easier to bear. 
 
 
Bazhanova  came  to  Moscow  on  business  and  paid  him  a  visit.  They  had  a  long  talk.  Pavel 
grew animated  as he told her of his plans to return in the near  future to the  fighting ranks.  
 
Bazhanova noticed the wisp of silver on Pavel's temples and she said softly: 
 
"I  see  that  you  have  gone  through  a  great  deal.  Yet  you  have  lost  none  of  your  enthusiasm. 
And  that  is  the  main  thing.  I  am  glad  that  you  have  decided  to  begin  the  work  for  which  you 
have been preparing these past five years. But how do you intend to go about it?"  
 
第 256 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
Pavel smiled confidently. 
 
"Tomorrow  my  friends  are  bringing  me  a sort  of cardboard  stencil,  which  will  enable me  to  write 
without getting the lines mixed up. I couldn't write without it. I hit upon the idea after much thought. 
You see, the stiff  edges  of  the cardboard  will keep my  pencil  from  straying  off  the straight  line.  Of 
course,  it  is  very  hard to  write  without  seeing  what you  are  writing,  but it  is  not impossible.  I  have 
tried it and I know. It took me some time to get the knack of it, but now I have learned to write more 
slowly, taking pains with every letter and the result is quite satisfactory." 
 
And so Pavel began to work. 
 
He had conceived the idea of writing a novel about the heroic Kotovsky Division. The ti tle 
came of itself: Born of the Storm. 
His  whole  life  was  now  geared  to  the  writing  of  his  book.  Slowly,  line  by  line,  the  pages 
emerged.  He  work ed  oblivious  to  his  surroundings,  wholly  immersed  in  the  world  of  images, 
and  for  the  first  time  he  suffered  the  throes  of  creation,  knew  the  bitterness  the  artist  feels 
when  vivid, unforgettable scenes so tangibly perceptible turn pallid and lifeless on paper.  
 
He  had  to  remember  everything  he  wrote,  word  by  word.  The  slightest  interruption 
caused him to lose the thread of his thoughts and retarded his work. 
Sometimes  he  had  to  recite  aloud  whole  pages  and  even  chapters  from  memory,  and 
there  were  moments  when  his  mother  feared  that  he  was  losing  his  mind.  She  did  not 
dare approach him while he worked, but as she picked up the sheets that had fallen on 
the floor she would say timidly: 
"I  do  wish  you  would  do  something  else,  Pavlusha.  It  can't  be  good  for  you  to  keep 
writing all the time like this. ..." 
He  would laugh heartily at her fears and assure the old lady that she need not worry, he 
hadn't "gone crazy yet". 
Three  chapters  of  the  book  were  finished.  Pavel  sent  them  to  Odessa  to  his  old  fighting 
comrades  from  the  Kotovsky  Division  for  their  opinion,  and  before  long  he  received  a  let ter 
praising his work. But on its way back to him the manuscript was lost in the mails. Six months' 
work  was  gone.  It  was  a  terrible  blow  to  him.  Bitterly  he  regretted  having  sent  off  the  only 
copy he possessed. Ledenev scolded  him roundly when he heard what had happened.  
 
"How could you have been so careless? But never mind, it's no use crying over spilt milk. 
You must begin over again." 
"But I have been robbed of six months' work. Eight hours of strenuous labour every day. 
Curse the parasites!" 
Ledenev did his best to console his friend. 
 
There was nothing for it but to start afresh. Ledenev supplied him with paper and helped 
him to get the manuscript typed. Six weeks later the first chapter was rewritten. 
A  family  by  the  name  of  Alexeyev  lived  in  the  same apartment  as  the  Korchagins.  The 
eldest son, Alexander, was secretary of one of the district committees of the Komsomol. 
His  sister  Galya,  a  lively  girl  of  eighteen,  had  finished  a  factory  training  school.  Pavel 
asked  his  mother  to  speak  to  Galya  and  find  out  whether  she  would  agree  to  help  him 
with his work in the capacity of "secretary". Galya willingly agreed. She came in one day, 
smiling pleasantly, and was delighted when she learned that Pavel was writing a novel. 
 
"I shall be very glad to help you, Comrade Korchagin," she said. "It will be so much more fun than 
 
 
 
第 257 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
writing those dull circular letters for father about the maintenance of hygiene in communal 
apartments." 
From that day Pavel's work progressed with doubled speed. Indeed so much was accomplished in 
one  month that Pavel  was  amazed.  Galya's  lively  participation  and sympathy  were  a  great  help  to 
him.  Her  pencil  rustled swiftly  over  the  paper,  and  whenever  some  passage  particularly  appealed 
to  her  she  would  read  it  over  several  times,  taking  sincere  delight  in  Pavel's  success.  She  was 
almost  the  only  person  in  the  house  who  believed  in  his  work, the  others  felt  that  nothing  would 
come of it and that Pavel was merely trying to fill in the hours of enforced idleness. 
 
Ledenev,  returning  to  Moscow  after  a  business  trip  out  of  town,  read  the  first  few 
chapters and said: 
"Carry on, my friend. I have no doubt that you will win. You have great happiness in store 
for  you,  Pavel.  I  firmly  believe  that  your  dream  of  returning  to  the  ranks  will  soon 
materialise. Don't lose hope, my son." 
The old man went away deeply satisfied to have found Pavel so full of energy. 
 
Galya came  regularly, her pencil raced over the pages reviving scenes from the unforgettable 
past.  In  moments  when  Pavel  lay  lost  in  thought,  overwhelmed  by  a  flood  of  memory,  Galya 
would  watch  his  lashes  quivering,  and  see  his  eyes  reflecting  the  swift  passage  of  thought.  It 
seemed incredible that those eyes could n ot see, so alive were the clear, unblemished pupils. 
 
When the day's work was over she would read what she had written and he would listen 
tensely, his brow wrinkled. 
"Why are you frowning, Comrade Korchagin? It is good, 
isn't it?" "No, Galya, it is bad." 
The  pages  he  did  not  like  he  rewrot e  himself.  Hampered  by  the  narrow  strip  of  the  stencil  he 
would  sometimes  lose  his  patience  and  fling  it  from  him.  And  then,  furious  with  life  for  having 
robbed him of his eyesight, he would break his pencils and bite his  lips until the blood came.  
 
As the work drew to a close, forbidden emotions began more often to burst the bonds of 
his ever-vigilant will: sadness and all those simple human feelings, warm and tender, to 
which  everyone  but  himself  had  the  right.  But  he  knew  that  were  he  to  succumb  to a 
single one of them the consequences would be tragic. 
 
 
At last the final chapter was written. For the next few days Galya read the bo ok aloud to 
Pavel. Tomorrow the manuscript would be sent to Leningrad, to the Cultural Department 
of the Regional Party Committee. If the book was approved there, it would be turned over 
to the publishers ― and then. . . . 
His heart beat anxiously at the thought. If all was well, the new life would begin, a life won 
by years of weary, unremitting toil. 
The fate of the book would decide Pavel's own fate. If the manuscript was rejected that 
would be the end for him. If, on the other hand, it was found to be b ad only in part, if its 
defects could be remedied by further work, he would launch a new offensive. 
His  mother  took  the  parcel  with  the  manuscript  to  the  post  office.  Days  of  anxious  waiting 
began.  Never  in  his  life  had  Pavel  waited  in  such  anguis hed  suspense  for  a  letter  as  he  did 
now.  He lived from the morning to the evening post. But no news came  from Leningrad.  
 
第 258 页 共 259 页 
 
 
 
 
 
The continued silence of the publishers began to look ominous. From day to day the presentiment 
of disaster mounted, and Pavel admitted to himself that total rejection of his book would finish him. 
That, he could not endure. There would be no longer any reason to live. 
 
At such moments he remembered the park on the hill overlooking the sea, and he asked 
himself the same question over and over again: 
"Have  you  done  everything  you  can  to  break  out  of  the  steel  bonds  and  return  to  the 
ranks, to make your life useful?" 
And he had to answer: "Yes, I believe I have done everything!" 
 
At  last,  when the  agony  of  waiting  had  become  well-nigh  unbearable,  his mother,  who  had  been 
suffering from the suspense no less than her son, came running into the room with the cry: 
 
"News from Leningrad!" 
 
It  was a telegram from the Regional Committee. A terse message on a telegraph form: 
"Novel heartily approved. Turned over to publishers. Congratulations on your victory." 
His heart beat fast. His cherished dream was realised! The steel bonds have been burst, 
and now, armed with a new weapon, he had returned to the fighting ranks and to life. 
 
1930-1934 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
第 259 页 共 259 页 
 
