 
THE  RED  AND  THE 
BLACK 
A CHRONICLE OF 1830 
Stendhal 
A new translation by Burton Raffel 
Introduction by Diane Johnson 
Notes by James Madden 
The Modern Library 
New York 
For Reuven Eliezer Pride 
 
 
 
Notice 
This  book  was  about  to  be  published  when  the  great  events  of  July1  turned  our  minds 
away from mere fictions. There is reason to believe that the following pages were written in 
1827.2 
Stendhal 
Marie-Henri Beyle―later known as Stendhal―was born in Grenoble on January 23, 1783. 
His mother, whom he idolized, died when he was seven, and he was raised by three people he 
detested―his bourgeois father, a prosperous lawyer; a jealous maiden aunt; and a tyrannical 
Jesuit tutor who inspired in him lifelong feelings of anticlericalism. The only person he felt any 
closeness to was his maternal grandfather, a respected physician who embraced the culture of 
the  Enlightenment.  In  1799,  at  the  age  of  sixteen,  the  young  man  left  for  Paris  to  study 
mathematics  at  the  07cole  Polytechnique,  but  became  a  dragoon  in  Napoleon’s  army  the 
following  year.  The  invasion  of  Italy  took  him  to  Milan,  the  city  he  came  to  love  above  all 
others;  over  the  next  decade  he  served  as  an  aide-de-camp  in  Bonaparte’s  campaigns  in 
Germany, Austria, and Russia. In between wars he flourished in Parisian drawing rooms and 
devoted himself (unsuccessfully) to writing plays, all the while keeping elaborate journals that 
chronicled his travels and love affairs. 
Following Napoleon’s fall in 1814, Beyle retired permanently from the army and settled in 
Milan,  where  he  began  to  write  in  earnest.  He  soon  produced  Lives  of  Haydn,  Mozart,  and 
Metastasio  (1814),  followed  by  the  two-volume  History  of  Painting  in  Italy  (1817).  His  next 
book―a travel guide entitled Rome, Naples, and Florence in 1817 (1817)―was the first to bear 
the  pen  name  Stendhal,  the  most  famous  of  the  more  than  two  hundred  pseudonyms  he 
employed  in  his  lifetime.  During  this  period  he  fell  in  love  with  Matilde  Dembowski  (née 
Viscontini), who served as the basis for his heroines. Suspected of being a French secret agent 
and of involvement in left-wing plots, the writer was expelled from Italy in 1821 by the Austrian 
police. 
Upon returning to Paris, Stendhal immediately resumed la chasse au bonheur (the pursuit 
of  happiness)  and  writing.  He  quickly  finished  the  semiautobiographical  treatise  On  Love 
(1822), the critical study Racine and Shakespeare (1823), and Life of Rossini (1824). Armance, the 
author’s first novel, appeared in 1827. A Roman Journal, a guidebook that marked Stendhal’s 
first real success, came out in 1829. Then in October of that year he began a novel based on a 
case  reported  in  the  Gazette  des  Tribunaux:  the  trial  of  a  young  man  charged  with  the 
attempted  murder  of  an  ex-mistress.  Published  in  1830,  The  Red  and  the  Black  shocked  the 
public  with  its  incisive  portrait  of  Restoration  France,  along  with  its  probing  psychological 
study  of  the  complex  protagonist,  Julien  Sorel.  (“A  novel  is  like  a  bow,  and  the  violin  that 
produces the sound is the reader’s soul,” Stendhal like to remind his audience.) 
Following  the  July  Revolution  of  1830,  which  brought  Louis-Philippe  to  the  throne, 
Stendhal  returned  to  government  service.  In  1831  he  was  appointed  consul  to  the  port  of 
                                                             
1 The Revolution of July 1830, which brought down the increasingly conservative government of Charles X 
and effectively ended the Bourbon monarchy and the period known as the Restoration. The Duke d’Orléans 
became King Louis-Philippe and began what is known as the July Monarchy. 
2 There is no question that Stendhal began writing The Red and the Black in 1829 and completed the novel in 
1830. 
 
 
Translator’s Note 
Civitavecchia, some forty miles from Rome, where he spent many of his final years. During the 
1830s  Stendhal  began  two  novels,  Lucien  Leuwen  and  Lamiel,  both  of  which  remained 
unfinished  and  were  not  published  until  long  after  his  death.  He  also  undertook  two 
autobiographical works, Memoirs of an Egotist and The Life of Henri Brulard, which likewise 
appeared  posthumously.  In  1835  Stendhal  was  awarded  the  Legion  of  Honor  for  services  to 
literature; the following year he returned to Paris on an extended leave of absence. There he 
started a biography of Napoleon and completed Memoirs of a Tourist (1838), a popular travel 
guide to France. Then, between November 4 and December 26 of 1838, the author dictated his 
last great novel, The Charterhouse of Parma (1839), a tale of political intrigue set in Italy. In 
failing health, he lived long enough to rejoice in Balzac’s generous praise of it. Stendhal died in 
Paris,  following  a  series  of  strokes,  on  March  23,  1842,  and  was  buried  the  next  day  in  the 
cemetery of Montmartre. 
“I  will  be  famous  around  1880,”  Stendhal  once  predicted.  Indeed,  at  about  this  time  he 
began  to  attract  widespread  attention,  and  many  of  his  previously  unpublished  books 
appeared―including A Life of Napoleon (1876), Journal of Stendhal (1888), Lamiel (1889), The 
Life  of  Henri  Brulard  (1890),  Memoirs  of  an  Egotist  (1892),  and  Lucien  Leuwen  (1894).  In  the 
twentieth century such writers as Paul Léautaud, André Gide, and Paul Valéry have acclaimed 
Stendhal’s work. “We should never be finished with Stendhal,” said Valéry. “I can think of no 
greater praise than that.” 
Translator’s Note 
Stendhal was largely misunderstood in his lifetime (when he was noticed at all), and has 
continued  to  be  misperceived  in  the  century  and  a  half  since  his  death.  Translating―as 
opposed to reading― Le Rouge et Le Noir has given me new respect for the virtuosic brilliance 
of  Stendhal’s  prose,  and  for  the  passionate  intensity  that  makes  this  novel  a  profound  and 
moving tragedy. 
My  text  has  been  the  1972  Gallimard  Folio  edition,  which  is  based  on  but  has  been 
updated from the Pléiade version, edited and annotated by Henri Martineau in 1932. 
The meaning of the book’s title has been disputed. The best short account of the various 
interpretations seems to me that of Professor René Ternois: 
The title The  Red and the Black3 was not  understood by [Stendhal’s] contemporaries. A 
great deal has been written to explain it, and many silly things have been said. Probably the 
“red”  symbolizes  dreams  of  glory,  in  the  revolutionary  or  in  the  imperial  armies,  and  the 
“black” [symbolizes] ecclesiastical ambition―in short, the dilemma created for Julien Sorel, or, 
more likely still, the impossible dream versus the sad necessity. It is very possible that the title 
concerns the two colors in the game of roulette; life itself is a game; Julien hesitates for a long 
time before placing his bet; he bets on the red, and loses. At a different point, he would have 
bet on the black, and might have won. He did not have the chance. 
The  epigraphs  placed  by  Stendhal  before  each  of  the  book’s  many  chapters,  until  the 
dramatic final chapters (which have been given no epigraphs), are frequently, deliberately, and 
notoriously  unreliable.4  Many  were  written  by  Stendhal  himself,  and  ascribed  ironically  to 
                                                             
3 (translated [and at one point corrected] from Le Rouge et Le Noir, vol. I, Paris, Larousse, 1937, p. 8) 
4 Professor Jean-Jacques Hamm has concluded that only fifteen of the seventy-three epigraphs in The Red and 
the Black are correctly and verifiably attributed. For the rest, it is virtually impossible to determine precisely 
which  are  playful  inventions,  mistakes,  or  intentional  misattributions  by  Stendhal.  As  a  rule,  citations 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
highly unlikely sources. With one exception, I present them, here, as he wrote them. When 
Stendhal  attributes  to  Virgil  a  passage  written  in  fact  by  Horace,  I  have  added  a  correction. 
Caveat lector. 
The  many  different  currencies  in  use,  in  Stendhal’s  France,  have  here  been  converted 
(mostly in due proportion) to more readily comprehensible francs. Famous names, battles, and 
the like have more often than not been explicated, in the text proper, by an added word or 
two. M., the standard French abbreviation for monsieur, has without exception been given its 
full form. In conversational passages, monsieur has usually been translated as “sir.” And so on. 
Or, as Stendhal would say, and I have been careful to let him say, etc., etc. 
Introduction 
Diane Johnson 
I  always  think  that  Stendhal,  the  name  Marie-Henri  Beyle  chose  as  his  nom  de  plume, 
would have preferred to be Lord Byron, the prototypical romantic hero of the early nineteenth 
century, handsome, gifted, aristocratic, and rich. The two men met a time or two in Milan, and 
Stendhal greatly admired “le joli homme de génie.”5 Though Byron, the younger, was long dead 
by 1830, when Stendhal’s great novel Le Rogue et le Noir was published, Stendhal’s tone often 
reminds one of Byron in his letters, or in Don Juan, a work which Stendhal cites in epigraphs 
to his chapters. 
Like  Byron,  Beyle  had  a  masculine  life  of  action.  He  served  in  the  military  under 
Napoleon―between 1800 and 1813 in Italy as a second lieutenant, and with the campaigns in 
Germany, Russia, and Austria as aide to the Napoleonic general Michoud. At other times he 
lived in Paris, where he exerted himself to lead a strenuous, somewhat rakish life about town, 
and would become a diplomat―a French consul-general―in Civita Vecchia, Italy, the country 
he most loved and appreciated. His years there seem to have been happier than those he spent 
in Paris, where, as a provincial born in Grenoble, he perhaps did not quite fit in, being neither 
handsome enough (plain, short, and plump) or rich enough to cut a swath in the society he 
would have preferred. 
The period of Beyle’s lifetime (1783C1842), one of the most turbulent in European history, 
included  the  French  Revolution,  the  Terror,  the  reign  of  Napoleon,  Napoleon’s  wars,  the 
subsequent  restorations  of  Louis  XVIII  and  Charles  X,  and  upheavals  caused  by  various 
factions struggling to make France a Republic. Altogether, in France alone during this period 
there were at least six political regimes, culminating in 1830 with the July Revolution, which 
put  an  end  to  the  Bourbon  rule,  and  instead  of  fulfilling  the  author’s  republican  hopes, 
brought to the throne a new king, Louis-Philippe, who would still be ruling at Beyle’s death. 
And  when  we  consider  the  upheavals  in  Italy,  so  long  dominated  by  Austria,  and  by  1830 
divided into various papal and other states, it is not surprising that politics play an important 
part in Stendhal’s books, as in his life. The period covered in The Red and the Black is almost 
coextensive with the moment it was being written. 
But the contradictions involved in leading a life of fashion as well as the life of a writer 
were something else he shared with Lord Byron. At the same time that the Marie-Henri Beyle 
side of his nature was drawn to mondaine life in the military and social worlds, Stendhal was a 
                                                                                                                                                                    
attributed to English, Latin, and Italian writers were given in the original languages―which Stendhal knew―
those of German origin were translated into French. 
5 Retranslated from the French 
 
 
Introduction 
sober intellectual and writer. It is fortunate that as both a provincial bureaucrat in Italy and a 
Parisian  dandy  he  would  have  had  considerable  leisure time,  during which  he  wrote  critical 
essays  in  French  journals,  articles  which  were  translated  for  English  magazines,  wrote 
extensively on painting, music, and opera, as well as travel pieces, stories, and of course his 
five  novels,  of  which  the  most  famous  are  The  Red  and  the  Black  and  The  Charterhouse  of 
Parma. By these efforts he supplemented his small private income. 
Today  Stendhal  is  secure  in  the  smallish  pantheon  of  the  greatest  French  novelists 
(Flaubert,  Balzac,  Stendhal,  and  Proust),  but  he  is  not  uncontroversial,  and  some  of  his 
qualities, especially his natural, almost conversational style, invite comparisons with Flaubert, 
always to Stendhal’s disadvantage. Flaubert, an exquisite stylist, is, at the moment at least, the 
undisputed roi of French prose, but for many, Stendhal is the more enjoyed, and is above all a 
greater creator of characters, perhaps excepting Madame Bovary. 
An American reader is most likely to have encountered The Red and the Black at about the 
age of its  protagonists, Julien Sorel and Mathilde de La  Mole, who are eighteen or nineteen 
when we meet them. The other important figure, Madame de Rênal, is “about thirty, but still 
quite  pretty.”  As  with  many  novels,  to  take  it  up  again  at  an  older  age  is  to  experience  a 
different book. At first reading, you are caught up in Julien’s precarious career, with his love 
affairs and mishaps, and with the adorable, tempestuous Mathilde and poor Madame de Rênal. 
We  are  drawn  to  Julien’s  egotism,  so  like  our  own,  laugh  when  Julien  falls  off  his  horse  or 
fights a duel, and are generally swept along by the story and the brilliance and candor of its 
understanding of human motivation. American literature has not produced a writer like this, 
though the reader may think of Twain’s similar mixture of irony and romanticism. 
We were not apt to be distracted by the character of Stendhal himself, his cynicism, social 
perspicacity, the complexity of his attitude toward Julien, and his inability to hide his writerly 
cards. What on first reading had seemed a tone expressive of the dawn of the romantic period, 
we now find to be heavily ironic, often patronizing, even sarcastic and impatient, and to owe a 
lot  to  Voltaire  and  the  eighteenth-century  philosophes,  as  well  as  to  romantic  ironists  like 
Byron. This is especially true at the beginning of the novel, as Stendhal sets off on his task of 
recounting Julien Sorel’s rise and fall. We see as the novel progresses that the author softens 
toward his hero, even identifies with him, and puts a lot of his own experience into a tale that 
began more objectively. The reader then may become fascinated by the character of Stendhal, 
who  positions  himself  in  the  tale  as  a  presiding  intelligence  without  ever  seeming  to  be  in 
charge  of  what  happens;  he  always  makes  it  clear  that  it  is  the  characters  themselves  who 
direct their fates, reacting in the light of the corrupt realities of their society. 
Julien  Sorel’s  story  was  taken  from  the  actual  case  of  Antoine  Berthet,  reported  in  the 
Gazette des Tribunaux in December 1827, whose career and crime become Julien’s. At first one 
senses that Stendhal felt constrained by the story he had chosen: a bookish boy, son of a brutal 
peasant  who  beats  him  and  whose  family  doesn’t  understand  him,  sees  a  way  out  of  his 
situation by studying for the priesthood and taking a job as a tutor in a prosperous bourgeois 
family, the Rênals. Here he has an affair with Madame de Rênal, and in other ways furthers his 
career, learning manners and something of the world. He is intelligent and good-looking, the 
epitome of a romantic hero with his large, dark eyes and tousled curls. More important, he has 
“an  unshakable  determination  to  undergo  a  thousand  deaths  rather  than  fail  to  achieve 
success.” 
This accounts for the side of Julien that is calculating, flattering, insincere, and inwardly 
hostile even to people who intend to help and love him―indeed, he is an early example of an 
antihero of whom, at first, even Stendhal cannot approve. But there is a side of Julien that is 
loving despite himself, that is deservedly proud of his superiority to many, if not most, people 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
in  the  ranks  above  him,  and  who  takes  pleasure  in  the  pleasures  of  life  with  natural 
spontaneity. It is his most admirable side, when he finally becomes truthful and sincere and 
listens to his own heart, that dooms him, an outcome that of course reflects Stendhal’s own 
cynical view of a world where hypocrisy, scheming, wealth, and rank are necessary to success. 
Unlike Byron, Stendhal himself was far from irresistible to women, at least as a lover, and 
there is some suspicion that he was rather too direct and clumsy in his approaches to them, or 
unrealistically  romantic,  or  self-protective  in  that  he  more  often  than  not  fell  in  love  with 
married  women.  In  any  case,  despite  his  innumerable  love  affairs,  perhaps  complicated  by 
having  syphilis  (like  many  other  figures  of  the  period),  he  never  married,  and  confessed  to 
occasional homosexual impulses. 
By  all  accounts,  however,  he  was  a  delightful  friend  to  women,  admiring  those  with 
intelligence and learning, qualities warmly appreciated by French men in this time of famous 
salons  and  witty  hostesses.  This  was  generally  an  eighteenth-century  frame  of  mind,  which 
was in part to disappear in the covert misogyny of later nineteenth-century writers. 
That  Stendhal  liked  women  helps  explain  why  he  is  such  a  great  portrayer  of  women 
characters. His portrait of Mathilde de La Mole in The Red and the Black is clearly drawn by a 
man who understood women―he had a beloved sister―and Mathilde is a woman the modern 
reader can understand without having to allow for the attitudes of an earlier time. Unlike the 
heroines of certain English novels, who are apt to be clinging, frail, and doomed like Clarissa 
or Tess, to die at the least transgression, Stendhal’s heroines are witty, rational, responsible for 
their own actions, and willing sometimes to sacrifice our pity for our respect. Above all, they 
are women in a French novel, which is quite a different tradition, always franker about sex and 
infinitely less censorious. Almost more than his racy, vernacular style (very well rendered in 
this new translation), defying the developing taste of his period for a more florid style of prose 
(Victor  Hugo  found  him  horribly  prosaic,  and  Henry  James  “unreadable”),  his  portraits  of 
women seem utterly modern. 
But  Julien  Sorel  is,  of  course,  his  greatest  creation,  perhaps  because  Stendhal  himself 
embodied  some  of  the  contradictions  of  Julien’s  nature.  At  pains  to  demonstrate  Julien’s 
muddle of inexperience, romantic delusion, ambition and na07veté, pride and timidity, Stendhal 
sometimes betrays his own exasperation with these qualities, but by the time Julien is installed 
in  the  splendor  of  the  aristocratic  Parisian  de  La  Moles’  mansion,  Stendhal’s  scorn  turns 
instead  on  the  fashionable  Royalist  society  to  which  they  belong,  an  attitude  reflecting  his 
republican views. The long scene where Julien sits in on the Royalist discussion is a masterly 
precis of the political climate of his day. 
Here Stendhal falls under the spell of his own, perhaps rather autobiographical, creation. 
It is easy to imagine as least some of Julien’s misadventures in Parisian society to have come 
from actual experience, whether Stendhal’s own or that of others he observed floundering in 
that exacting setting. Stendhal’s friends said Julien reminded them of him; in other words, as 
the novel progresses Julien becomes more like Stendhal, and hence his creator comes to like 
him better.6 
Perhaps this is why he spares us a harrowing account of Julien’s end, a fate the present 
reader  may  passionately  resent,  as  this  one  did  at  first  reading.  For,  alas,  things  are  to  end 
badly, leaving Madame de Rênal to die of grief, and poor Mathilde pregnant, though far from 
ruined. What is one to make of Julien’s fate? Was Stendhal bound by the actual case, in that 
Antoine Berthet was executed? Is it an ultimately cynical statement about the futility of life 
                                                             
6 See Jonathan Keates’s entertaining account in his biography Stendhal (Carroll & Graf, 1997). A member of 
Byron’s party in Milan found Stendhal “a fat and lascivious man.” 
 
 
Introduction 
and ambition, or a concession to the concepts of romantic tragedy, or the ultimate expression 
of Stendhal’s ambivalence about his hero, or a moment of high, ironic comedy that laughs at 
human  absurdity,  the  culmination  of  which  is  found  in  Mathilde’s  Gothic  plans  for  Julien’s 
grave? 
Though Julien, Madame de Rênal, and Mathilde de La Mole are themselves creatures of 
the romantic period, they were formed by someone with a foot in each world, which explains 
the  savagery  with  which  their  conflicted  creator  will  turn  on  his  characters  at  unexpected 
moments. In any case, it is the harshness of Julien’s fate which has sealed posterity’s view of 
Stendhal as a severe, even bitter realist rather than the romantic he struggled to hide, and who 
emerges  despite  himself.  For  what,  finally,  is  more  romantic,  in  the  largest  sense,  than  the 
ending of this remarkable work? 
 
Diane Johnson is the author of ten novels―most recently Le Mariage and Le Divorce―
two books of essays, two biographies, and the screenplay for Stanley Kubrick’s classic film The 
Shining.  She  has  been  a  finalist  four  times  for  the  Pulitzer  Prize  and  National  Book  Award.
 
 
THE RED AND THE BLACK 
Part One 
Truth, bitter truth. 
DANTON1 
Chapter One: A Small Town 
Put thousands together 
Less bad, 
But the cage less gay. 
―HOBBES2 
The little town of Verrières might be one of the prettiest in all Franche-Comté. Its white 
houses with their sharp-pointed roofs of red tile stretch down a hillside, every faint ripple in 
the long slope marked by thick clusters of chestnut trees. A few hundred feet below the ruins 
of the ancient fortress, built by the Spanish,3 runs the River Doubs. 
To the north, Verrières is sheltered by a great mountain, part of the Jura range. The first 
frosts  of  October  cover  these  jagged  peaks  with  snow.  A  stream  that  rushes  down  from  the 
mountains, crossing through Verrières and then pouring itself into the Doubs, powers a good 
many sawmills―an immensely simple industry that provides a modest living for most of the 
inhabitants, more peasant than bourgeois. But the sawmills are not what brought prosperity to 
the  little  town.  It  was  the  production  of  printed  calico  cloth,  known  as  “Mulhouse,”4  which 
ever since the fall of Napoleon has created widespread comfort and led to the refinishing of 
virtually every house in Verrières. Just inside the town, there is a stunning roar from a machine 
of frightful appearance. Twenty ponderous hammers, falling over and over with a crash that 
makes the ground tremble, are lifted by a wheel that the stream keeps in motion. Every one of 
these hammers, each and every day, turns out I don’t know how many thousands of nails. And 
it’s pretty, smooth-cheeked young girls who offer pieces of iron to these enormous hammers, 
which quickly transform them into nails. This operation, visibly harsh and violent, is one of 
the  things  that  most  astonishes  a  first-time  traveler,  poking  his  way  into  the  mountains 
separating France and Switzerland. And if the traveler, entering Verrières, asks who owns this 
noble nail-making factory, deafening everyone who walks along the main street, he’ll be told, 
in the drawling accent of the region, “Ah―it belongs to His Honor the Mayor.” 
                                                             
1 Georges-Jacques Danton (1759C94) was a celebrated revolutionary orator; leader of the radical Cordeliers and 
then  the  Jacobins;  minister  of  justice  during  the  first  republican  government  (1792C93);  and  member  of  the 
infamous Committee for Public Safety during the Terror. Danton was imprisoned and then guillotined when 
he and his onetime ally Robespierre turned on each other. There is no record of Danton ever having made this 
statement. 
2 The epigraph was given in English, and arranged as if from a poem by Stendhal. The English philosopher 
Thomas Hobbes (1588C1679) wrote no poetry. 
3 The geography and description of Verrières suggests the town of Besan04on, historic capital of the Franche-
Comté region, which was a possession of the Spanish Hapsburgs until it was conquered by Louis XIV in 1678. 
Stendhal was born and raised in the small mountain town of Grenoble, which he despised. 
4 A small Alsatian town known for its textile production. 
 
 
Chapter One: A Small Town 
If  the  traveler  spends  just  a  moment  or  two  on  Verrières’s  grand  thoroughfare,  which 
ascends along the bank of the Doubs right up to the top of the hill, the odds are a hundred to 
one he’ll see a tall man with an air both businesslike and important. 
As soon as he appears, every hat is respectfully raised. His hair is grizzled, he’s dressed in 
gray. He wears the insignia of several knightly orders; his forehead is lofty, his nose aquiline, 
and taking him all in all there’s a certain orderliness about him. At first sight, one even feels 
that he blends the dignity of mayoral status with the sort of charm still often to be found in a 
man of forty-five or fifty. But it does not take long for a Parisian traveler to be struck, most 
unfavorably,  by  clear  signs  of  self-satisfaction  and  conceit,  topped  off  by  who  knows  what 
limitations,  what  lack  of  originality.  Finally,  one  is  aware  that  his  talents  are  confined  to 
making sure he is paid exactly what he is owed, while paying what he himself owes only at the 
last possible moment. 
This then is Monsieur de Rênal, mayor of Verrières. Crossing the street with solemn steps, 
he  goes  into  City  Hall  and  disappears  from  the  traveler’s  sight.  But  if  the  traveler  keeps  on 
walking, no more than another hundred paces up the hill he will see a distinguished-looking 
house  and,  if  he  looks  through  an  adjoining  wrought-iron  gate,  a  very  fine  garden.  Beyond 
that, he will see a horizon shaped by Burgundian hills, which seems to have been put there 
expressly for the purpose of pleasing the eye. This view will help the traveler forget the foul 
smell of petty financial transactions, which had begun to asphyxiate him. 
He  is  informed  that  this  house  belongs  to  Monsieur  de  Rênal.  The  mayor  of  Verrières 
owes this fine, just-completed dwelling, built of cut stone, to the profits earned by his noble 
nail factory. His family, it is explained, is Spanish, ancient, and (as the story is told) settled in 
the region long before Louis XIV conquered it. 
Ever since 18155, his status as an industrialist has embarrassed him. It was 1815 that made 
him  mayor  of  Verrières.  The  terrace  walls  around  the  different  parts  of  this  magnificent 
garden, holding in place each of the different levels descending almost to the Doubs, are yet 
another reward for Monsieur de Rênal’s iron-trade business acumen. 
Nowhere in France can you hope to find the picturesque gardens surrounding Germany’s 
manufacturing towns―Leipzig, Frankfurt, Nuremberg, etc. In Franche-Comté, the more walls 
you put up, the more your property bristles with rocks heaped one on top of another, the more 
claim you have on your neighbors’ respect. Monsieur de Rênal’s gardens, packed with walls, 
are even more admired because he bought―for just about their weight in gold―the bits and 
pieces of land on which they lie. For example, the sawmill located so strangely right on the 
bank of the Doubs, which caught your eye as you entered Verrières, and on which you noticed 
the nameSOREL, written in gigantic letters on a board protruding over the roof, until six years 
ago had stood exactly where, at this very  moment, they are building the wall for the fourth 
terrace of Monsieur de Rênal’s garden. 
For  all  his  haughty  pride,  Monsieur  de  Rênal  had  been  obliged  to  make  a  good  many 
overtures to old Sorel, a tough, stubborn peasant; he had to count out a stack of handsome 
gold coins before the old man agreed to move his business elsewhere. As for the public stream 
that had powered the sawmill, Monsieur de Rênal relied on the influence he enjoyed in Paris 
to have it diverted. This official favor had come to him after the elections of 182-. 
To  get  one  acre,  he  had  given  Sorel  four,  situated  five  hundred  paces farther down  the 
bank of the Doubs. And even though the new location was far more advantageous for his trade 
                                                             
5 The year of Waterloo marked the permanent―so it was thought―restoration of the Bourbons to the throne. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
in pine boards, Père Sorel6 (as they call him, now that he’s a rich man) knew how to play on 
his neighbor’s pressing impatience, and his land-owning mania, squeezing out a sale price of 
six thousand francs. 
To  be  sure,  the  transaction  was  criticized  by  wiser  heads  in  the  area.  Once,  about  four 
o’clock  on a Sunday, coming home from  church, dressed in his mayoral robes, Monsieur de 
Rênal saw in the distance old Sorel, surrounded by his three sons, watching him and smiling. 
That smile proved fatally illuminating to the mayor: he realized, from then on, that he could 
have bought the land for less. 
To earn a public reputation in Verrières, the essential thing―while of course building a 
great  many  walls―is  not  to  adopt  some  design  carried  across  the  Jura  gorges  by  Italian 
stonemasons,  in  their  springtime  pilgrimages  to  Paris.  Any  such  innovation  would  earn  the 
imprudent builder the unshakable taint of rebel; he would be forever after ruined in the eyes of 
the wise, moderate folk who parcel out reputation in Franche-Comté. 
In truth, these wise fellows wield an incredibly wearisome despotism, and it is precisely 
this wretched word that makes small towns unlivable for those who have been successful in 
that great republic we call Paris. The tyranny of opinion―and such opinion!―is every bit as 
idiotic in the small towns of France as it is in the United States of America. 
Chapter Two: A Mayor 
Importance! My dear sir, isn’t that worthless? The respect of donkeys, the astonishment of small children, 
the rich man’s jealousy and the wise man’s disdain. 
―BARNAVE7 
Happily for Monsieur de Rênal’s reputation as an administrator, a huge retaining wall was 
required for the public walkway running along the hillside, roughly a hundred feet above the 
Doubs. This wonderful location gives it one of the most picturesque views in all France. But 
every spring the rains had regularly furrowed the walkway, digging out gullies and rendering it 
impassable. This inconvenience, which affected everyone, placed Monsieur de Rênal under the 
fortunate obligation of immortalizing his administration by a wall twenty feet high and well 
over two hundred feet long. 
The  upper  portion  of  this  wall―on  behalf  of  which  Monsieur  de  Rênal  had  been 
compelled  to  make  three  trips  to  Paris,  because  the  former  minister  of  the  interior  had 
declared himself the mortal enemy of Verrières’s walkway―the upper portion of this walkway 
had  now  grown  to  be  four  feet  above  the  ground.  And  as  if  to  challenge  all  the  ministers, 
present and past, at this very moment slabs of cut stone are being put in place. 
How many times, dreaming about Parisian balls long left behind, with my chest pressed 
against those great blocks of stone―a lovely gray streaked with blue―has my glance plunged 
down into the valley through which the Doubs runs! Out there, along the left bank, five or six 
valleys  go  meandering,  the  eye  easily  able  to  distinguish  small  streams  tumbling  through 
them.  Having  splashed  through  one  waterfall  after  another,  one  sees  them  pouring  into  the 
Doubs. The sun is powerful, in these mountains: when it shines directly overhead, a traveler’s 
daydreaming, as he stands on this raised earthwork, is sheltered by magnificent plane trees. 
They owe their rapid growth, as well as their beautiful foliage, green tinted with blue, to the 
                                                             
6 Literally, Father Sorel, not a religious but a folksy and familiar form of address, more respectful than le vieux 
Sorel (old man Sorel) but less than Monsieur. 
7 Antoine Barnave (1761C93) quickly earned a reputation as the finest young orator of the National Assembly 
in 1789. A native of Grenoble, he had been an acquaintance of Stendhal’s (Marie-Henri Beyle’s) grandfather. 
Barnave was a moderate supporter of constitutional monarchy; he was an early victim of the Terror. 
 
 
Chapter Two: A Mayor 
earth brought by the mayor and deposited behind his huge retaining wall, for in spite of the 
Municipal  Council’s  opposition,  he  had  enlarged  the  walkway  by  more  than  six  feet―I 
commend him for this, although he is a monarchist and I a liberal8―and indeed that is why, in 
his  opinion  and  that  of  Monsieur  Valenod,  the  fortunate  director  of  the  Pauper’s  Bureau  in 
Verrières, this raised earthwork can bear comparison to that of Paris’s Saint-Germain-en-Laye. 
For myself, I find only one thing to object to, about Loyalty Walkway. One can read this 
formal title in fifteen or twenty places, on marble plaques that earned Monsieur de Rênal an 
extra  star  on  his  official  medal.  But  what  I  disapprove  of  about  Loyalty  Walkway  is  the 
barbarous way the authorities cut and clip those vigorous plane trees, down to the very quick. 
Instead of looking as if their heads were bowed low, plump and round and debased like the 
most vulgar of garden vegetables, they ask only to be granted the magnificent shapes one sees 
them assume in England. His Honor the Mayor is a despot, and twice a year all trees belonging 
to the town are shorn without pity. Those of liberal belief pretend (though they exaggerate) 
that the town gardener’s hand has become even more severe since Father Maslon decided to 
impound for church use the profits from this shearing. 
This  young  ecclesiastic  was  sent  out  from  Besan04on,  some  years  ago,  to  keep  watch  on 
Father Chélan and several other priests in the neighborhood. An old surgeon-major,9 a veteran 
of the Italian wars who had retired to Verrières, and who in his lifetime had been (according to 
His Honor the Mayor) both a Jacobin10 and a Bonapartist, actually had the nerve to complain 
to the mayor about the periodic mutilation of these beautiful trees. 
“I  like  shade,”  replied  Monsieur  de  Rênal  with  the  arrogant  tone  so  appropriate  when 
speaking to a surgeon and member of the Legion of Honor.11 “I love shade, and I have my trees 
cut so they provide shade, nor can I conceive of any other use for trees, especially when, unlike 
the useful walnut, they bring in no revenue.” 
And  there  you  have  the  mighty  words  that,  in  Verrières,  decide  everything:  bring  in  no 
revenue. This phrase alone is representative of the habitual views of more than three-quarters 
of the inhabitants. 
Bring in no revenue, then, explains every decision taken in this little town, which seemed 
to you so pretty. The arriving traveler, seduced at first by the beauty of the deep, green valleys 
all  around,  fancies  that  these  are  people  who  appreciate  the  beautiful;  indeed,  they’re 
constantly chattering about the loveliness of their countryside, nor can one deny that they in 
fact  appreciate  it―but  simply  because  it  attracts  outsiders  whose  money  fattens  up 
innkeepers, which in turn, via the local tax system, brings in revenue. 
                                                             
8 “Monarchist” is given here for ultra. The ultra-royalistes were a faction that were said to be more monarchist 
than the monarch, and opposed the moderate constitutionalism of King Louis XVIII, younger brother of Louis 
XVI. They gained increasing political power with the advent of the third brother, Charles X (reigned 1824C30), 
whose attempts to turn back the historical clock eventually led to the July Revolution. “Liberal” is a broader 
term, covering everyone from constitutional monarchists to republicans. 
9 This character is based on Dr. Gagnon, Stendhal’s maternal grandfather, to whom the author was extremely 
close as a child. Gagnon was a surgeon, if not a soldier, and a political progressive, if not actually a Jacobin. 
Like Julien Sorel, Marie-Henri Beyle lost his mother at a young age, and had a difficult relationship with his 
lawyer father. 
10  The  most  radical  faction  of  the  National  Assembly,  the  Jacobin  Club  took  its  name  from  the  former 
monastery that served as their headquarters. Danton and Robespierre were leading members. Throughout the 
early nineteenth century, “Jacobin” became an epithet for anyone suspected of political radicalism, even in 
Britain and the United States. 
11  Founded  by  Bonaparte  in  1802  to  recognize  service  to  the  nation;  although  maintained  by  the  restored 
Bourbons, the Legion of Honor was necessarily scorned by conservatives such as Monsieur de Rênal. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
One fine autumn day Monsieur de Rênal strolled along Loyalty Walkway, his wife on his 
arm. While listening to her husband, who addressed her in serious tones, Madame de Rênal’s 
glance anxiously followed the movements of her three little boys. The oldest, who might have 
been eleven, kept coming over to the stone wall, clearly thinking about climbing up on top. 
Her gentle voice called out, “Adolphe,”12 and the child gave up his ambitious project. 
Madame de Rênal seemed to be about thirty, but still quite pretty. 
“He’s  going  to  regret  it,  this  fine  gentleman  from  Paris,”  said  Monsieur  de  Rênal, 
obviously offended, his cheeks even paler than usual. “I’m not entirely without friends at the 
castle....” 
But though I propose to tell you about provincial life for some hundreds of pages, I will 
not barbarously submit you to the prolixity, the wise heavy-footedness of country conversation. 
This fine gentleman from Paris, so unbearable to the mayor of Verrières, was none other 
than Monsieur Appert, who two days earlier had found a way not only to push himself into 
both Verrières’s prison and its Pauper’s Bureau, but also into the hospital, which the mayor 
and the principal landowners administered free of charge. 
“But,”  said  Madame  de  Rênal  timidly,  “what  harm  could  this  gentleman  from  Paris 
possibly do you, since you look after the welfare of the poor with such scrupulous integrity?” 
“He’s come here just to dig up scandal, and then he’ll have articles appearing in the liberal 
newspapers.” 
“You never read them, my dear.” 
“But  people talk to us about those Jacobin articles; it’s distracting, and it keeps us from 
doing good.13 And as for me, I’m never going to forgive the parish priest.” 
Chapter Three: A Priest 
A priest who’s virtuous and not a schemer is a heavenly gift to a small town. 
―FLEURY14 
You  need  to  know  that  Verrières’s  parish  priest,  an  old  man  of  eighty,  who  owed  his 
health and his iron will to the brisk air of these mountains, had the right to visit the prison, 
the hospital, and even the Pauper’s Bureau at any time he wished. Monsieur Appert, who had 
been recommended to the parish priest by people in Paris, had the good sense to arrive in this 
gossipy little town at exactly six o’clock in the morning. And he went straight to the rectory. 
Father  Chélan  read  the  letter  from  Marquis  de  La  Mole,  a  French  nobleman  and  the 
largest landowner in the province, then sat quietly contemplating it. 
“I’m  an  old  man,  and  well  loved  here,”  he  finally  murmured.  “They  wouldn’t  dare!” 
Quickly looking up at the gentleman from Paris, his eyes were gleaming, despite his age, with 
a  special  consecrated  fire  that  showed  how  delightful  he  found  it,  plunging  himself  into 
something both good and rather risky: 
“Come with me, sir, and in the presence of the jailer and, above all, of the superintendents 
at the Pauper’s Bureau, please express no opinion whatsoever on the things we will be seeing.” 
                                                             
12 Adolphe was the title of Benjamin Constant’s very popular sentimental novel of 1816, which tells the story of 
a young man’s unhappy affair with an older woman. A suggestion of sentimentality on Madame de Rênal’s 
part? 
13 A direct quote [Stendhal’s note]. 
14 The name suggests two very different early-eighteenth-century ecclesiastics: Claude Fleury (1640C1723) was 
confessor to Louis XV and a Church historian, principal author of the thirty-six-volume Histoire écclésiastique; 
André-Hercule,  Cardinal  de  Fleury  (1653C1743),  was  a  skillful  politician  who  served  as  de  facto  prime 
minister for Louis XV from 1726 until his death. 
 
 
Chapter Three: A Priest 
Monsieur  Appert  understood  that  he  was  dealing  with a  high-minded  man:  he  followed  the 
venerable priest, went to the prison, the old people’s home, the poorhouse, asked a great many 
questions  and,  in  spite  of  some  extraordinary  responses,  did  not  allow  himself  the  slightest 
indication of criticism. 
These  visits  lasted  several  hours.  The  priest  invited  Monsieur  Appert  to  dine  with him, 
but the gentleman from Paris pretended to have letters to write: besides, he did not want to 
compromise  his  generous  companion-in-arms.  About  three  o’clock  the  two  men  went  to 
inspect the Pauper’s Bureau, then returned to the prison. There, they found the jailer standing 
at  the  door,  a  tall,  bow-legged  giant  of  a  man;  fright  had  transformed  his  ugly  face  into 
something truly hideous. 
“Ah! Monsieur,” he said to the priest, the moment he saw them, “this gentleman I see here 
with you, isn’t he Monsieur Appert?” 
“And?” said the priest. 
“It’s just that, as of yesterday, I have the most precise orders, sent by the chief of police 
and  delivered  by  a  gendarme  who  had  to  gallop  all  night,  that  Monsieur  Appert  mustn’t  be 
allowed into the prison.” 
“Let me inform you, Monsieur Noiroud,” said the priest, “that this traveler, here with me, 
is Monsieur Appert. Remember that I have the right to enter the prison at any hour, day or 
night, accompanied by whomever I choose.” 
“Yes, Father,” said the jailer, his voice low, bowing his head like a bulldog obliged to do as 
he is told, but reluctantly, for fear of the stick. “It’s just, Father, I’ve got a wife and kids, and if 
anyone squeals on me I’ll be a beggar. All I’ve got to live on is my job.” 
“I’d be just as sorry to lose mine,” said the good priest, his voice increasingly emotional. 
“But what a difference!” the jailer answered quickly. “You, Father, everyone knows you’ve 
got an income of eight hundred francs a year, good land under the warm sun....” 
These  are  the  things  that,  for  two  days―gossiped  about,  exaggerated  twenty  different 
ways―stirred up malignant passions all over the little town of Verrières. Just now, they were 
serving  as  the  text  for  a  little  discussion  Monsieur  de  Rênal  was  having  with  his  wife.  That 
morning, accompanied by Monsieur Valenod, director of the Pauper’s Bureau, he had gone to 
see the parish priest, bearing witness to the liveliest sort of dissatisfaction. No one was there to 
shield Father Chélan; he alone bore the weight of these gentlemen’s remarks. 
“Well  then,  gentlemen!  At  eighty  years  of  age,  I’ll  become  the  third  parish  priest  to  be 
dismissed in this district. I’ve been here fifty-six years; I’ve baptized virtually everyone living in 
the town, which was no more than a farmers’ market when I arrived. Day after day I marry all 
the young people, just as I’ve long since married their grandparents. Verrières is my family―
but what I said to myself, seeing this stranger from Paris, was: ’Perhaps this man is in fact a 
liberal,  we  see  all  too  many  of  them.  But  what  harm  can  he  do  our  poor  folk  and  our 
prisoners?’” 
Monsieur de Rênal’s harsh words, and especially those of Monsieur Valenod, as director 
of the Pauper’s Bureau, grew more and more strident. 
“Well  then,  gentlemen,  dismiss  me,”  the  old  priest  cried,  his  voice  trembling.  “I’m  still 
going to live here. Everyone knows that, forty-eight years ago, I inherited land that brings in 
eight hundred francs. I will live on that. I don’t put away anything from my salary, which may 
be why I’m never frightened when there’s talk of taking it away from me.” 
Monsieur  de  Rênal  got  on  very  well  with  his  wife,  but  he  had  not  known  how  to  reply 
when she’d asked, timidly, “What harm can this gentleman from Paris do to the prisoners?” He 
was  about  to  grow  angry  when,  suddenly,  she  choked  back  a  cry.  Her  second  son  had  just 
climbed to the top of the wall around the terrace, and was running along it, although it soared 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
more than twenty feet above the vineyard on the other side. Fear of frightening her child, and 
causing him to tumble down, had kept her from calling out. Finally, laughing at his success, 
the boy looked over at his mother, saw how pale she was, and, jumping down to the walkway, 
ran over to her. He got a good scolding. 
This minor episode changed the whole course of their conversation. 
“I’ve really got to bring that Sorel into the house,” said Monsieur de Rênal. “The sawmill 
operator’s son. He’ll keep an eye on the children: they’re getting to be too much for you. He’s a 
young priest, or very nearly, an expert Latinist, and he’ll help the children make good progress, 
because  Father  Chélan  tells  me  he’s  a  solid  sort.  I’ll  give  him  three  hundred  francs  and  his 
board. 
“I had some doubts on the question of morality, because Sorel was the favorite of that old 
surgeon, the one who was a member of the Legion of Honor and who came to live with the 
Sorels, under the pretense that he was actually related to the family. The man might very well 
have been, after all, a secret agent for the liberals. He used to say that our mountain air was 
good for his asthma, but who knows if that was true or not? He was with Buonoparté15 on all 
his  Italian  campaigns,  and  once,  I’ve  heard,  he  even  voted  against  the  Empire.16  This  liberal 
taught Latin to young Sorel, and left him all the books he’d brought with him. 
“Also, I would never have dreamed of having someone right out of a sawmill here in the 
house, around our children, but Father Chélan―actually, just the night before the quarrel that 
has estranged us forever―told me Sorel had been studying theology for three years, planning 
to enter the seminary, so he’s no liberal: he’s a Latinist. 
“This  would  be  a  sensible  arrangement  in  more  ways  than  one,”  Monsieur  de  Rênal 
continued, while watching his wife with a diplomatic air. “Valenod’s terribly proud of that pair 
of Normands he just bought, for pulling his fancy carriage. But his children don’t have a tutor.” 
“He might very well steal ours.” 
“So you like my plan?” said Monsieur de Rênal, thanking his wife, with a smile, for the 
excellent idea she’d just had. “All right, then. It’s decided.” 
“Ah, good Lord! My dear, how quickly you make up your mind!” 
“It’s because, me, I know what I’m doing―and our parish priest has seen that. Let’s be 
completely  open  about  it:  we’re  surrounded  by  liberals,  here.  All  these  calico  dealers  are 
jealous of me, I’m quite sure of it; two or three have gotten rich―well now! I’m going to be 
powerfully pleased when they see Monsieur de Rênal’s children passing by, on their way to the 
walkway,  accompanied  by  their  tutor.  That’s  going  to  make  an  impression.  My  grandfather 
always used to tell us how, in his youth, he had a tutor. This one will cost me a hundred gold 
crowns,17  but  we  must  see  this  expense  as  something  necessary  to  preserve  our  social 
standing.” 
This sudden decision left Madame de Rênal distinctly pensive. She was a tall, well-made 
woman,  who  had  been  the  local  beauty,  as  people  in  these  mountains  put  it.  There  was  a 
distinct straightforwardness about her, and in the youthful spring of her walk: indeed, to the 
                                                             
15 Royalists, even before 1815, would use the Italian pronunciation of the “usurper’s” name to emphasize the 
Corsican-born  dictator’s  foreignness.  Italian  campaigns:  The  youthful  General  Bonaparte  made  his  name  by 
driving the Austrians out of northern Italy in 1796C97. The Italian campaigns included such famous battles as 
Rivoli and the Lodi bridge. These campaigns concluded in 1797 with the Treaty of Campo Formio, where the 
young general virtually dictated terms to the Holy Roman emperor before returning to a hero’s welcome in 
Paris. 
16 Citizen First Consul Bonaparte became the Emperor Napoleon by virtue of a plebiscite in 1804. The total 
vote of 3,572,329 for to 2,569 against reflected intimidation, corruption, and massive abstention. 
17 For ecus, a coin worth three francs in the nineteenth century. 
 
 
Chapter Three: A Priest 
eyes of a Parisian such unspoiled charm, as innocent as it was lively, might even have seemed 
suggestive of a sweet sensuality. Had she been told this was the sort of effect she produced, 
Madame de Rênal would have been deeply ashamed. She had never in her life been tempted 
either to flirtation or any manner of affected behavior. Monsieur Valenod, the wealthy director 
of the Pauper’s Bureau, was said to have tried making advances to her, quite without success, 
which  threw  her  virtue  into  high  relief,  for  he  was  a  tall  young  man,  strongly  built,  with  a 
florid face and great black whiskers―one of those coarse creatures, shameless and loud, that 
they call, in the provinces, good fellows. 
Madame  de  Rênal,  terribly  shy  and  equally  moody,  was  above  all  else  disturbed  at 
Monsieur  Valenod’s  incessant  moving  about,  and  the  blaring  of  his  voice.  Her  antipathy  to 
what  Verrières  called  pleasure  had  gotten  her  a  reputation  for  snobbishness.  No  such  thing 
had ever crossed her mind, but she’d been perfectly happy to see fewer and fewer townsfolk 
calling at her house. Nor should we hide the fact that, in the eyes of the town’s ladies, she was 
an outright fool, since with not the slightest regard for proper management of her husband, 
she passed over the loveliest opportunities for buying beautiful hats from Paris or Besan04on. 
But if they just let her wander about in her fine garden, she never complained. 
This was, in short, an artless soul who had never so much as thought of passing judgment 
on her husband and admitting to herself that he bored her. It seemed to her, though not in so 
many  words,  that  no  relationship  between  husband  and  wife  could  be  any  better.  She  was 
especially fond of Monsieur de Rênal when he spoke to her about his plans for their children, 
the first of whom he meant to make a soldier, the second a judge, and the third a priest. That 
is, she found Monsieur de Rênal less boring than any other man she knew. 
Nor was this marital opinion an irrational one. His Honor the Mayor of Verrières owed 
his reputation for wit and, above all, for good breeding to half a dozen jokes he had inherited 
from  an  uncle.  Old  Captain  de  Rênal,  before  the  Revolution,  had  served  in  an  infantry 
regiment  commanded  by  the  Duke  d’Orléans,  18  and  when  he’d  been  in  Paris  had  been 
entertained in the prince’s drawing rooms. There, he had seen Madame de Montesson,19 the 
celebrated Madame de Genlis, and Monsieur Ducrest, who had redesigned the Royal Palace.20 
These personages kept popping up, over and over, in Monsieur de Rênal’s stories. But little by 
little this echo of events exceedingly ticklish in the telling became laborsome for him, and after 
a time he repeated his anecdotes about the House of Orléans only on great occasions. Besides, 
                                                             
18 These are curious allusions for the conservative Monsieur de Rênal: In the last years of the ancien régime, 
the Duke d’ Orléans (1747C93) and his Paris residence, the Palais-Royal, were centers of political opposition. 
The duke was a cousin of Louis XVI, First Prince of the Blood Royal, and was an ambitious and thoroughly 
unprincipled man. Hungry for power, he attempted to put himself at the head of the Revolution, abandoning 
his name (but not his inheritance) and calling himself Philippe 07galité. In spite of this ostentatious radicalism, 
he ended up being guillotined during the Terror. 
19 Madame de Montesson, morganitic second wife of Philippe 07galité’s father, introduced the young duke to her 
niece,  the  Countess  de  Genlis  (1746C1830).  This  intellectual  and  progressive  thinker  was  briefly  the  duke’s 
mistress; he later scandalized conservatives and thrilled the philosophes by making her tutor to his children, 
including the future king, Louis-Philippe d’Orléans. Madame de Genlis fled to England after the arrest of the 
Royal family, and eked out her living by writing her memoirs and also novels. 
20 Parisian palace to the north of the Louvre, built by Cardinal de Richelieu and later acquired by the Orleans 
family. In the last years of the ancien régime, under the future Philippe 07galité, the Palais-Royal was known as 
a hotbed of liberal politics and libertine society. With the help of Marquis Ducrest [ sic,né du Crest ], brother of 
Madame de Genlis, the duke turned the palace into a public gathering place by renting out space in the public 
galleries to shops and cafés. The galleries and gardens of the Palais-Royal were frequented by prostitutes and 
by radical orators such as Camille Desmoulins. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
since he was extremely polite, except when the topic was money, he was very properly thought 
of as the most aristocratic person in all Verrières. 
Chapter Four: A Father Andson 
And am I to blame 
If that’s how things are? 
―MACHIAVELLI21 
“My wife really has a head on her shoulders!” the mayor of Verrières said to himself, at six 
o’clock the next morning, as he walked down to Père Sorel’s sawmill. “Though I told her I had, 
so as to maintain my natural superiority, it really had not occurred to me that if I didn’t hire 
this  little  priest―who’s  said  to  command  Latin  like  an  angel―the  director  of  the  Pauper’s 
Bureau, that restless soul, might very well have had the same idea and stolen him away. With 
what self-satisfaction he’d have talked about his children’s tutor! ... Will my tutor, once he’s in 
the house, wear a cassock?” 
Monsieur de Rênal was pondering this question when he saw, in the distance, a peasant, a 
man nearly six feet tall, who from the first light of dawn had apparently been hard at work, 
measuring lengths of wood laid out along the bank of the Doubs. The peasant22 did not seem 
particularly pleased to see His Honor the Mayor coming toward him, because his timber was 
blocking the towpath and had been put there in violation of town laws. 
Père  Sorel,  for  it  was  indeed  him,  was  very  surprised―and  even  more  pleased―by  the 
strange arrangement Monsieur de Rênal proposed for his son. All the same, he listened with 
that air of downcast discontent, and absolutely no interest, which the shrewd inhabitants of 
these  mountains  understood  only  too  well  how  to  drape  over  themselves.  They  had  been 
enslaved,  ever  since  the  days  of  Spanish  domination,  and  they  preserved  this  physiological 
trait of the fedayin of Egypt.23 
Sorel’s first response was merely a long recitation of all the formulas of respect, which he 
knew  by  heart.  While  he  was  repeating  these  meaningless  words,  with  a  stupid  smile  that 
nicely supplemented the look of dishonesty, even of roguery, so profoundly natural to him, the 
old peasant’s lively spirit tried to figure out what could have led so important a man to take in 
his good-for-nothing son. He was totally disillusioned with Julien―and here was Monsieur de 
Rênal offering the incredible salary of three hundred francs a year, plus food and board, and 
even clothing. This last claim, which Père Sorel had the quick wit to suddenly include, even 
before negotiations had been concluded, was agreed to by Monsieur de Rênal just the same. 
The mayor had been struck by the demand. “Since Sorel is hardly delighted and gratified 
by my proposal, as in the nature of things he ought to be,” he said to himself, “it’s clear that 
he’s had offers from elsewhere, and from whom could they have come, if not from Valenod?” 
Monsieur  de  Rênal  urged  Sorel  to  settle  things  on  the  spot,  but  he  would  not:  the  wily  old 
peasant  stubbornly  refused,  saying  he  had  to  consult  his  son―as  if,  in  the  countryside,  a 
wealthy father ever consulted a penniless son, except for the sake of appearances. 
Water-powered  sawmills  are  sheds  on  the  banks  of  a  stream.  The  roof  sits  on  a  frame 
built around four big wooden pillars. At a height of eight or ten feet, in the middle of the shed, 
one sees a saw rising and coming down, while an extremely simple device pushes a piece of 
wood against the blade. A wheel turned by the running stream is what operates both parts of 
                                                             
21  Niccolò  Machiavelli  (1469C1527)  is  best  known  for  The  Prince,  his  masterpiece  of  cynical  realpolitik. 
However, these precise words are not found in Machiavelli’s work. 
22 Should be understood to refer to social rather than economic status. 
23 The peasants of ancient Egypt. 
 
 
Chapter Four: A Father Andson 
the process, the ascending and descending saw and the mechanism that gently guides wood 
toward it, after which it is cut into boards. 
Walking over to his factory, Père Sorel bellowed for Julien; there was no response. All he 
could see were his older sons, giantlike fellows who, armed with heavy axes, were squaring up 
fir-tree trunks, then lugging them to the saw. Completely occupied with following exactly the 
black  line  drawn  on  the  wood,  with  each  swing  of  the  axe  they  would  pare  away  enormous 
chips. They could not hear their father’s voice. Sorel went into the shed and looked in vain for 
his  youngest  son,  in  the  spot  next  to  the  saw  where  he was  supposed  to  be.  He  found  him, 
finally, five or six feet higher up, sitting on one of the roof beams. Instead of carefully watching 
over the working of the machinery, Julien was reading. For old Sorel, nothing could have been 
more objectionable; he might have forgiven Julien his small size, hardly suited for hard labor, 
and utterly unlike his older brothers, but he himself could not read, and this mania for reading 
was repulsive to him. 
He called Julien two or three times, without being heard. More even than the noise of the 
saw, the young man’s intense focus on his book blocked out his father’s terrible voice. At last, 
despite his age, Sorel jumped onto the tree trunk being fed into the saw, and from there got up 
to  the  roof  beam.  A  violent  blow  sent  Julien’s  book  flying  into  the  running  water;  a  second 
blow, just as powerful, struck the young man on top of his head, making him lose his balance. 
He  was  about  to  drop  some  twelve  or  fifteen  feet,  right  onto  the  machine’s  moving  levers, 
which would have beaten him to a pulp, but his father grabbed him with his left hand, even as 
he fell. 
“Well, lazybones! You’re always reading your damned books―and you’re supposed to be 
in charge of the saw? Read them tonight, when you’re wasting time with the parish priest―
fine, fine!” 
Stunned by the force of the blow, and bloodied all over, Julien went back to his official 
post, on the platform next to the saw. There were tears in his eyes, less from the physical pain 
than for the loss of his book, which he dearly loved. 
“Get down here, you pig, so I can talk to you.” 
The noise of the machine was loud enough to keep Julien from hearing the command. His 
father, who had already jumped down, had no interest in climbing back up, so he went to fetch 
a  long  stick  used  for  cracking  nuts  and  smacked  his  son  on  the  shoulder.  Julien’s  feet  had 
barely touched the ground when old Sorel began shoving him roughly along, in the direction 
of the house. “God only knows what he’s going to do to me!” the young man said to himself. As 
they proceeded, he looked sadly at the stream into which his book had fallen: it was the one he 
loved best in the world, Memories of Napoleon on Saint-Helena.24 
His  cheeks  were  purple,  his  eyes  cast  down.  He  was  a  small  young  man,  eighteen  or 
nineteen  years  old,  not  appearing  very  strong,  with  irregular  but  delicate  features  and  an 
aquiline nose. His large black eyes, which at peaceful moments indicated thought and passion, 
were  at  the  moment  sparkling  with  wild  hatred.  His  dark  chestnut  hair,  worn  very  long, 
covered much of his forehead and, when he was angry, gave him a wicked look. Among the 
innumerable varieties of the human face, there may well be none more striking. His slender, 
compact form was more indicative of light quickness than of power and energy. Even when 
very young, his extremely thoughtful air and his pallor had convinced his father he would not 
                                                             
24 Le Mémorial de Sainte-Hélène, by Comte Emmanuel de Las Cases, was the author’s recounting of Napoleon’s 
life  in  exile  and  the  deposed  emperor’s  oral  history  of  his  extraordinary  career.  Las  Cases,  Napoleon’s 
chamberlain,  followed  his  master  to  Saint-Helena  and  lived  with  him  until,  in  November  1816,  the  British 
ordered him to leave. Le Mémorial appeared in 1822 and 1823 and contributed greatly to the already growing 
Napoleonic legend. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
live, or if he did that he’d be a burden on his family. Everyone in the house despised him; he 
hated his brothers and his father; when the children played in the public square, on Sunday, 
he was always beaten up. 
He was barely a year old when his beautiful face began to make friends for him, among 
the little girls. Looked down on by the entire world as a feeble creature, Julien was adored by 
the old surgeon, he who had had the nerve, one day, to speak to His Honor the Mayor about 
the butchered plane trees. 
Sometimes the surgeon paid Père Sorel for a day’s working time, and taught his youngest 
son Latin and history, or what he himself knew of history: Napoleon’s Italian campaign of 1798. 
When he died, he’d left his Legion of Honor medal to Julien, as well as whatever was owing 
from his half-pay military pension,25 plus thirty or forty books, the most precious of which had 
just leaped into the public stream, diverted into new channels by the influence of His Honor 
the Mayor. 
They’d hardly gotten into the house when Julien felt his father’s powerful hand take hold 
of his shoulder; he trembled, waiting for the blows to follow. 
“Answer me and without any lying,” the old peasant’s rough voice cried in his ears, while 
his hand turned the young man around as a child turns a toy soldier. Julien’s large black eyes, 
flowing with tears, found themselves staring straight into the small, gray, rascally eyes of the 
old carpenter, who seemed determined to read his son’s soul, straight down into its depths. 
Chapter Five: A Negotiation 
Taking it slowly fixes everything. 
―ENNIUS 26 
“Answer  me  without  lying,  if  you’re  able  to,  you  son  of  a  lizart:  Where  did  you  meet 
Madame de Rênal? When have you spoken to her?” 
“I’ve never spoken to her,”  Julien answered. “The only time I’ve ever seen the lady is at 
church.” 
“But you’ve stared at her, you barefaced rascal?” 
“Never! As you know, at church, all I ever see is God,” Julien added, a bit hypocritically, 
yet a fair and decent maneuver, as far as he was concerned, for warding off his father’s blows. 
“Anyway, there’s something behind this,” replied the sly peasant, and then he was silent 
for a moment. “But I’ll never learn anything from you, you damned hypocrite. But I’m going to 
be rid of you, and that’s a good thing for my sawmill. Somebody, the parish priest or someone 
else, has gotten you a good job. Go and get yourself packed, and I’ll take you to Monsieur de 
Rênal’s house, where you’re going to be his children’s tutor.” 
“And what would I be paid?” 
“Food and board, clothing, and three hundred francs a year.” 
“I’m not interested in being a servant.” 
“Pig, why are you jabbering about being a servant? Would I want my son to be a servant?” 
“But who will I be eating with?”27 
                                                             
25 One of the politically clumsy moves of the Restoration government was to cut by 50 percent the pensions of 
all  veterans  of  the  Revolutionary  and  Napoleonic  armies.  Perhaps  economically  necessary,  this  move 
increased resentment toward the Bourbons and contributed to the popularity of Napoleon among the military 
and the lower classes. 
26 Quintus Ennius (239C169B .C.), a Roman poet whose work survives largely through quotations in the works 
of other writers, such as Cicero. 
 
 
Chapter Five: A Negotiation 
This  question  embarrassed  old  Sorel,  who  felt  that  if  he  spoke  about  such  matters  he 
might say something rash: he grew fiercely angry at Julien, piling insult after insult on him, 
accusing him of being a glutton, and then ended by walking away to consult with his other 
sons. 
Julien  saw  them,  before  too  long,  leaning  on  their  axes  and  conferring.  After  watching 
them for a long time, and realizing that he could not predict what would happen, he went and 
set himself on the far side of the saw, to keep from being surprised. He wished he were capable 
of  thinking  about  this  unexpected  news,  which  was  going  to  change  his  destiny,  but  he felt 
unable to think sensibly. His mind was entirely absorbed in trying to imagine what he would 
find inside Monsieur de Rênal’s fine mansion. 
“I’ve got to get away from all this,” he said to himself. “I’d sooner run off than be reduced 
to eating with the servants. My father will try to force me; I’d rather die. I’ve saved up more 
than  fifteen  francs,  I’ll  escape  tonight;  in  two  days,  using  back  roads  where  I  won’t  have  to 
worry about gendarmes, I’ll be at Besan04on, and there I’ll sign up as a soldier, and if I have to 
I’ll cross over into Switzerland. But that will be the end of getting ahead in the world: no more 
ambition for me, no more of that fine priestly status, which can lead to everything.” 
The horror of eating with the servants was not something natural to Julien; to make his 
fortune he would have done other things equally unpalatable. He had learned his repugnance 
from Rousseau’s Confessions,28 which was the only book that in any way helped him imagine 
the great world. That, plus a collection of Grand Army bulletins29 and Memories of Napoleon 
on Saint-Helena, completed his personal Koran. He would have died for these three books. He 
would  never  believe  in  any  others.  As  the  old  surgeon-major  had  once  said,  he  considered 
every other book in the world a pack of lies, written by swindlers trying to get ahead. 
Together  with  his  fiery  soul,  Julien  possessed  one  of  those  stunning  memories  so  often 
linked to stupidity. To win over Chélan, the old parish priest, on whom he saw very clearly his 
future  depended,  he  had  learned  by  heart the  entire  New  Testament  in  Latin;  he  also  knew 
Monsieur de Maistre’s On the Pope30―and had no more belief in the one than in the other. 
That day, as if by mutual agreement, Sorel and his son avoided speaking to each other. In 
the evening, Julien went to the parish priest for his theology lesson, but it seemed to him risky 
to say anything about the strange proposal made to his father. “Maybe it’s a trap,” he said to 
himself. “I’d better act as if I’d forgotten all about it.” 
Early  the  next  day,  Monsieur  de  Rênal  summoned  old  Sorel,  who  first  kept  the  mayor 
waiting for an hour or two, then at last appeared, and as he came through the door made a 
hundred  excuses,  mixed  with  as  many  shows  of  respect.  By  pressing  all  sorts  of  objections, 
Sorel learned that his son would be eating with the master and mistress of the house; on days 
when they had company he would dine with the children, in a separate room. Always inclined 
to  quibble,  in  exact  proportion  as  he  sensed  His  Honor  the  Mayor  anxious  to  really  move 
forward,  and  also  bristling  with  defiance  and  genuine  astonishment,  Sorel  asked  to  see  the 
                                                                                                                                                                    
27 An important question for the time. To eat with the family was a sign of status; only servants ate in the 
kitchen. 
28 The autobiographical masterpiece of Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712C78). Published posthumously, 1782C88, 
the sentimental and introspective Confessions became one of the inspirational texts of European romanticism. 
29  These  weekly  bulletins,  first  appearing  in  1805,  were  the  official  record  of  the  military  exploits  of  the 
emperor and his troops. Blatantly propagandic―soldiers used the expression “to lie like the bulletin”―they 
were nonetheless an effective tool for Napoleon. Stendhal appreciated their crisp, journalistic prose. 
30  Joseph-Marie  de  Maistre  (1753C1821)  was  a  leading  writer  of  the  counterrevolutionary  movement;  his 
royalism  was  heavily  influenced  by  his  deeply  mystical  Catholicism.  His  1819  book,  Du  Pape,  was  an 
argument in favor of papal infallibility. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
room where his son would be sleeping. It was large, furnished most properly, but into which 
they were already moving beds for three children. 
This  was  like  a  flash  of  light  to  the  old  peasant:  he  immediately,  and  with  great 
confidence, asked to see the clothing his son was to be given. Monsieur de Rênal opened his 
desk and took out a hundred francs. 
“With  this,  your  son  can  go  to  Monsieur  Durand,  the  tailor,  and  get  a  complete  black 
suit.” 
“And even if I took him away from you,” said the peasant, suddenly forgetting his fawning 
and scraping, “he’d still keep his black suit?” 
“Of course.” 
“Fine,  fine,”  said  Sorel  languidly.  “So  there’s  only  one  thing  left,  to  have  everything 
arranged: how much you’re going to pay him.” 
“What!” cried Monsieur de Rênal indignantly. “We agreed on that yesterday. I’ll pay him 
three hundred francs, which seems to me quite enough―and perhaps too much.” 
“That was what you offered, I can’t deny it,” said old Sorel, speaking even more slowly―
and  then,  with  a  stroke  of  genius  that  would  astonish  only  those  who  do  not  know  the 
peasants of Franche-Comté, he added, looking fixedly at Monsieur de Rênal: “We can do better 
elsewhere.” 
At  these  words,  the  mayor’s  face  registered  immense  shock.  He  recovered  himself  and, 
after a weighty conversation that lasted two full hours, in which not a single word was casually 
uttered, the peasant’s shrewdness prevailed against that of the rich man, who did not need to 
be  shrewd  to  make  his  living.  All  the  many  conditions  and  stipulations  that  would  regulate 
Julien’s new existence were settled, and not only was his salary set at four hundred francs a 
year, but it was to be paid in advance on the first day of each month. 
“Good!” said Monsieur de Rênal. “I’ll give him thirty-five francs.” 
“To round the sum off, for a man as rich and generous as Your Honor the Mayor,” said the 
peasant coaxingly, “why not make it thirty-six francs?” 
“So be it,” said Monsieur de Rênal, “but that’s enough.” 
The mayor suddenly sounded decisive. The peasant saw that no more could be gotten out 
of him. Then it was Monsieur de Rênal’s turn to push ahead. He flatly refused to give the first 
month’s thirty-six francs to old Sorel, who was anxious to have it on his son’s behalf. Monsieur 
de Rênal realized, too, that he was going to have to inform his wife what he had agreed to. 
“Let  me  have  back  that  hundred  francs,”  he  said  pleasantly.  “I  have  a  certain  credit  on 
Monsieur Durand’s books. I’ll go with your son, to get the black suit.” 
After  this  forceful  gesture,  Sorel  prudently  returned  to  his  fawning  formulas;  this 
occupied  a  full  quarter  of  an  hour.  Finally,  seeing  there  was  absolutely  nothing  more  to  be 
gained, he left. His last respectful declaration was completed by these words: 
“I’ll send my son to the ch09teau.” 
This was how those who served in the mayor’s administration referred to his house, when 
they wanted to please him. 
When he got back to his factory, Sorel could not find his son. Worried about what might 
happen to him, Julien had gone off in the middle of the night. He wanted a safe place to leave 
his  books  and  his  Legion  of  Honor  medal.  So  he  had  brought  them  to  a  young  timber 
merchant,  a  friend  named  Fouqué,  who  lived  up  on  the  high  mountain  towering  above 
Verrières. 
And when he came back: 
 
 
Chapter Five: A Negotiation 
“God knows, you cursed lazy dog,” his father told him, “if you’ll ever be honorable enough 
to pay me the price of your raising, all I’ve spent on you for so many years! Take your rags and 
go to the mayor’s house.” 
Amazed not to be beaten, Julien left as quickly as he could. But as soon as he was out of 
his  terrible  father’s  sight,  he  began  to  walk  more  slowly.  He  thought  that  making  a  stop  at 
church would be important to his hypocrisy. 
The word surprises you? Before arriving at so horrible a conclusion, the young peasant’s 
soul had traveled a long road. 
In his early childhood, he’d seen dragoons from the Sixth Cavalry, home from the war in 
Italy, with their long white cloaks, wearing helmets that dangled plumes of black horsehair, 
and  watching  them  tie  their  horses  to  the  window  grille,  at  his  father’s  house,  made  him 
desperate to be a soldier. Later, he listened in ecstasy as the old surgeon-major told him tales 
of  the  battles  at  Lodi  bridge,  at  Arcoli,  and  at  Rivoli.31  He  was  struck  by  the  old  man’s 
passionate glances at his Legion of Honor medal. 
But  when  Julien  was  fourteen,  they  began  to  build  a  church  at  Verrières,  and  one  that 
could be called magnificent in such a small town. There were four marble columns, the sight 
of  which  especially  fascinated  him;  they  became  famous  all  over  the  region,  for  the  mortal 
hatred they caused between the justice of the peace and the young vicar, considered a spy for 
the Congregation of the Holy Virgin.32 The justice of the peace was about to be dismissed―or 
so most people thought. Hadn’t he dared to quarrel with a priest who, just about every second 
week, traveled to the regional capital, Besan04on, and there reported (it was said) to His Grace 
the Bishop? 
In  the  meantime,  the  justice  of  the  peace,  father  of  a  large  family,  was  responsible  for 
several punitive sentences that seemed unjust; all of them were against readers of the liberal 
newspaper, The Constitutional.33 Those who were on God’s side had won. True, it was all about 
trifling sums, no more than three or five francs, but one of these petty fines had to be paid by a 
nail maker, Julien’s godfather. In his anger, the man exclaimed, “What a changed man! And for 
more than twenty years we thought the justice of the peace was such a decent fellow!” By this 
point the surgeon-major, Julien’s friend, was dead. 
All  of  a  sudden,  Julien  stopped  talking  about  Napoleon,  declaring  he  would  become  a 
priest; in his father’s sawmill he could be seen, day after day, memorizing a Latin Bible lent 
him by the old parish priest. That good man, amazed at the youngster’s progress, spent whole 
evenings  teaching  him  theology.  In  his  presence,  Julien  expressed  nothing  but  pious 
sentiments.  Who  could  have  imagined  that  this  girlish  face,  sweet  and  pale,  concealed  an 
ineradicable determination to risk a thousand deaths rather than fail to make its fortune! 
For  Julien,  making  his  fortune  meant,  first  of  all,  leaving  Verrières:  he  hated  his 
hometown. Everything he saw there chilled his imagination. 
                                                             
31 All victories in Bonaparte’s Italian campaigns of 1796C97. 
32  “La  Congrégation”  and  similar  secret  organizations―on  the  left  and  the  right―preoccupied  the  popular 
imagination of early-nineteenth-century France. In The Red and the Black, the Congregation obliquely refers to 
the Jesuits―who were widely resented as a secretive, power-hungry shadow government―and their allies. A 
royalist  organization  known  as  La  Congrégation  actually  existed;  formed  in  1801,  dissolved  by  order  of 
Napoleon  in  1814,  they  regrouped  under  the  Restoration  and  broke  up  in  1830.  A  similar  group  was  the 
Chevaliers de la Foi (The Knights of the Faith), a group of devout royalists formed under the Empire who 
exercised some influence under the Restoration.  Many Chevaliers were also members of the Congrégation, 
which contributed to the reputation of the latter for secretive political activism. 
33 First published in 1815, this newspaper was the voice of the liberal opposition throughout the Restoration. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Beginning  in  early  childhood,  he  had  had  moments  of  exaltation.  He  dreamed  of  the 
delights  he’d  experience,  one  day,  being  introduced  to  the  pretty  ladies  of  Paris:  he  would 
know  how  to  attract  their  attention  by  some  brilliant  act.  Why  shouldn’t  he  become  the 
beloved  of  one  of  them,  like  Bonaparte  while  he  was  still  poor,  but  loved  by  the  sparkling 
Madame de Beauharnais?34 For many years there had not been a single hour when Julien did 
not say to himself that Bonaparte, an obscure, poverty-stricken junior officer, had conquered 
the  entire  world  with  his  sword.  This  notion  comforted  him  for  misfortunes  that,  to  him, 
seemed very great, and redoubled his pleasure, when there was any for him to enjoy. 
Construction  of  the  church,  and  the  justice  of  the  peace’s  decisions,  struck  him  like 
lightning: he had an idea that turned him half crazy for weeks, and finally seized him with all 
the supreme force of the first idea that an impassioned soul feels it has ever invented. 
“When  Bonaparte  set  people  to  talking  about  him,  France  lived  in  fear  of  invasion: 
military skills were both necessary and fashionable. Today, we see forty-year-old priests with 
salaries  of  a  hundred  thousand  francs―that  is,  three  times  as  much  as  Napoleon’s  famous 
generals. And they have to have assistants. Here’s the justice of the peace, such a good fellow, 
such a thoroughly honest man―until now: old as he is, he’s forced to disgrace himself for fear 
of displeasing a young vicar of thirty. So the thing is: become a priest.” 
Right in the middle of his newfound piety, when he had been studying theology for two 
years, Julien had once betrayed himself by a sudden eruption of the fire devouring his soul. It 
was at Father Chélan’s, a dinner party of priests where the good Father had introduced him as 
an educational prodigy, and Julien managed to praise Napoleon in wild terms. So he bound his 
right arm to his chest, pretending he had dislocated it while moving the trunk of a pine tree, 
and for two months carried it in that awkward position. After this personal  punishment, he 
pardoned himself. And there we have the young man of nineteen, in appearance so slight and 
weak  that  he  would  not  have  been  thought  more  than  seventeen,  who―carrying  a  small 
bundle under his arm―walked into Verrières’s magnificent church. 
He  found  it  dark  and  empty.  When  there  was  a  holy  day  to  be  celebrated,  all  the 
casement windows were covered with crimson cloth. When the rays of the sun shone through, 
this produced a dazzling light, deeply impressive and profoundly religious. Julien shivered. All 
alone  in  the  church,  he  seated  himself  in  a  strikingly  attractive  pew.  It  bore  Monsieur  de 
Rênal’s coat of arms. 
Kneeling on the prayer stool, Julien noticed a scrap of printed paper, flattened out as if for 
reading. He leaned forward and read: 
Circumstances attending the execution and the last moments of Louis Jenrel, executed at 
The  paper  had  been  ripped.  On  the  back  could  be  made  out  the  first  words  of  a  line, 
Besan04on on the...35 
which read: The first step. 
“Who could have put this bit of paper here?” thought Julien. “Poor wretch,” he added with 
a sigh, “his name ends just like mine...”―and then he crumpled the paper. 
Leaving the church, Julien thought he saw blood near the basin of holy water, but it was 
only sanctified liquid that someone had spilled. The play of light through the red curtains over 
the windows made the water seem like blood. 
Now Julien was ashamed of his secret terror. 
                                                             
34 The future empress, Joséphine de Beauharnais (1763C1814), widow of a general, was a celebrated beauty in 
the libertine high society of the Directory when she met the young General Bonaparte. It is a matter of some 
dispute how much she actually loved him when they were married in 1796. 
35  This  odd-sounding  name  is  an  anagram  of  Julien  Sorel.  Stendhal  was  very  fond  of  anagrams,  which 
frequently figure in the ludic threads that run through his fiction. 
 
 
Chapter Five: A Negotiation 
“Am I turning into a coward!” he exclaimed to himself. “Forward march!” 
These words, so often recited during the old surgeon-major’s battle stories, were heroic to 
Julien. He walked rapidly toward Monsieur de Rênal’s house. 
But for all his noble resolutions, when he got within twenty paces of it he was gripped by 
an invincible timidity. The ironwork gate was open; to him it seemed magnificent, and he had 
to go in there. 
Julien was not the only one whose heart was troubled, as he arrived at the house. Madame 
de  Rênal’s  extreme  shyness  was  shaken  by  the  thought  of  this  stranger,  who,  by  the  very 
nature of his job, was going to find himself constantly with her and her children. She was in 
the  habit  of  having  her  sons  sleep  in  her  room.  That  morning,  the  tears  had  flowed 
abundantly, seeing their little beds carried into the room that was now the tutor’s. She could 
not persuade her husband to have the youngest child’s bed, Stanislas-Xavier’s,36 carried back 
into her room. 
Madame de Rênal carried feminine delicacy to an extreme. She fashioned for herself the 
most obnoxious of images, a gross and unkempt creature paid to snarl at her children, and all 
because he knew Latin, a barbarous language for the sake of which her sons were going to be 
flogged. 
                                                             
36 Another meaningful name for a Rênal child? Louis-Xavier-Stanislas was the full name of King Louis XVIII 
(born 1755, reigned 1814C15, 1815C24). The ultra Monsieur de Rênal would have chosen this name. 
 
The Red and the Black 
 
Chapter Six: Boredom 
I no longer know what I am, 
Or what I’m doing. 
―Mozart’s Figaro1 
With the grace and vivacity natural to her, when she could not be seen, Madame de Rênal 
was leaving the drawing room, going out the French window leading into the garden, when 
near the main doorway she noticed a young peasant, really still a child; he was extremely pale 
and  had  obviously  just  been  weeping.  He  wore  a  very  white  shirt,  and  under  his  arm  was 
carrying an absolutely spotless jacket of violet ratteen. 
The little peasant’s complexion was so pale, his eyes so gentle, that Madame de Rênal’s 
sometimes romantic spirit thought, at first, that this could be a young girl in disguise, coming 
to ask a favor of His Honor the Mayor. She felt sorry for this poor creature, held motionless at 
the entryway, clearly not daring to lift his hand toward the doorbell. Madame de Rênal went 
over,  forgetting  for  a  moment  the  bitter  grief  she’d  been  feeling  as  she  contemplated  the 
tutor’s  coming.  Julien,  facing  the  door,  did  not  see  her  approaching.  He  shivered  when  her 
sweet voice said, so close to his ear: 
“What have you come for, my child?” 
Julien turned quickly and, struck by the charm of Madame de Rênal’s expression, lost a bit 
of his shyness. And then, stunned by her beauty, he forgot everything, even what he was doing 
there. 
Madame de Rênal repeated her question. 
“I’ve come to be the tutor, madame,” he finally replied, deeply embarrassed by the tears 
he’d been wiping away as best he was able. 
Madame de Rênal was silent, bewildered; they were standing very close, looking at each 
other.  Julien  had  never  seen  anyone  so  beautifully  dressed,  especially  a  woman  with  such  a 
dazzling  complexion,  speaking  to  him  in  so  sweet  a  voice.  Madame  de  Rênal  looked  at  the 
heavy tears on the young peasant’s cheeks, which had been at first so exceedingly pale, and 
which were now so rosy. And then she began to laugh, with all the foolish gaiety of a young 
girl, scoffing at herself; she could not believe how happy she was. This, this was the tutor she 
had imagined as a dry, badly dressed priest, snarling and beating her children! 
“Really, my dear sir?” she finally said. “You really know Latin?” 
Being addressed as “sir” so astonished Julien that, for an instant, he hesitated. 
“Yes, madame,” he answered shyly. 
Madame de Rênal was so overjoyed that she actually dared to ask him: 
“You won’t snarl too much at my poor children?” 
“Me, snarl at them?” Julien said, astonished. “Why?” 
“Indeed, sir,” she added, after a small silence and in a voice more and more emotional, 
“you’ll be good to them, you promise me?” 
Hearing  himself  again  spoken  to  as  “sir,”  and  perfectly  seriously,  and  by  a  lady  so 
elegantly dressed, went beyond any of Julien’s expectations: even in the castles in Spain he’d 
built as a child, he’d never contemplated that any lady of fashion would condescend to speak 
to him at all, until he was wearing a handsome uniform. For her part, Madame de Rênal was 
utterly  beguiled  by  his  fine complexion,  his  great  black  eyes,  and  his  lovely  hair,  which  was 
                                                             
1  Mozart’s  Figaro,  as  every  French  reader  knew,  was  based  on  the  character  from  Beaumarchais’s  wildly 
popular  play,  Le  Mariage  de  Figaro.  This  quote  comes  from  the  act  1  aria  in  which  Chérubin  sings  of  his 
adolescent desires. Mozart and Cimarosa (see note for p. 341, l. 3) were Stendhal’s favorite composers. 
 
 
Chapter Six: Boredom 
curlier than most men’s―since, to freshen up, he’d just plunged his head into the waters of 
the public fountain. To her deep pleasure, she’d seen the shy demeanor of a young girl in this 
fateful tutor, though on her children’s account she’d dreaded his harsh surliness. For so quiet 
and peaceful a soul as Madame de Rênal, the contrast between her fears and the reality she 
saw in front of her was a great event. 
She finally recovered from her surprise. She was amazed to find herself standing at the 
door to her own house, so close to a young man virtually in his shirtsleeves. 
“Shall we go in, sir,” she said with a patently embarrassed air. 
In all her life, no purely pleasant emotion had ever so deeply moved Madame de Rênal; 
never  had  an  apparition  so  charmingly  superseded  her  worst,  most  troubling  fears.  So:  Her 
pretty  children,  of  whom  she’d  taken  such  loving  care,  were  not  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  a 
peevish, dried-up priest. They had barely walked into the hall when she turned toward Julien, 
who was timidly following along. The wonderment in his face, seeing so fine a house, was to 
her yet another charming trait. She could not believe her eyes, especially since she’d thought a 
tutor had to be wearing black. 
“But, sir,” she said to him, stopping once again, powerfully afraid―because she had been 
made so happy―of being deceived, “is it really true that you know Latin?” 
Julien’s pride was aroused by these words that demolished the fairy-tale world in which, 
for a quarter of an hour, he had been living. 
“Yes, madame,” he said, trying to take on a distant, chilly tone. “I know Latin quite as well 
as our parish priest, and sometimes he even says I know it better than he does.” 
Madame de Rênal realized that Julien, who had stopped barely two steps behind her, was 
speaking quite cuttingly. She came closer to him and said, in a hushed voice: 
“But really, these first days you won’t whip my children, will you, even when they don’t 
know their lessons?” 
So  sweet,  even  so  suppliant  a  voice,  coming  from  such  a  beautiful  lady,  made  Julien 
instantly  unable  to  think  of  what  he  was  owed,  arriving  in  this  house  with  such  a  splendid 
reputation as a Latinist. Madame de Rênal’s face was close to his, he breathed in the perfume 
of a woman’s summer clothing, an amazing sensation for a poor peasant. He grew very red and 
said, with a sigh and a weak voice: 
“Have no fear, madame, I will obey you in everything.” 
This  was  the  precise  moment  when  Madame  de  Rênal,  her  concern  for  her  children 
completely  dissipated,  felt  herself  struck  by  Julien’s  unusual  beauty.  His  almost  feminine 
features, and his embarrassment, did not seem in any way ridiculous to a woman herself so 
extraordinarily shy. The masculine ways people thought necessary, for a man to be handsome, 
made her afraid. 
“How old are you, sir?” she said to Julien. 
“I’m about to be nineteen.” 
“My  oldest  son  is  eleven,”  Madame  de  Rênal  went  on,  completely  reassured.  “He’ll  be 
almost a comrade for you; you can reason with him. His father started to beat him, once, and 
the child was ill for an entire week, but it was only a very tiny blow.” 
“How different from me,” thought Julien. “Just yesterday, my father was beating me. How 
happy these rich people are!” 
Madame Rênal had already become aware of the slightest nuances the tutor was feeling 
deep in his soul; she took this swell of sadness for shyness, and wanted to encourage him. 
“What is your name, sir?” she asked, with a lilt and a graciousness that utterly charmed 
Julien, though he could not have said why. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
“I’m Julien Sorel, madame. I tremble, coming to a strange house for the first time in my 
life: I need your protection and for you to pardon me for all sorts of things, in my first days 
here. I’ve never gone to school, I’m too poor; the only men I’ve ever spoken to are my cousin, a 
surgeon-major and a member of the Legion of Honor, and our parish priest. He’ll tell you good 
things about me. My brothers have always beaten me, so don’t believe a word they say, if they 
tell you bad things. Pardon my faults, madame: they will always be unintentional.” 
Julien was studying Madame de Rênal as he delivered this long speech, and he felt a good 
deal more comfortable. This is always the effect of perfect graciousness when it springs from 
natural roots,  and above all  when the person displaying  it never dreams of doing so.  Julien, 
who was an excellent judge of female beauty, would at that moment have sworn that she could 
not  be  more  than  twenty.  He  suddenly,  then  and  there,  had  the  rash  notion  of  kissing  her 
hand. He was immediately afraid of his own idea. A moment later he said to himself: “It would 
be sheer cowardice not to do something that might prove distinctly useful to me―and would 
lessen the disdain this beautiful lady probably feels for a poor workman only just now freed 
from  his  saw.”  Perhaps  Julien  was  encouraged  by  the  words  handsome  boy,  which  for  six 
months he’d been hearing, every Sunday, from young girls. As he was silently debating with 
himself, Madame de Rênal made a few instructive comments on how to begin his work with 
the  children.  The  violence  of  his  inner  struggle  once  again  turned  him  exceedingly  pale. 
Speaking stiffly, he said: 
“Never, madame―I’ll never beat your children, I swear to God I won’t.” 
And as he spoke, he boldly took her hand and carried it to his lips. She was astonished by 
the gesture and, as she thought about it, shocked. Since the weather was very warm, under her 
shawl  her  arm  was  bare  and,  as  Julien  lifted  her  hand,  the  arm  was  completely  uncovered. 
After  a  moment,  she  reproached  herself  for  not  having,  with  proper  rapidity,  registered  her 
indignation. 
Monsieur  de  Rênal,  having  heard  them  talking,  came  out  of  his  study.  With  the  same 
imposing, paternal air he put on when, as mayor, he solemnized marriages, he now addressed 
Julien: 
“It will be important that I speak to you before the children see you.” 
Taking Julien into a room, he gestured to his wife―who had preferred to leave them to 
themselves―to come in, as well. The door once shut behind them, Monsieur de Rênal seated 
himself, most formally. 
“The parish priest has informed me that you are dependable: everyone here will treat you 
honorably, and, if I am satisfied, when you come to leave us I will help you set up on your own. 
I prefer that you entertain no visits from either relatives or friends, their manners not being 
suitable  for  my  children.  Here,  then,  are  thirty-six  francs  for  the  first  month―but  I  require 
your word that not a cent will go to your father.” 
Monsieur  de  Rênal  was  annoyed  at  the  old  peasant,  who  in  this  business  had  been  the 
sharper of the two. 
“Now,  sir  ―and  I  have  ordered  that  everyone  here  will  so  address  you,  and  you  will 
become aware of the advantages of entering a household where everyone acts properly―now, 
sir, it’s not right for the children to see you wearing a jacket. Have the servants seen him?” he 
asked his wife. 
“No, my dear,” she replied contemplatively. 
“So much the better. Put this on,” he said to the surprised young man, giving him a full-
length frock coat. “Shall we pay a visit to Monsieur Durand, the tailor?” 
More than an hour later, when Monsieur de Rênal returned with the new tutor dressed all 
in black, he found his wife sitting exactly where he had left her. She felt herself soothed, now, 
 
 
Chapter Six: Boredom 
by Julien’s presence; as she considered him, she forgot to be afraid. Julien did not think of her 
at all: in spite of his distrust for fate and men alike, at this moment his soul was nothing but a 
child’s. He felt that it had been years since, three hours earlier, he had knelt in the church, 
trembling. He noted Madame de Rênal’s distant air; he understood she was angry because he 
had dared kiss her hand. But the pride he felt, touching these new garments, so different from 
those he was used to wearing, threw him sharply out of equilibrium, and he tried so hard to 
hide  his  pleasure  that  everything  he  did  became  abrupt;  he  took  on  a  distinctly  foolish  air. 
Madame de Rênal watched him, amazed. 
“A certain sobriety, sir,” Monsieur de Rênal told him, “if you wish to be respected by my 
children and by my domestics.” 
“Sir,”  replied  Julien,  “I  am  troubled,  embarrassed,  wearing  these  new  clothes;  a  poor 
peasant  like  myself  has  never  worn  anything  more  than  a  jacket.  With  your  permission,  I’ll 
close myself in my room.” 
“So,” said Monsieur de Rênal to his wife, “what do you think of this new acquisition?” 
By  a  process  essentially  instinctive,  and  of  which  she  certainly  had  no  conscious 
awareness, Madame de Rênal hid the truth from her husband. 
“I’m hardly as enchanted with this little peasant as you are: your kindness will turn him 
into such an impertinent that, after a month, you’ll have to send him away.” 
“So be it! We’ll send him away, I’ll lose the hundred francs he’ll probably have cost me, 
and Verrières will have gotten used to seeing Monsieur de Rênal’s children with a tutor. This 
could not have been accomplished had I left Julien in workman’s clothing. If I send him away, 
of course, I’ll keep the new black suit I’ve just ordered for him at the tailor’s. All he’ll keep will 
be the ready-made clothes I found at Monsieur Durand’s shop, for which I’ve paid.” 
To Madame de Rênal, the hour Julien spent in his room seemed like so many seconds. 
The  children,  who  had  been  told  about  their  new  tutor,  overwhelmed  their  mother  with 
questions. Finally, Julien appeared. It was a different person who returned to them. To say of 
this man that he was somber would be a misrepresentation: he was sobriety incarnate. He was 
introduced to the children, to whom he spoke in a manner that astonished even Monsieur de 
Rênal. 
“I have come here, gentlemen,” he told them as his finished his introductory comments, 
“for the purpose of teaching you Latin. You already know how to recite your lessons. Here is 
the  Holy  Bible,”  he  explained,  showing  them  a  small,  pocket-sized  book,  bound  in  black. 
“What you have, here, is the detailed story of Our Lord Jesus Christ; this is the part of the Bible 
known  as  the  New  Testament.  I  will  often  oblige  you  to  recite  your  lessons:  let  me  recite 
mine.” 
The oldest, Adolphe, had picked up the book. 
“Open it at random,” Julien went on, “and tell me the first word of the paragraph. Until 
you  ask  me  to  stop,  I  will  recite  from  memory  this  holy  book,  our  rule  of  conduct  in 
everything.” 
Adolphe opened the book, read out a word, and Julien recited the entire page with the 
same  facility  he  would  have  had  in  speaking  French.  Monsieur  de  Rênal  gave  his  wife  a 
triumphant look. Seeing their parents’ astonishment, the children opened their eyes wide. A 
servant  came  to  the  door  of  the  room;  Julien  continued  to  recite  in  Latin.  The  servant 
remained,  at  first  motionless,  and  after  a  time  left.  Soon  Madame  de  Rênal’s  chambermaid, 
and also another woman, the cook, came and hovered near the door. By then, Adolphe had 
opened the book in eight different places, and Julien went on reciting with unchanged ease. 
“Ah, my God! What a handsome priest,” said the cook, loudly; she was a thoroughly good 
girl and deeply devout. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Monsieur  de  Rênal’s  self-esteem  was  disquieted.  He  had  absolutely  no  interest  in 
examining the tutor, being totally concerned with rummaging about in his memory for Latin 
words. At last, he was able to recite a line from Horace. The only Latin Julien knew was the 
Bible. Knitting his eyebrows, he replied: 
“The holy ministry for which I am meant will not permit me to read a poet so profane.” 
Monsieur de Rênal quoted quite a number of imaginary verses from Horace. He explained 
to his children just who Horace was, but the children, smitten with admiration, hardly heard a 
word he said. They kept watching Julien. 
With  the  servants  constantly  coming  and  going  at  the  door,  Julien  felt  he  ought  to 
prolong his demonstration. 
the holy book.” 
“Monsieur  Stanislas-Xavier,”  he  said  to  the  youngest  child.  “You  choose  a  passage  from 
Little  Stanislas,  terribly  proud,  read  out  the  first  words  of  a  paragraph―reading  rather 
better  than  worse―and  Julien  recited  the  whole  page.  To  complete  Monsieur  de  Rênal’s 
triumph,  while  Julien  was  intoning,  Monsieur  Valenod―he  of  the  noble  Normand  horses―
came  in,  along  with  Monsieur  Charcot  de  Maugiron,  deputy  governor  of  the  district.  The 
episode earned Julien the title “sir”: the servants themselves would not dare refuse it to him. 
That  evening,  all  of  Verrières  crowded  into  Monsieur  de  Rênal’s  house  to  glimpse  the 
marvel. Julien spoke somberly to all  of them,  keeping them at a distance. His fame grew so 
rapidly, all through the town, that not many days later Monsieur de Rênal, fearing someone 
might steal him away, suggested he sign a contract for two years. 
“No, sir,” Julien replied coolly. “If you should want to send me away, I would be obliged to 
leave. A contract binding me, without exacting anything of you, does not seem fair, so I can’t 
agree.” 
Julien handled things so well that, less than a month after he’d come to the house, he’d 
won the respect of Monsieur de Rênal himself. The parish priest having broken relations with 
both  Monsieur  de  Rênal  and  Monsieur  Valenod,  nobody  could  betray  Julien  for  his  old 
Napoleonic passions. Whenever he spoke of Napoleon, he did so with horror. 
Chapter Seven: Elective Affinities 
They can only touch the heart by breaking it. 
―ACONTEMPORARY 
The children adored him, he had no affection whatever for them; his mind was elsewhere. 
Nothing these urchins could ever do made him impatient. Cold, fair, impassive, and yet loved, 
because somehow his coming had banished boredom from the house: he was a good tutor. He 
felt only hatred and horror for the high society into which he had been admitted―at the foot 
of the table, to be sure, which might perhaps explain the hate and the horror. During some 
formal  dinners  he  was  barely  able  to  contain  his  hate  for  everyone  around  him.  Once  in 
particular,  on  the  Feast  of  Saint  Louis,2  when  Monsieur  Valenod  was  monopolizing  the 
conversation at Monsieur de Rênal’s table, Julien came very close to betraying himself; he was 
saved only by hurrying out to the garden, pretending he had to look in on the children. “What 
panegyrics  on  probity!”  he  silently  cried.  “You’d  think  it  was  the  one  and  only  virtue  of 
virtues―and even apart from that, such vulgar respect for a man who has obviously doubled 
                                                             
2 August 25; the feast days of Catholic saints were very important in France. Saint Louis, the canonized King 
Louis IX, was especially important to the French, particularly after the execution (martyrdom, for royalists) of 
Louis XVI in 1793. 
 
 
Chapter Seven: Elective Affinities 
and tripled his fortune, ever since he got to be in charge of the poor! I’d bet he even makes 
money on the fund for foundlings―those poor children whose misery is the most sacred of all! 
Ah! Monsters! Monsters! And me, I’m also a kind of foundling, detested by my father, by my 
brothers, by my entire family.” 
A  few  days  before  the  Feast  of  Saint  Louis,  Julien  had  been  all  alone  and  saying  his 
breviary prayers, walking in a small wood called the Belvedere, which overlooked the Loyalty 
Walkway. He’d been trying unsuccessfully to avoid his two brothers: he had seen them from a 
distance,  approaching  along  a  deserted  path.  The  jealousy  of  these  huge  workmen  was  so 
excited by his fine black clothes and eminently proper appearance, and by their brother’s open 
contempt for them, that they’d beaten him until he was unconscious and lying prone, bloodied 
all  over.  Madame  de  Rênal,  walking  in  the  wood  with  Monsieur  Valenod  and  the  deputy 
governor of the district, stumbled on him, quite by accident; she saw Julien motionless on the 
ground and thought him dead. Her shock was so intense that it aroused Monsieur Valenod’s 
jealousy. 
His  alarm,  however,  had  sounded  entirely  too  soon.  Julien  found  Madame  de  Rênal 
wonderfully beautiful, but because of her beauty he hated her: that loveliness was the first reef 
on which his fortune had almost foundered. He spoke to her as little as possible, to wipe out 
the memory of that ecstatic rapture which, on his first day, had led him to kiss her hand. 
Elisa, Madame de Rênal’s chambermaid, had had no trouble falling in love with the young 
tutor; she spoke of him, often, to her mistress. Miss Elisa’s love had earned Julien the hatred of 
one of the menservants. One day, Julien overheard this man saying to Elisa: “You don’t want to 
talk  to  me  anymore,  since  this  filthy  tutor’s  come  to  the  house.”  Julien  did  not  deserve  this 
insult; nevertheless, with a handsome young fellow’s instincts, he paid even more attention to 
his  appearance.  Monsieur  Valenod’s  dislike  grew  in  equal  measure.  He  said  publicly  that  so 
much coquetry was unsuitable for a young ecclesiastic. Aside from not wearing a cassock, this 
was indeed how Julien dressed. 
Madame de Rênal noticed that he spoke  more often than usual with Elisa, and learned 
that  these  conversations  were  caused  by  the  extraordinary  poverty  of  Julien’s  wardrobe.  He 
had so little underclothing that he was regularly reduced to washing it, away from the house; 
for  these  petty  attentions  Elisa  was  useful  to  him.  This  utter  poverty,  which  she  had  not 
suspected, moved Madame de Rênal; she wanted to give him gifts, but did not dare; and that 
inner conflict was the first painful feeling Julien caused her. To that point, Julien’s name and a 
feeling  of  chaste,  completely  intellectual  happiness  had  become  synonymous  in  her  mind. 
Tormented by the idea of his poverty, Madame de Rênal asked her husband to give him a gift 
of underclothes. 
“What foolishness!” he replied. “How now! Give gifts to a man with whom we are perfectly 
satisfied, and who is serving us very well? That would make sense only if he were negligent and 
we needed to stimulate his zeal.” 
This kind of perspective humiliated Madame de Rênal; she would never have so much as 
noticed it, before Julien’s coming. Every time she saw the utter propriety of his clothing, which 
was also so extremely plain, she asked herself: “This poor boy, how can he possibly manage it?” 
Little by little, instead of being shocked she felt pity for everything Julien lacked. 
Madame de Rênal was one of those provincial women one might very well take for stupid, 
for the first fifteen days one knew her. She had no experience of life, and conversation held no 
interest  for  her.  Endowed  with  a  refined  and  haughty  soul,  the  natural  instinct  toward 
happiness possessed by all creatures led her, most of the time, to pay no attention to what was 
done by the grosser folk in the middle of whom chance had thrown her. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
She might have been distinguished for spontaneous vivacity, had she received any sort of 
decent  education.  But  as  an  heiress,  she  had  been  raised  in  a  convent  by  nuns  who  were 
passionate  worshipers  of  the  Sacred  Heart  of  Jesus,  and  driven  by  violent  hatred  for  French 
enemies  of  the  Jesuits.3  Madame  de  Rênal  had  enough  sense  to  quickly  forget,  as  utter 
absurdity,  everything  she  had  learned  at  the  convent,  but  she  set  nothing  in  its  place  and 
ended  by  knowing  nothing.  The  flattery  showered  on  her  from  an  early  age  (as  heiress  to  a 
large fortune), and a pronounced leaning toward impassioned devotion, helped shape her as 
someone  who  lived  a  life  entirely  interior.  Given  her  perfect  air  of  condescension,  and  a 
renunciation  of  self-will  (which  the  husbands  of  Verrières  held  up  to  their  wives,  as  an 
example, and which made Monsieur de Rênal swell with pride), she lived her life as loftily as 
she possibly could. A great princess, famous for her pride, devotes infinitely closer attention to 
what  the  gentlemen  around  her  are  up  to  than  this  provincial  woman,  so  sweet,  always  so 
visibly modest, but paying absolutely no attention to whatever her husband might say or do. 
Until Julien’s arrival, indeed, she had not truly paid attention to anyone or anything except her 
children. Their little hurts and ills, their sorrows, their little pleasures, filled to the brim the 
emotional  existence  of  a  soul  which,  in  all  her  life,  had  adored  only  God―though  that  was 
when she was still at Sacred Heart, in Besan04on. 
Although she would not admit it, not to anyone, when one of her sons had a fever she was 
reduced to the same state as if he had died. In the first years of their marriage, confidences 
about these kinds of fears and sorrow, forced out of her by immense need, had been met by 
her husband with a bout of coarse laughter, a shrug, and some platitude about the foolishness 
of  women.  Such  displays  of  wit,  especially  when  the  health  of  their  children  was  at  issue, 
twisted  a  dagger  into  her  heart.  This  was  what  she  had  gotten,  in  exchange  for  the  eager, 
honey-sweet  flattery  she’d  known,  as  a  girl  in  the  Jesuitic  convent.  Her  education  had  been 
shaped  by  sadness.  Too  proud  to  speak  of  these  afflictions,  even  to  her  friend,  Madame 
Derville,  she  fancied  that  all  men  were  like  her  husband,  and  Monsieur  Valenod,  and  the 
deputy  governor,  Charcot  de  Maugiron.  Coarseness  and  the  most  brutal  insensitivity  to 
everything  not  connected  with  money  or  the  power  of  being  decorated  with  medals;  blind 
hatred for every argument opposing their views―these seemed to her natural attributes of the 
male sex, exactly like wearing boots or felt hats. 
Long  years  later,  Madame  de  Rênal  had  still  not  gotten  used  to  these  men  of  money, 
among whom she was obliged to live. 
All of which explains what went on with the little peasant, Julien. She discovered sweet 
pleasures and all the glowing charms of novelty in the affectionate ways of this noble, fierce 
soul.  Madame  de  Rênal  often  had  to  excuse  his  extraordinary  ignorance,  which  was  yet 
another  charm,  as  well  as  the  coarseness  of  his  manners,  which  she  tried  to  correct.  She 
learned that he took the trouble to listen to her, even when they spoke of the most ordinary 
things, like a poor dog run over, as it was crossing the street, by a peasant’s cart going quite 
fast.  Seeing  such  small  tragedies  made  her  husband  laugh  his  grossest  laugh,  whereas  she 
could see the furrowing of Julien’s handsome, beautifully arched black eyebrows. Generosity, 
nobility of soul, humanity, little by little appeared to her to exist nowhere but in this young 
ecclesiastic. It was only for him that she felt the sympathy, even the admiration, that virtue 
arouses in well-born souls. 
                                                             
3  Became  increasingly  unpopular  in  France  throughout  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries,  and  were 
ultimately expelled from the kingdom in 1764. Allowed to return under the Restoration, they retained their 
reputation as secretive, power-hungry intriguers. Napoleon in particular hated the Jesuits. 
 
 
Chapter Seven: Elective Affinities 
In Paris, Julien’s position vis-à-vis Madame de Rênal would have been quickly resolved, 
but  in  Paris  love  is  born  out  of  the  pages  of  romantic  fiction.  The  young  tutor  and  his  shy 
mistress could have found enlightenment for themselves in three or four of these novels, and 
even in high school poetry. The novels would have outlined what roles to play, giving them 
models  to  imitate,  and  sooner  or  later,  perhaps  without  much  pleasure,  and  even  sullenly, 
vanity would have compelled Julien to play out the game. 
In  small  towns  off  the  Mediterranean  coast,  or  in  the  Pyrenees,  the  very  slightest  of 
occasions  would  have  turned  decisive,  given  the  climate’s  burning  intensity.  Under  our 
quieter,  darker  skies,  an  ambitious  but  poor  young  man,  moved  to  ambition  only  by  the 
refinement of his heart, which obliges him to seek some of the pleasures money can supply, 
can go on spending every day with a deeply prudent woman of thirty, busy with her children, 
without  finding  any  of  the  guides  to  behavior  provided  by  romantic  fiction.  Things  go  very 
slowly, in the provinces; everything happens naturally, bit by bit. 
Frequently, while daydreaming about the young tutor’s poverty, Madame de Rênal would 
find herself moved to the point of tears. Julien came upon her, one day, just as she suddenly 
burst out weeping. 
“Eh, madame! Something unpleasant must have happened to you!” 
“No, no, my dear,” she answered. “Call the children and we’ll take them for a walk.” 
She took his arm and leaned against him, in a way that seemed to him strange. It was the 
first time she had ever spoken to him as “my dear.” 
As they neared the end of the walkway, Julien observed that she was noticeably blushing. 
She slowed her steps. 
“You’ll have heard,” she said, not looking at him, “that I’m the sole heiress of a very rich 
aunt who  lives in  Besan04on. She’s always  giving me  presents...My sons are improving...quite 
astonishingly...so I’d like you to accept a small present as a mark of my gratitude. It’s just a few 
francs so you can take care of your clothing needs. But...” she continued, blushing even more, 
and then saying nothing else. 
“But what, madame?” said Julien. 
“It would not be useful,” she went on, her glance turned down, “to mention this to my 
husband.” 
“I am humble, madame, but I am not base,” replied Julien, looking at her, his eyes bright 
with anger. He drew himself up to his full height. “This is something you have not sufficiently 
considered.  I  would  be  less  than  a  manservant  if  I  involved  myself  in  concealing  from 
Monsieur de Rênal anything whatever concerning my wages.” 
Madame de Rênal was thunderstruck. 
“His Honor the Mayor,” continued Julien, “has five times paid me thirty-six francs, in the 
time I have been in his house. I am ready to show my record of expenses to Monsieur de Rênal 
and to anyone else, even Monsieur Valenod, who hates me.” 
After  this  outburst,  Madame  de  Rênal  was  left  pale  and  trembling;  their  walk  ended 
without either of them able to find an excuse for renewing the conversation. To love Madame 
de  Rênal  became  more  and  more  an  impossibility,  in  Julien’s  proud  heart;  for  her  part,  she 
respected him, she admired him, she had been scolded by him. Giving herself the excuse that 
she could make up for the humiliation unwittingly caused him, she let herself offer him the 
tenderest of attentions. For an entire week, the novelty of such things was sheer happiness for 
Madame de Rênal. And to some degree, they quieted Julien’s anger; he had not the slightest 
notion that there might be anything remotely resembling personal feeling in all this. 
“So there,” he told himself, “this is what these rich people are like. First they humiliate 
you, then they think they can make it all up to you by monkey business!” 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Madame de Rênal’s heart was too full, and as yet too innocent, for her not to inform her 
husband of the offer she’d made to Julien, despite all her resolutions to the contrary; she told 
him exactly how it had been declined. 
“What?” replied Monsieur de Rênal, distinctly annoyed. “How could you tolerate such a 
refusal from a servant?” 
And when Madame de Rênal protested against the use of that word: 
“I speak, madame, as did the late Prince de Condé,4 in presenting his chamberlains to his 
newly married wife: ’All these people,’ he said to her, ‘are our servants.’ I have read you the 
passage in Besenval’s memoirs,5 so indispensable for the understanding of social precedence. 
Anyone not a gentleman, living in your house and receiving a salary, is your servant. I’ll have a 
few words with Monsieur Julien, and I’ll give him a hundred francs.” 
“Ah!  my  dear,”  said  Madame  de  Renal  shakily,  “at  least  let  it  not  be  in  front  of  the 
servants!” 
“Indeed, they might be jealous, and with reason,” said her husband as he left her, thinking 
about tax aspects of the sum he had mentioned. 
Madame  de  Rênal  dropped  into  a  chair,  almost  fainting  with  sorrow.  “He’s  going  to 
humiliate Julien, and it will be my fault!” She covered her face with her hands, horror-struck by 
her husband. She promised herself never to take him into her confidence again. 
When next she saw Julien, she was trembling all over; her chest was so constricted, she 
could  not  manage  to  say  a  word.  In  her  embarrassment,  she  caught  hold  of  his  hands  and 
squeezed them. 
“Well, my dear!” she finally said. “Are you happy with my husband?” 
“How  could  I  not  be?”  answered  Julien  with  an  ironical  smile.  “He  gave  me  a  hundred 
Madame de Rênal looked at him, doubtful. 
“Give me your arm,” she said at last, more forcefully than Julien was used to hearing her 
francs.” 
speak. 
For  all  the  frightfully  liberal  reputation  of  the  store’s  proprietor,  she  was  courageous 
enough to walk, with Julien and her children, right into the bookstore in Verrières. There, she 
picked out, for two hundred and fifty francs, volumes which she gave to her sons. But these 
were books she knew Julien had been wanting. She required that, right there in the shop, the 
children  inscribe  their  names  in  the  volumes  given  them.  Although  Madame  de  Rênal  was 
happy with the kind of amends she’d been able to make to Julien, he was astonished by the 
quantity of books he saw. He had never dared go into a place so profane; his heart beat wildly. 
Far from having any notion of what Madame de Rênal was feeling, he longed for a way that 
would allow him, as a young theology student, to obtain some of these books. 
And  then  he  thought,  if  he  did  it  skillfully,  he  might  be  able  to  persuade  Monsieur  de 
Rênal  that  he  ought  to  set  his  sons,  as  a  subject  for  the  writing  of  themes,  the  lives  of 
celebrated  gentlemen  born  in  the  province.  After  a  month  of  careful  preparation,  Julien 
worked out the idea, and to such a point that he risked raising, while speaking to Monsieur de 
Rênal,  a  matter  which  might  well  have  been,  in  different  circumstances,  distressing  to  the 
noble  mayor―namely,  the  notion  of  contributing  to  a  liberal’s  fortune  by  taking  out  a 
                                                             
4  The  princely  Condé  family  were  cousins  of  the  Bourbons,  Princes  of  the  Blood  Royal.  The  most  famous 
member  of  the  family,  le  Grand  Condé,  was  a  famous  general  and  leader  of  the  Fronde  rebellions  against 
Cardinal Mazarin during the minority of Louis XIV (see note for p. 453, l. 3). 
5 The Baron de Besenval was a soldier and courtier at Versailles. He became an intimate and a defender of 
Marie-Antoinette. Stendhal had read his unreliable Mémoires, which gave a very biased view of life at the last 
royal court of the ancien régime. 
 
 
Chapter Seven: Elective Affinities 
subscription at the bookstore. Monsieur de Rênal certainly agreed that it would be sensible to 
give  his  oldest  son  a  visual  impression  of  books  he  might  hear  mentioned  in  conversation, 
once he was attending military school. But Julien saw that His Honor the Mayor had dug in his 
heels and would go no further. Julien suspected some hidden reason, but could not imagine 
what it might be. 
“I’ve  been  thinking,  sir,”  he  said  to  his  employer  one  day,  “that  it  really  would  be  very 
unseemly to have an upright gentlemanly name like Rênal appear on the dirty accounts of this 
bookstore.” 
Monsieur de Rênal’s forehead cleared. 
“It would be almost as bad,” continued Julien, his voice wonderfully humble, “for a poor 
theology student, should someone discover, one day, that his name had been on the accounts 
of a bookstore that rented out volumes. Liberals could accuse me of having requested the most 
infamous  of  writings.  Who  knows,  they  might  even  go  so  far  as  to write  after  my  name  the 
titles of these perverse books.” 
But  Julien  let  it  go  at  that.  He  could  see  the  mayor’s  face  taking  on,  once  again,  an 
expression of embarrassment and irritation. Julien stayed silent. “I’ve hooked my fish,” he said 
to himself. 
Some  days  later,  the  oldest  of  the  boys  asked  Julien,  in  their  father’s  presence,  about  a 
book he’d noticed in the monarchist newspaper, The Legitimist.6 
“In order to avoid such subjects as the triumph of the Jacobin party,” said the young tutor, 
“while in the meantime giving me information needed to reply to Monsieur Adolphe, perhaps 
we could have the very least of your people take out a bookstore subscription.” 
“Not a bad idea,” said Monsieur de Rênal, obviously very pleased. 
“However, it would be necessary to specify,” said Julien, with a certain somber and almost 
miserable air that works so well with certain people, when they witness the success of some 
long-desired business, “it would be necessary to specify that the servant is forbidden to borrow 
any  novel  whatever.  Once  in  the  house,  these  dangerous  volumes  might  corrupt  madame’s 
maids, and the servant himself.” 
“Don’t forget political pamphlets,” added Monsieur de Rênal loftily. He would have liked 
to conceal the admiration he himself felt for this middle way, concocted by the tutor of his 
children. 
Julien’s  life  was  thus  composed  of  a  series  of  petty  negotiations,  and  their  success 
concerned him far more than the signs of special affection he could have read in Madame de 
Rênal’s heart, if only he had bothered. 
The moral position he had occupied all through his life was renewed, in his post with His 
Honor  the  Mayor  of  Verrières.  Just  as  in  his  father’s  sawmill,  he  had  the  most  profound 
contempt for the people he lived among, and hated them. Every day he witnessed tales told by 
the deputy governor, by Monsieur Valenod, or by other friends of the house, relating events 
they  had  just  seen,  and  realized  how  little  their  ideas  resembled  reality.  Things  that  to  him 
seemed  admirable  were  precisely  those  censured  by  the  people  around  him.  His  silent 
response  was  always:  “What  monsters,  what  fools!”  He  was  glad,  and  proud,  that  often  he 
understood nothing they were talking about. 
In  his  entire  life,  the  only  person  to  whom  he  had  ever  spoken  honestly  was  the  old 
surgeon-major, whose limited stock of ideas concerned either Bonaparte’s campaigns in Italy, 
or  surgery.  Julien’s  youthful  fortitude  delighted  in  reciting  the  old  man’s  most  painful 
surgeries, assuring himself: “I’ve never blinked.” 
                                                             
6 Or La Quotidienne, a highly conservative daily newspaper (see note for p. 65, l. 20). 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
The first time Madame de Rênal tried having a conversation with him, having nothing to 
do with the children’s education, he began to talk about surgical procedures; she turned pale 
and asked him to stop. 
Julien  knew  nothing  about  anything  else.  Accordingly,  living  in  the  same  house  as 
Madame de Rênal, the most peculiar silence developed when they were alone together. In the 
drawing  room,  no  matter  with  what  humility  he  behaved,  she  saw  in  his  eyes  how 
intellectually superior he felt to everything he encountered in her house. If she found herself 
alone with him, even for an instant, it was not hard to see how embarrassed he became. This 
troubled  her,  because  her  woman’s  instinct  told  her  that  there  was  no  tenderness  in  this 
embarrassment. 
Based on some idea or other, formed by a tale of high society narrated by the old surgeon-
major, as soon as Julien was anywhere with a woman, and no one was speaking, he felt himself 
humiliated,  exactly  as  if  the  silence  was  his  fault.  This  feeling  was  a  hundred  times  more 
painful when they were alone. His imagination sprouted the wildest Spanish-style notions as 
to what a man ought to say, finding himself alone with a woman: all the ideas presented him 
by his troubled mind were utterly impossible. No matter that his soul soared in the clouds, he 
was unable to break the humiliating silence. And so his severe bearing, on the long walks he 
took  with  Madame  de  Rênal  and  her  children,  was  intensified  by  the  cruelest  kind  of  inner 
suffering. He found himself disgusting. If some ill luck forced him to speak, he managed to say 
the  most  ridiculous  things.  Worse  yet,  he  saw  how  absurdly  he  was  behaving,  and  then 
exaggerated it still further, but what he did not see was the expression in her eyes, so lovely 
and revealing so ardent a heart that, just as a good actor does, it gave meaning to words that 
had no meaning. She noticed how, alone with her, he never said anything worth saying except 
when,  distracted  by  something  unforeseen,  he  wasn’t  trying  to  turn  a  well-phrased 
compliment. Since the friends of the house did not spoil her with new and brilliant ideas, she 
found Julien’s flashes of insight thoroughly delightful. 
Ever since Napoleon’s fall, provincial manners rigidly suppress anything that smacked of 
gallantry. People are afraid of being dismissed from office. Rogues turn to the Congregation of 
the  Holy  Virgin  for  support,  and  hypocrisy  has  made  excellent  progress,  even  among  the 
liberal classes. Boredom grows and grows. The only pleasures left are reading and farming. 
At sixteen, Madame de Rênal, rich heiress of a devoted aunt, was married to a well-bred 
gentleman,  having  neither  experienced  nor  witnessed,  at  any  time  in  her  life,  anything  that 
resembled  in  the  slightest  the  world  of  love.  Her  confessor,  the  good  parish  priest,  Father 
Chélan,  had  barely  mentioned  love  to  her,  and  then  only  in  connection  with  Monsieur 
Valenod’s attempts, and had created in her mind a picture so disgusting that the very word 
had come to represent nothing but the most wretched debauchery. What she saw in the very 
small number of novels chance had placed in front of her eyes seemed purely exceptional, even 
completely unnatural. Thanks to this state of ignorance, Madame de Rênal was able, perfectly 
happily, to think constantly about Julien and yet remain quite remote from anything worthy of 
even the slightest censure. 
Chapter Eight: Minor Occasions 
Then there were sighs, the deeper for suppression, 
And stolen glances, sweeter for the theft, 
And burning blushes, though for no transgression. 
 
 
Chapter Eight: Minor Occasions 
―Byron, Don Juan, Canto I, Stanza 747 
The  angelic  sweetness  that  came  from  Madame  de  Rênal’s  very  nature,  and  from  her 
genuine  goodness,  was  not  in  the  least  affected  when  she  thought  about  her  chambermaid, 
Elisa. Coming into some money, the girl admitted to her confessor, the parish priest, that she 
hoped to marry Julien. Monsieur Chélan was delighted by his young friend’s good fortune, but 
was  extremely  startled  when  Julien  told  him,  most  determinedly,  that  Mademoiselle  Elisa’s 
offer did not suit him. 
“Be careful, my son, of what’s happening in your heart,” said the old priest, knitting his 
brows. “I congratulate you on your religious vocation, if it is that and that alone to which you 
owe this contempt for a more-than-sufficient fortune. Fifty-six years have tolled since I came 
to officiate in Verrières, but so far as I can see, I am going to be deprived of my parish. This 
grieves me, even though I have an income of eight hundred francs a year. I want to share these 
details with you, so you have no illusions as to what awaits you as a priest. If you dream of 
paying  court  to  men  of  power,  your  eternal  damnation  is  guaranteed.  You  could  make  a 
fortune, but you’d have to tread on the poor, flatter the deputy governor of the district, and 
the mayor, and all other men of substance, and assist them in their passions. For a layman, 
such conduct, which the world calls knowing how to live, is not incompatible with salvation. 
But with the likes of us, a choice has to be made: it’s a question of making your fortune in this 
world, or in the next. There’s no middle ground. Go now, my dear friend; consider; and come 
back in three days to tell me what you’ve decided. I have a troubled glimpse, deep down, of a 
dark ambition which does not speak to me of the temperance, the perfect surrender of worldly 
advantages, which a priest must have. I see good things in your spirit―but permit me to tell 
you,”  added  the  good  old  man,  tears  in  his  eyes, “for  you  as  a  priest,  ah,  I  tremble  for  your 
salvation.” 
Julien was embarrassed by his own emotions: for the first time in his life, he felt himself 
loved, and he wept with delight as he went away, hiding his tears under the great trees high 
above Verrières. 
“Why am I in this state?” he finally asked himself. “I know I’d give my life, and a hundred 
times over, for this good Father Chélan, even if he’s just proved to me that I’m nothing but a 
fool. He above all is the person I need to deceive, and he sees right through me. The secret 
ambition he senses is my plan to make my fortune. He doesn’t think I’m worthy of becoming a 
priest―and that at the very moment when sacrificing an income of a thousand francs ought to 
have given him the highest opinion of my piety and my vocation. 
“From  now  on,”  Julien  continued,  “I’ll  only  depend  on  tested  aspects  of  my  character. 
Who could have known that I’d be glad to shed tears! That I’d love the person who proves me 
nothing but a fool!” 
Three days later, Julien invented the excuse he should have found the very first day: it was 
slanderous,  but  what  did  that  matter?  He  swore  to  the  old  priest,  with  much  pretense  of 
hesitation, that there was something he could not explain, because it would be damaging to a 
third party, which had from the first dissuaded him from agreeing to the marriage. It was as 
good as an accusation against Elisa. Monsieur Chélan felt a certain worldly warmth underlying 
his behavior―not what ought to be inspiring a prospective priest. 
“My friend,” he told Julien once again, “become a good rural bourgeois, worthy and well 
educated, rather than a priest without a vocation.” 
                                                             
7 Stendhal had met Lord Byron while living in Milan. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Julien  replied  with  new  explanations,  which  were  all  well  and  good,  but  just  words:  he 
used the same phrases a fervent young seminarian might have employed, but the tone with 
which he spoke them, and the badly hidden light burning in his eyes, worried Father Chélan. 
But there is no need to prophesy terrible things for Julien: he had nicely created language 
appropriate to a crafty, prudent hypocrite. At his age, this was hardly wickedness. And as for 
his  speech,  the  gestures  he  relied  on,  he  lived  among  country  folk,  he  had  never  had  the 
opportunity to watch the great models. Later, as soon as he’d been given the chance to mingle 
with these gentlemen, he would become equally polished in both gesture and word. 
Madame de Rênal had been amazed when her chambermaid’s newfound wealth did not 
make the girl happier. She saw her constantly going to the parish priest, and returning with 
tears in her eyes; finally, Elisa talked to her about her marriage. 
Madame de Rênal thought she must be ill; a sort of fever kept her from sleeping. She felt 
truly alive only when she was watching either her chambermaid or Julien. She could think of 
nothing  but  them  and  the  happiness  they  had  found  in  the  Rênal  household.  The 
wretchedness of Elisa’s little house, where they’d have to exist on a thousand francs a year, she 
pictured to herself in ravishing colors. Julien might very well become a lawyer at Bray, a local 
office of the district government, in which case she’d sometimes see him. 
Madame  de  Rênal  believed  most  sincerely  that  she  was  going  mad;  she  said  so  to  her 
husband,  and  then,  finally,  she  fell  sick.  That  same  evening,  as  her  chambermaid  was 
attending to her, she noticed the girl crying. At that moment she loathed Elisa and was rude to 
her; then she begged the girl’s pardon. Elisa’s tears fell still faster; if her mistress would give 
her permission, she said, she’d explain just why she was so miserably unhappy. 
“Tell me,” answered Madame de Rênal. 
“Well  then,  madame,  he’s  refused  me.  Nasty  people  told  him  terrible  things  about  me, 
and he believes them.” 
“Who refused you?” said Madame de Rênal, barely able to breathe. 
“And who else, madame, but Julien?” replied the chambermaid, sobbing. “Father Chélan 
couldn’t make him change his mind, because Father doesn’t think he ought to turn down a 
good girl just because she’s been a chambermaid. After all, Monsieur Julien’s father is nothing 
but a carpenter. How did he himself make his living before he came here with madame?” 
Madame de Rênal heard nothing else the girl said; overflowing happiness very nearly cost 
her  the  power  of  thought.  She  told  herself,  several  times,  that  Julien’s  refusal  had  been 
definitive, which fact would no longer permit of a more sensible decision. 
“I’ll make one last try,” madame told the chambermaid; “I’ll talk to Monsieur Julien.” 
The next day, after lunch, Madame de Rênal treated herself to the delightful pleasure of 
pleading  her  rival’s  cause,  and  for  a  solid  hour  seeing  Elisa’s  hand,  and  her  fortune,  refused 
over and over again. 
After a while, Julien’s responses grew more formal, and he finished with a lively rebuttal 
of Madame de Rênal’s eminently sensible suggestions. She could not suppress the torrent of 
happiness  that  overwhelmed  her  soul,  after  so  many  days  of  despair.  Suddenly,  she  felt  ill. 
When she’d been taken back to her room and put to bed, she sent everyone away. She felt a 
shock of the most profound order. 
“Have I fallen in love with Julien?” she finally asked herself. 
At any other time, this discovery would have plunged her into all manner of repentance 
and a profound agitation, but now it seemed to her no more than a bizarre display, but of no 
particular significance. Her soul, exhausted by all she’d been going through, had no spark of 
sensitivity to enlist in passion’s cause. 
 
 
Chapter Eight: Minor Occasions 
Madame de Rênal wished to attend to her responsibilities, but fell into a very deep sleep; 
awaking,  she  was  not  as  worried  as  she  ought  to  have  been.  She  was  far  too  happy  to  feel 
concern about anything. Innocent and na07ve, this good provincial woman had never tortured 
her  soul,  trying  to  tease  some  new  shade  of  feeling,  or  of  misfortune,  out  of  any  sensory 
moment.  Before  Julien’s  coming,  she  had  been  entirely  absorbed  in  that  massive  heap  of 
things-to-be-done that, outside of Paris, is the fate of a good mother: Madame de Rênal was 
used  to  thinking  of  the  passions  as  we  think  of  the  lottery―guaranteed  deception  and  a 
happiness sought only by fools. 
The bell sounded for dinner; hearing Julien’s voice, as he led in the children, Madame de 
Rênal  blushed.  Made  more  skillful  by  love,  she  explained  her  reddened  face  by  a  frightful 
headache. 
“Like  all  women!”  Monsieur  de  Rênal  answered  her,  laughing  uproariously.  “There’s 
always something in need of repair, in those machines!” 
No matter how accustomed she was to this sort of nasty joking, his tone of voice shocked 
her. To distract herself, she looked over at Julien’s face: he could have been the very picture of 
ugliness, and at that moment he would have delighted her. 
Quick to copy the ways of court gentlemen, at the coming of the first fine days of spring 
Monsieur de Rênal transferred his family to Vergy, the village made famous by the tragic old 
love  story  of  Gabrielle.8  A  few  hundred  steps  from  the  wonderfully  picturesque  ruins  of  an 
ancient  Gothic  church,  Monsieur  de  Rênal  owned  an  old  ch09teau,  with  four  towers  and  a 
garden made to look like that of the Tuileries; it had thick boxwood borders and alleys lined 
with  chestnut  trees,  trimmed  twice  a  year.  An  adjoining  field,  planted  with  apple  trees, 
provided an excellent place for civilized strolling. Eight or ten magnificent walnut trees grew 
at one end of the orchard, their immense branches rising perhaps eighty feet in the air. 
“Each of those damned walnut trees,” declared Monsieur de Rênal when his wife admired 
them, “costs me the harvest of half an acre: grain can’t grow in their shade.” 
The  view  of  the  countryside  seemed  fresh  and  new  to  Madame  de  Rênal;  her  pleasure 
came very close to ecstasy. She drew courage and determination from the feelings it inspired 
in her. Two days after their arrival in Vergy, Monsieur de Rênal having gone back to the city on 
official  mayoral  business,  Madame  Rênal  hired  workmen―at  her  own  expense.  Julien  had 
given her the idea of a little graveled walkway, encircling the orchard and running under the 
shade of the great walnut trees: this would allow the children to take morning walks without 
the dew wetting their shoes. The idea was carried to completion less than twenty-four hours 
after  its  conception.  Madame  de  Rênal  happily  passed  the  entire  day,  together  with  Julien, 
giving orders to the workmen. 
When the mayor of Verrières returned from the city, he was distinctly surprised, seeing 
this  walkway  in  place.  His  arrival  surprised  Madame  de  Rênal,  too:  she  had  forgotten  his 
existence. For the next two months he amused himself, remarking on the boldness with which, 
quite without his having been consulted, so important a repair had been accomplished. On the 
other hand, Madame de Rênal had paid the whole cost, out of her own funds, and this made 
him feel a bit better. 
She  spent  her  days  running  in  the  orchard  with  the  children,  and  hunting  butterflies. 
They made oversized nets of clear muslin, with which they captured the poor Lepidoptera, this 
being  the  barbarous  name  Julien  had  taught  Madame  de  Rênal.  For  she  had  ordered,  from 
                                                             
8 The medieval romance of Gabrielle de Vergy tells the story of a virtuous young peasant girl, beloved by a 
virtuous  young  peasant  boy.  The  Duchess  of  Burgundy  falls  in  love  with  Gabrielle’s  lover  and,  when  he 
rejects her, accuses him, before her husband the duke, of having assaulted her. In despair, Gabrielle commits 
suicide, and her distraught lover stabs himself to death over her body. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Besan04on,  Monsieur  Godart’s9  handsomely  illustrated  volume,  and  Julien  read  her  the 
fascinating accounts of these poor little beasts. 
With no compassion whatever, using pins, they stuck the trophies of their hunt onto a big 
cardboard box; this too had been set up by Julien. 
At last, there  was something for Madame de Rênal and Julien to talk about: he was no 
longer exposed to the ghastly torture inflicted by moments of silence. 
Indeed,  they  talked  to  each  other  constantly,  with  profoundly  keen  pleasure,  though 
always  about  completely  innocent  matters.  This  active  life,  busy  and  cheerful,  pleased 
everyone  except  Miss  Elisa,  who  found  herself  overloaded  with  work.  “Not  even  in  carnival 
season,” she said, “when there’s a ball at Verrières, has madame ever paid so much attention to 
her wardrobe. She changes her clothes two or three times a day.” 
Since it is our intention to flatter no one, we will not deny that Madame de Rênal, who 
possessed superb skin, had her dresses made so that they left her arms, as well as her breasts, 
quite  open  to  view.  She  had  a  fine  figure,  and  this  way  of  showing  it  off  was  wonderfully 
becoming. 
“You’ve never been so youthful, madame,” her friends from Verrières told her when they 
dined at Vergy. (This is of course the way they talk, out in the countryside.) 
An unusual fact, which I know will seem quite incredible among us, is that Madame de 
Rênal  paid  so  much  attention  to  her  wardrobe  without  the  slightest  conscious  purpose.  It 
pleased her and, without thinking of anything more, whenever she wasn’t with the children 
and  Julien,  chasing  butterflies,  she  was  helping  Elisa  make  her  mistress’s  dresses.  The  only 
errands  that  took  her  to  Verrières  were  the  necessity  of  buying  the  new  Mulhouse  summer 
dresses, which were just ready. 
She brought to Vergy a young woman, a relation. Since her marriage, Madame de Rênal 
had gradually become quite close to Madame Derville, who in earlier days had been with her 
at Sacred Heart. 
Madame Derville used to laugh heartily at what she called her cousin’s crazy ideas. “All by 
myself,” she used to say, “I’d never have thought of such things.” These unexpected notions, 
which  in  Paris  would  have  been  called  flashes  of  wit,  made  Madame  de  Rênal  feel 
embarrassed,  when  she  was  with  her  husband;  but  Madame  Derville’s  presence  gave  her 
courage. She spoke her thoughts, at first, in a timid voice, but when the ladies were alone for 
any length of time, Madame de Rênal’s spirits rose, and a long day to themselves went by like 
an  instant,  leaving  the  two  friends  wonderfully  merry.  When  she  came,  this  time,  Madame 
Derville found her cousin much less merry but a great deal happier. 
For his part, ever since beginning their stay in the country Julien had lived like a genuine 
child, as happy chasing butterflies as were the children he taught. After living under so many 
constraints, with so much subtle maneuvering, being alone and away from other people’s eyes 
and, instinctively, no longer afraid of Madame de Rênal, he gave himself up to the pleasures of 
existence, so very lively at his age, and there in the middle of the most beautiful mountains in 
the world. 
The moment Madame Derville came, Julien took her for his friend. He hastened to show 
her the view at the end of the new walkway, under the giant walnut trees, for in fact it was the 
equal,  or  even  superior  to,  the  most  striking  view  to  be  seen  in  Switzerland  and  the  Italian 
lakes. If you climb the steep ascent, starting only a few steps farther on, you’ll soon get to great 
cliffs, bordered by a forest of oaks growing almost down to the river. It was at the heights of 
these almost perpendicular boulders that Julien, happy, free, and even more than happy and 
                                                             
9 A naturalist who published a popular illustrated study of butterflies. 
 
 
Chapter Nine: An Evening in the Country 
free,  felt  himself  the  king  of  the  household,  escorting  his  two  friends  and  rejoicing  in  their 
appreciation for such sublime sights. 
“For me,” said Madame Derville, “it’s like Mozart’s music.” 
His  brothers’  envy,  the  presence  of  a  despotic  father  bursting  with  bad  temper,  had 
spoiled the countryside around Verrières for him. He had no bitter memories in Vergy; for the 
first time in his life there were no enemies anywhere in sight. When Monsieur de Rênal was in 
the city, as he often was, Julien was not afraid to read. Soon, instead of reading only at night 
and  being  careful,  still,  to  hide  his  lamp  under  an  inverted  flower  vase,  he  was  able  to  let 
himself  sleep;  during  the  day,  in  the  intervals  between  the  children’s  lessons,  he  brought  a 
book to these great rocks, which were the sole supervisor of his behavior and the object of his 
immense  delight.  He  found  there,  all  combined,  happiness,  ecstasy  and,  in  moments  of 
discouragement, consolation. 
Certain things said about women, by Napoleon, several discussions of the value, under his 
reign, of fashionable novels, gave Julien, for the first time, ideas that any other young man of 
his age would have had a long time before. 
Summer  heat arrived.  They got  into  the  habit  of  spending  their  evenings  under  a  huge 
lime  tree,  a  few  steps  from  the  house.  The  darkness,  there,  was  profound.  Julien  spoke 
brilliantly,  one  night,  relishing  the  delights  of  speaking  well,  and  to  young  women;  while 
gesturing, he happened to touch Madame de Rênal’s hand, which was lying on the back of one 
of the painted wooden chairs they had brought to the gardens. 
The hand was withdrawn, and quickly, but to Julien it seemed his duty to arrange matters 
so that this hand would not be drawn back when he touched it. This notion of a duty which he 
was required to accomplish, and a sense of being ridiculed, or more likely made to feel inferior 
if he could not accomplish what he wanted to, instantly drove all pleasure from his heart. 
Chapter Nine: An Evening in the Country 
Monsieur Guérin’s painting of Dido, an exquisite sketch. 
―STROMBECK10 
The  next  day,  when  he  again  saw  Madame  de  Rênal,  he  looked  at  her  very  strangely, 
seeing her as an enemy with whom he was required to do battle. This look, so different from 
the night before, made Madame de Rênal’s self-possession waver: she had been good to him 
and he was apparently angry at her. She could not look away. 
Madame Derville’s presence allowed Julien to speak less and spend more time alone with 
his  thoughts.  His  only  occupation,  the  whole  day,  was  to  strengthen  himself  by  reading  his 
inspired book, which made him more determined. 
He  cut  the  children’s  lessons  short,  and  then,  when  Madame  de  Rênal’s  presence 
suddenly forced him, once again, to thoughts of conquest, he resolved that, come what may, 
tonight she was going to let her hand remain in his. 
The setting sun, and the decisive moment coming nearer, made Julien’s heart beat in the 
most remarkable fashion. Night fell. He saw, with a joy that lifted an immense weight from his 
heart, that it was going to be exceedingly dark. Heavy clouds filled the sky, blown by a hot, 
sticky wind: a storm seemed to be coming. The two women walked and walked, and it grew 
                                                             
10 Pierre-Narcisse Guérin (1774C1833), a popular and successful painter during the Empire. His Aeneas Telling 
Dido of the Disasters of Troy (1817) hangs in the Louvre. Dido was the Carthaginian queen who killed herself 
when deserted by Aeneas in Virgil’s epic The Aeneid. Strombeck: a German friend of Stendhal. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
late.  Everything  they  did  on  this  night  struck  Julien  as  bizarre.  They  toyed  with  time:  for 
certain sensitive souls, this appears to magnify the pleasures of love. 
They sat down, finally, Madame de Rênal next to Julien, and Madame Derville beside her 
friend. Caught up in what he was planning to attempt, Julien had nothing to say. Conversation 
faltered. 
“Will I be trembling and miserable like this, when I face the first duel I have to fight?” 
Julien  asked  himself,  having  too  much  contempt  both  for  himself  and  for  others  not  to  be 
aware of the state of his soul. 
In  this  mortal  anguish,  any  perils  seemed  to  him  preferable.  He  kept  wishing  that 
something  would  come  up  and  Madame  de  Rênal  would  be  compelled  to  go  back  into  the 
house,  and  abandon  the  garden!  So  powerful  was  the  violence  he  was  forcing  upon  himself 
that, inevitably, his voice became profoundly different. Soon Madame de Rênal’s voice began 
to tremble, too, but he was totally unaware: the frightful battle he had to wage against timidity 
was far too painful for him to notice anything outside himself. 
After a final anxiously hesitating moment, during which flooding emotion seemed to set 
Julien somewhere out of his own body, ten o’clock sounded on the clock above his head. Each 
fatal stroke reverberated in his breast like some physical force. 
At last, while the sound of the final stroke had still not died away, he put out his hand and 
grasped Madame de Rênal’s, which was immediately withdrawn. Without knowing quite how 
he did it, Julien took her hand again. Although shaken inside, he looked down, with a glacially 
frozen glance, at the hand he had seized, pressing it with convulsive power. She made a last 
effort to pull it away, but in the end her hand stayed in his. 
Happiness flooded across his heart: it was not that he loved Madame de Rênal, but the 
horrible torture was over. Madame Derville saw nothing, so he felt obliged to go on talking; his 
voice  became  bright  and  strong.  Madame  de  Rênal’s,  on  the  other  hand,  shook  with  such 
emotion  that  her  friend  thought  she  was  ill  and  suggested  she  return  to  the  house.  Julien 
sensed the danger: “If Madame de Rênal goes back to the drawing room, I’m going to tumble 
into the frightful position I’ve been in all day. I haven’t held this hand captive long enough for 
the victory to count.” 
Just as Madame Derville was again proposing a return to the drawing room, Julien gave a 
hard squeeze to the hand that had surrendered to him. 
Madame de Rênal, who was already starting to stand up, sat down once more and said, in 
a faint voice: 
“I do really feel a bit ill, but the open air does me good.” 
Her  words  confirmed  Julien’s  happiness,  which  right  then  was  extraordinarily  full:  he 
talked, he forgot to forge and counterfeit; both listening ladies found him the most amiable of 
men. But still, in the midst of his eloquence, he felt a sudden sinking fear. He was mortally 
afraid  that  Madame  Derville,  tired  of  the wind,  which  in  advance  of  the  storm  was growing 
stronger, might want to go back to the drawing room by herself. And then he would be left 
face-to-face with Madame de Rênal. Almost accidentally, he had had enough blind courage to 
do what he’d meant to do, but he felt it was utterly out of his power to say the simplest word 
to Madame de Rênal. No matter how gently she might reprove him, he was going to be beaten 
in battle, and the advantage he had just won would be annihilated. 
That  night,  luckily  for  him,  his  forceful,  affecting  words  found  favor  with  Madame 
Derville, who quite often had thought him as boorish as a child, and not at all amusing. As for 
Madame  de  Rênal,  with  her  hand  in  Julien’s  she  did  not  think  anything,  she  simply  gave 
herself over to being alive. The hours spent under the great lime tree, which local legend said 
 
 
Chapter Nine: An Evening in the Country 
had  been  planted  by  Charles  the  Bold,11  were  for  her  a  veritable  epoch  of  happiness.  She 
listened  with  delight  to  the  wind  wailing  in  the  tree’s  dense  foliage,  and  the  sound  of 
occasional drops falling on leaves in the lower branches. Julien had not noticed something that 
might have reassured him: Madame de Rênal, obliged to withdraw her hand when she stood 
up, helping her cousin restore a flower vase the wind had blown over, right at their feet, had 
barely seated herself again when, almost without any objection, she gave him her hand once 
more, rather as if this were something they had already agreed upon. 
Midnight had been tolled long before; it was finally necessary to leave the garden; they 
separated.  Carried  away  by  love’s  happiness,  Madame  de  Rênal  was  so  uneducated  in  love’s 
ways that she said virtually nothing reproachful. Happiness kept her from sleeping. A leaden 
sleep  seized  Julien,  mortally  exhausted  by  the  struggle  in  his  heart,  all  day  long,  between 
shyness and pride. 
He  woke  at  five  the  next  day,  and  it  would  have  been  painfully  cruel  for  Madame  de 
Rênal, had she known it, but he barely gave her a thought. He had done his duty, performed a 
heroic act. This made him exceedingly happy, and he proceeded to shut himself in his room, 
where he read about his heroes’ exploits with a new pleasure. 
By  the  time  the  bell  for  lunch  sounded,  he  had  forgotten,  absorbed  in  the  bulletins  of 
Napoleon’s Grand Army, all the gains of the night before. As he descended the stairs, he told 
himself, casually: “I have to tell this woman I love her.” 
Instead of loving looks, which he had expected to encounter, he met with the severe face 
of Monsieur de Rênal, who had arrived from Verrières at ten that morning, and was not hiding 
his displeasure, finding that Julien had spent the whole morning without paying any attention 
to the children. Nothing could be as ugly as this important man in a foul mood and thinking 
himself empowered to display it. 
Her husband’s every bitter word pierced Madame de Rênal’s heart. As for Julien, for the 
last  few  hours  he  had  been  so  deeply  immersed  in  ecstasy,  and  was  still  so  absorbed  in  the 
Great Things that had been passing in front of his eyes, that at first he could barely descend far 
enough down even to hear the harsh questions Monsieur de Rênal was asking him. He replied 
at last, rather crisply: 
“I was ill.” 
The tone of this response would have annoyed a less vulnerable man than the mayor of 
Verrières; he thought about an instant reply, chastising Julien then and there. The only thing 
that stopped him was his rule that, in business, he should never hurry himself. 
“This young fool,” he said to himself after a moment, “has after a fashion earned himself a 
reputation,  here  in  my  house,  and  Valenod  might  take  him  into  his,  or  else  he  might  well 
marry Elisa, and in both cases, deep down in his heart, he might scoff at me.” 
Despite his prudent reflections, Monsieur de Rênal’s dissatisfaction did not blaze any the 
less brightly in the stream of vulgar comments that followed; they gradually began to irritate 
Julien. Madame de Rênal was at the point of dissolving in tears. Lunch was barely over when 
she asked Julien to give her his arm for a walk, and she leaned on him, affectionately. But to 
everything she said, he was only able to reply, half muttering: 
“That’s what rich people are!” 
                                                             
11 Charles le Téméraire (1433C77), the last of the great Valois dukes of Burgundy, who for four generations 
ruled Burgundy and Flanders and rivaled the power of their cousins and putative feudal lords, the kings of 
France. Charles’s fierce military skills proved no match for the shrewd, patient, and unprincipled statecraft of 
Louis XI. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Monsieur de Rênal was walking quite near them; his presence irritated Julien. He realized, 
suddenly, that Madame de Rênal was leaning on his arm in a markedly noticeable fashion; this 
filled him with horror, and he pushed her away, violently, and pulled back his arm. 
Luckily,  Monsieur  de  Rênal  did  not  see  this  new  rudeness,  though  it  was  observed  by 
Madame Derville, who also saw her friend break down and weep. Just then, Monsieur de Rênal 
began to chase away, with a volley of stones, a small peasant girl who had chosen a forbidden 
path, cutting across a corner of the orchard. 
“Monsieur Julien, please,” Madame Derville said quickly. “Remember that we all have our 
moments of ill humor.” 
He looked at her coldly, his eyes showing a sovereign contempt. 
This astonished Madame Derville, and she would have been even more surprised if she 
had  understood  that  look’s  real  meaning:  she  would  then  have  seen  there  a  still  unformed 
longing  for  vengeance  of  the  most  atrocious  order.  Who  could  deny  that  such  humiliating 
moments have given us the Robespierres of the world?12 
“Your Julien is remarkably violent; he frightens me,” whispered Madame Derville to her 
friend. 
“He’s right to be angry,” was the reply. “Given the amazing progress he’s made with the 
children,  what  difference  does  it  make  if  he  spends  a  morning  without  speaking  to  them? 
You’ll agree, surely, that men can be remarkably harsh.” 
For the first time in her life, Madame de Rênal felt something like a desire for vengeance 
on her husband. And Julien’s profound hatred for the rich was rising to the surface. Luckily, 
Monsieur de Rênal called to his gardener and stayed busy, along with him, in closing off the 
orchard’s  forbidden  path  with  pine  branches.  During  the  remainder  of  the  walk,  the  ladies 
addressed a host of courteous observations to Julien; he responded to none of them. Monsieur 
de  Rênal  was  barely  out  of  sight  when,  on  the  pretext  of  fatigue,  they  each  requested  the 
support of his arm. 
Placed between these two women, whose red, embarrassed cheeks plainly showed their 
high  distress,  Julien’s  somber,  steady  appearance  formed  a  striking  contrast.  He  was 
contemptuous of both women, and of all their tender sentiments. 
“Lord!” he said to himself. “Not even five hundred francs a year to finish my studies! Ah, 
I’ll tell him where to go!” 
Completely caught up in these fierce ideas, the kindly words of the two ladies―what little 
of them he bothered to make out―annoyed him: they were senseless, foolish, weak-minded 
and, in a word, feminine. 
Obliged  to  talk  for  the  sake  of  talking,  and  to  find  some  way  to  keep  the  conversation 
going,  Madame  de  Rênal  chanced  to  say  that  her  husband  had  come  back  from  Verrières 
because  he’d  contracted,  with  one  of  his  farmers,  for  the  purchase  of  corn  straw.  (In  that 
region, corn straw is what mattresses are stuffed with.) 
“So he won’t be rejoining us,” she added. “He and his valet, and the gardener, will be busy 
refurbishing all the mattresses in the house. This morning they’ve already done all the beds on 
the first floor, and they’re moving on to the second.” 
Julien’s face blanched. He looked at Madame de Rênal strangely, and began to walk faster, 
so he could be more or less alone with her. Madame Derville let them walk on ahead. 
                                                             
12 A reference to Maximilien de Robespierre (1758C94), the fanatically anti-aristocratic Jacobin politician who 
controlled France through the Terror until he was himself guillotined. 
 
 
Chapter Nine: An Evening in the Country 
“Save  my  life,”  Julien  told  Madame  de  Rênal.  “You’re  the  only  one  who  can  do  it:  you 
know your husband’s valet detests me. I confess, madame, that I have a picture, a portrait; it’s 
hidden in my mattress.” 
At these words, Madame de Rênal too turned pale. 
“Right now, madame, you’re the only one who could walk into my room. If you don’t see 
it, investigate the corner of the mattress closest to the window; you’ll find a black cardboard 
box, small and smooth.” 
“And there’s a picture inside!” said Madame de Rênal, barely able to stay on her feet. 
Her dejection was obvious, and Julien immediately made use of it. 
“I have a second favor to ask of you, madame. I beg you not to look at the picture: it’s my 
secret.” 
“It’s a secret,” Madame de Rênal repeated, her words barely audible. 
Still,  no  matter  the  well-born  folk  among  whom  she  had  been  raised,  people  proud  of 
their  fortunes,  their  emotions  roused  only  by  money,  love  had  already  set  a  degree  of 
generosity  in  her  heart.  Cruelly  wounded  as  she  was,  Madame  de  Rênal  asked  Julien  the 
necessary questions, speaking from pure devotion, and resolved to do for him exactly what he 
asked of her. 
“So,”  she  said,  as  she  began  to  move  toward  the  house,  “a  small  round  box,  black 
cardboard, very smooth.” 
“Yes, madame,” replied Julien with the stiff manner men often assume in times of danger. 
She climbed to the ch09teau’s second floor, as pale as if she were walking to her death. To 
add to her misery, she felt she was on the point of becoming ill, but having to be of service to 
Julien gave her strength. 
“I’ve got to get that box,” she said, walking still faster. 
She  heard  her  husband  say  something  to  his  valet:  they  were  right  in  Julien’s  room. 
Luckily, they went through it, into the children’s quarters. She lifted the mattress and thrust 
her hand through the straw with such violence that she scratched her fingers. She was usually 
enormously sensitive to minor pain of this sort. But she was not even aware of what she had 
done,  because  just  then  she  felt  the  smooth  surface  of  the  cardboard  box.  She  took  it  and 
quickly walked off. 
The moment she was no longer afraid of being surprised by her husband, the horror of 
this box made her very sure she was going to be ill. 
“Julien is in love, and I’ve got his beloved’s picture!” 
Collapsing into a chair in the entryway, Madame de Rênal was seized by all the terrors of 
jealousy.  However,  her  utter  ignorance  was  of  use  to  her  at  that  moment,  for  astonishment 
balanced the scales against sorrow. Julien appeared, grabbed the box, not uttering a word of 
thanks, not saying anything, and ran into his room, where he made a fire and quickly burned 
the whole thing. He was pale, stupefied; he dramatized the dangers from which he had just 
escaped. 
“A  portrait  of  Napoleon,”  he  said  to  himself,  shaking  his  head.  “Found  hidden  in  the 
rooms  of  someone  who  spouts  such  hatred  for  that  usurper!  Found  by  Monsieur  de  Rênal, 
such  a  monarchist,  and  already  so  angry  at  me!  And  to  make  matters  worse,  the  white 
cardboard behind the portrait shows some lines written in my handwriting! And from which 
no  one  could  possibly  doubt  my  admiration!  And  every  one  of  these  ecstatic  declarations 
dated! There’s even one from yesterday. 
“My  reputation  completely  destroyed,  annihilated  on  the  instant,”  he  told  himself, 
watching the box burn, “and my reputation is all I have, it’s the only thing that can earn me a 
living...and yet, what a way of living, oh dear God!” 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
An  hour  later,  his  weariness,  and  the  pity  he  felt  for  himself,  led  him  to  feelings  of 
tenderness.  He  found  Madame  de  Rênal  and,  taking  her  hand,  kissed it  with  more  sincerity 
than  ever  before.  She  blushed  with  happiness  and,  virtually  instantaneously,  repulsed  him, 
angry with jealousy. Julien’s pride, so recently wounded, turned him into a fool. All he could 
see in Madame de Rênal was a rich woman: he let her hand fall, disdainfully, and walked away. 
He went for a solitary, pensive walk in the garden; before too long, there was a bitter smile on 
his lips. 
“Here  I  am,  walking  as  calmly  as  if  I  were  a  man  whose  time  was  all  his  own!  I’m  not 
taking care of the children! I’m risking Monsieur de Rênal’s humiliating scorn―and he’d be 
right.” He ran directly to the children’s room. 
The  caresses  of  the  littlest  one,  to  whom  he  was  deeply  attached,  partially  eased  his 
burning grief. 
“This one doesn’t despise me anymore,” Julien thought. But soon he reproached himself 
for this easing of his sadness, treating it like yet another weakness. “These children caress me 
the way they caress the little hunting dog they got yesterday.” 
Chapter Ten: A Large Heart and a Small Fortune 
But passion most dissembles, yet betrays, 
Even by its darkness; as the blackest sky 
Foretells the heaviest tempest... 
―Byron, Don Juan, Canto 1, Stanza 73 
Monsieur  de  Rênal,  after  going  through  all  the  rooms  in  the  house,  came  back  to  the 
children’s room, together with the servants carrying the straw matting. His sudden entrance 
acted on Julien like the single drop of water that makes a vase overflow. 
Paler and darker-looking than usual, he sprang toward his employer. Monsieur de Rênal 
stopped and gave a quick glance at his servants. 
“Sir,” Julien declared, “do you think that, with any other tutor, your children would have 
made  progress  equal  to  what  they’ve  enjoyed  with  me?  If  you  answer  no,”  said  Julien,  not 
giving Monsieur de Rênal a chance to speak, “how dare you reproach me for neglecting them?” 
Monsieur de Rênal, not having quite conquered his fear, decided that the peculiar tone 
the little peasant was taking stemmed from some better offer, which he had in his pocket, and 
he was about to resign. Julien’s anger grew as he spoke: 
“I can live without you, sir,” he went on. 
“I’m truly grieved to see you so upset,” replied Monsieur de Rênal, stuttering a bit. The 
servants were ten paces away, busily arranging the beds. 
“That’s  not  what  I  want  to  hear,  sir,”  answered  Julien,  beside  himself.  “Think  of  the 
disgraceful words you spoke to me―and, mind you, in front of women!” 
Monsieur de Rênal understood only too well what Julien was asking of him, and a painful 
struggle tore at his soul. And then Julien, essentially crazed with anger, shouted: 
“I know where to go, sir, when I leave you.” 
At these words, Monsieur de Rênal saw Julien established at Monsieur Valenod’s house. 
“Ah  well,  sir,”  he  said  at  last,  with  a  sigh  and  the  same  demeanor  as  when  he  asked  a 
surgeon not to make things more painful than strictly necessary, “you’ll have what you want. 
Starting the day after tomorrow, which will be the first of the month, I’ll give you fifty francs13 
a month.” 
                                                             
13 Or ecus, 150 francs. 
 
 
Chapter Ten: A Large Heart and a Small Fortune 
Julien felt like laughing; he stood where he was, stunned. His anger had vanished. 
“I  can’t  feel  too  much  scorn  for  this  beast,”  he  told  himself.  “Surely,  here’s  the  most 
extravagant apology so vulgar a soul could possibly utter.” 
The  children,  who  had  been  listening  to  this  scene,  openmouthed,  ran  down  to  the 
garden to tell their mother that Monsieur Julien had really been angry, but he was going to get 
fifty francs a month. 
Strictly from habit, Julien followed after them, without a glance at Monsieur de Rênal; he 
left him deeply annoyed. 
“That’s a hundred and sixty-eight francs,” the mayor told himself, “Monsieur Valenod has 
cost me. I’ve really got to say a couple of strong words to him, about his contract for supplying 
the foundlings.” 
The next minute, Julien came back into the room: 
“I’ve got to make my confession to Father Chélan: I have the honor to inform you that I 
will be away for several hours.” 
“Eh,  my  dear  Julien!”  said  Monsieur  de  Rênal,  laughing  terribly  insincerely.  “Take  the 
whole day, if you like―the whole day tomorrow, my good friend. Take the gardener’s horse, 
for traveling to Verrières.” 
“Off he goes,” Monsieur de Rênal said to himself, “to give Valenod his answer. He hasn’t 
made me any promises, but it’s better to let this young man’s head cool down a bit.” 
Julien escaped quickly, proceeding up the wide wood through which one went from Vergy 
to Verrières. He did not want to get to Father Chélan’s house too early. Far from wanting to 
commit himself to a new hypocritical scene, he needed to be ready to see clearly into his soul, 
and to pay attention to the thronging feelings that were shaking it. 
“I’ve won a battle,” he said to himself as soon as he was well into the wood, where no one 
could see him. “I’ve really won a battle!” 
These words nicely summed up his whole position, and gave his soul a modicum of peace 
and calm. 
afraid of something. But of what?” 
“So now I’ve got a salary of fifty francs a month: Monsieur de Rênal must have really been 
Thinking  about  what  could  have  frightened  this  man,  only  an  hour  earlier  so  happily 
powerful  in  dealing  with  him  that  he  fairly  boiled  with  anger,  helped  clear  Julien’s  soul.  He 
became  almost  aware  of  the  ravishing  beauty  of  the  wood  through  which  he  was  walking. 
Some enormous chunks of bare rock had fallen down the mountainside, right into the middle 
of the forest. There were huge beeches, reaching almost to the height of these boulders, and 
their shade gave off a delightful freshness, barely three steps away from places where the sun’s 
powerful rays would have made it impossible to pause. 
Julien  caught  his  breath,  for  a  moment,  in  the  shadow  of  these  great  rocks,  then  set 
himself  to  climbing  once  more.  Soon,  following  a  narrow  path,  plainly  almost  never  used 
except by goatherds, he found himself standing on a huge boulder: without any question, now, 
he was separated from all other men. To be in this position, physically, made him smile, for it 
was  exactly  where  he  so  desperately  yearned  to  be,  morally.  The  pure  air  of  these  high 
mountains breathed serenity and even joy into his soul. In his eyes, the mayor of Verrières had 
always  represented  all  the  rich  and  insolent  men  on  earth.  But  despite  the  violence  he  had 
displayed, he felt that the hate which had so recently stirred him was in no way personal. If he 
could  stop  seeing  Monsieur  de  Rênal,  in  a  week  he  would  have  forgotten  him―him,  his 
ch09teau,  his  dogs,  his  children,  and  all  his  family.  “I  forced  him,  God  alone  knows  how,  to 
make  the  greatest  of  all  sacrifices.  Hah:  more  than  fifty  gold  crowns  a  year!  And  yet,  just  a 
moment before I pulled back from the most awful jeopardy. So: two victories in a single day; 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
there is no merit attached to the second one, which I still need to understand. Well, such a 
painful investigation can wait for tomorrow.” 
Standing  on  his  huge  rock,  Julien  looked  out  at  the  sky,  lit  by  an  August  sun.  Crickets 
sang  in  the  field  below;  when  they  were  quiet,  he  was  surrounded  by  absolute  silence.  He 
could  look  over  twenty  leagues  of  countryside.  From  time  to  time  he  saw  sparrow  hawks 
launch themselves from the rocks over his head, and watched their noiseless circling. His eyes 
followed  the  birds  of  prey,  mechanically.  The  hawks’  quiet,  powerful  movements  impressed 
him; he envied their strength; he envied their utter isolation. 
That had been Napoleon’s destiny. Would it be his, one day? 
Chapter Eleven: An Evening 
Yet Julia’s very coldness still was kind, 
And tremulously gentle her small hand 
Withdrew itself from his, but left behind 
A little pressure, thrilling, and so bland 
And slight, so very slight that to the mind 
’Twas but a doubt. 
BYRON, DON JUAN, CANTO 1, STANZA 71 
Yet he had to show himself in Verrières. As he was leaving Father Chénal, it was Julien’s 
good  luck  to  meet  Monsieur  Valenod,  to  whom  he  quickly  conveyed  the  good  news  of  his 
increased salary. 
Returning  to  Vergy,  he  didn’t  go  into  the  garden  until  darkness  had  settled  down.  His 
soul was weary, after all the powerful emotions he had been experiencing that day. “What will 
I say to them?” he thought uncomfortably, wondering about the two ladies. He had no idea 
that  his  soul  functioned  precisely  at  the  level  of  petty  events,  which  usually  so  preoccupy 
women.  Often,  Julien  made  no  sense  to  Madame  Derville,  and  even  to  her  friend,  and  he 
himself understood no more than half of what they said to him. This was due to the power 
and, if I may speak in those terms, the grandeur that had been turning this young, ambitious 
man’s soul upside down. For this strange creature, almost every day was a stormy season. 
Walking  into  the  garden  that  evening,  Julien  was  quite  prepared  to  listen  to  the  pretty 
cousins. They had been waiting impatiently for him. He took his usual place beside Madame 
de  Rênal.  The  darkness  had  long  since  deepened.  He’d  wanted  to  take  the  white  hand  he’d 
been watching as it lay, near him, along the back of a chair. The hand had hesitated a bit, but 
in  the  end  had  been  withdrawn,  and  in  such  a  fashion  that  the  lady’s  vexation  had  been 
demonstrated. Julien was willing to let it go, and to continue happily chatting, when he heard 
Monsieur de Rênal approaching. 
Julien  could  still  hear,  as  if  ringing  in  his  ears,  the  vulgar  words  spoken  to  him  that 
morning. “Now,” he asked himself, “wouldn’t it be a way of laughing in this creature’s face, this 
man  so  stuffed  with  all  the  advantages  of  wealth,  if  I  took  possession  of  his  wife’s  hand, 
precisely in his presence? Yes, I’ll do it, I will, so he can see my scorn.” 
And, at that very moment, the calm so unnatural to Julien was swept away: he desperately 
wanted―with such anxiety that he could think of nothing else―for Madame de Rênal to give 
him her hand. 
Monsieur  de  Rênal  talked  politics,  and  angrily:  two  or  three  Verrières  industrialists, 
grown far richer than he, planned to oppose him in the next election. Madame Derville was 
listening.  Julien,  annoyed  at  this  bland  bluster,  came  nearer  to  Madame  de  Rênal’s  chair. 
Darkness hid his movements. He was bold enough to put his hand very near the pretty arm 
 
 
Chapter Eleven: An Evening 
that her dress left uncovered. He was so upset he hardly knew what he was doing: putting his 
cheek against the pretty arm, he ventured to set his lips against it. 
Madame  de  Rênal  quivered.  Her  husband  was  four  steps  distant;  hurriedly,  she  gave 
Julien her hand, and simultaneously pushed him away a little. As Monsieur de Rênal went on 
insulting worthless men, Jacobins who were enriching themselves, Julien covered the hand he 
was holding with passionate kisses―or, at least, kisses that seemed passionate to Madame de 
Rênal. But now the poor woman had the proof, that fatal evening, that the man she’d silently 
adored was in love with her! The whole time he’d been away, she’d been seized by a dreadful 
illness, which had forced her to ponder. 
“My  God,  I’ve  been  in  love,”  she  said  to  herself,  “I’ve  experienced  love!  Me,  a  married 
woman, in love! But,” she told herself, “I’ve never felt this sort of melancholy madness for my 
husband; I can’t stop thinking about Julien. After all, he’s just a boy; what he feels for me is 
immense respect! This craziness will pass. What difference does it make to my husband that I 
can  have  these  feelings  for  a  young  man?  Monsieur  de  Rênal  would  be  bored  by  my 
conversations  with  Julien,  all  about  matters  of  the  imagination.  He’s  busy  thinking  about 
business. I’m not taking anything away from him and giving it to Julien.” 
No hypocrisy intruded on the purity of this na07ve soul, distracted by a passion it had never 
experienced.  She  was  deceived,  but  all  unawares,  although  a  virtuous  instinct  took  fright. 
These were the struggles still shaking her when Julien appeared in the garden. She heard his 
voice  almost  at  the  same  moment  she  saw  him  sit  down  beside  her.  And  her  soul  felt  itself 
soaring,  lifted  by  the  bewitching  happiness  that,  for  two  weeks,  had  seduced  but  had,  even 
more, astonished her. For her, it was all unknown. However, a few moments later she asked 
herself:  “Is  Julien’s  presence  enough  to  wipe  away  all  his  wrongdoing?”  She  was  frightened; 
that was when he had taken her hand. 
His  passionate  kisses,  the  like  of  which  she  had  never  experienced,  made  her  suddenly 
forget that perhaps he loved another woman. In her eyes, he was no longer guilty. Throbbing 
sadness,  daughter  of  suspicion,  died  away,  and  a  happiness,  about  which  she  had  never  so 
much as dreamed, brought her love’s ecstasies and a wild gaiety. It was a charming evening for 
them all, except for His Honor the Mayor, who could not forget those industrialists, grown so 
terribly rich. Julien was no longer thinking of his black ambitions, nor of his painfully difficult 
plans. For the first time in his life, he was carried away by the power of beauty. Lost in a vague, 
sweet  reverie  utterly  foreign  to  his  nature,  he  was  pressing  the  hand  that  seemed  to  him 
loveliness  incarnate;  he  half  heard  the  rustling  of  the  lime  leaves,  stirred  by  a  light  night 
breeze, and the dogs of a mill along the Doubs, barking in the distance. 
But this was pleasure, not passion. When he got back to his room, he did not think only 
of his happiness: he picked up his favorite book. At age twenty, the sense of the great world 
and what could be achieved there was all that mattered. 
But soon he set down his book. In thinking about Napoleon’s victories, he had discovered 
something  new  about  his  own.  “Yes,  I’ve  won  a  battle,”  he  said  to  himself.  “But  I  must 
consolidate  my  gains,  I  must  crush  the  pride  of  this  proud  gentleman  while  he  is  still 
retreating. This is unadulterated Napoleonism. I need to ask for a three-day leave so I can visit 
my friend Fouqué. If he says no, I’ll demand his consent. But he’ll agree.” 
Madame de Rênal could not close her eyes. She felt as if, till that moment, she had never 
lived. She could not stop thinking about the happiness of feeling Julien cover her hand with 
burning kisses. 
Suddenly, a word frightened her: adulteress. She could see it. The worst things that the 
vilest debauchery could  stamp  on the notion of sensual love swarmed into her mind. These 
ideas were trying to stain the glow of the tender, divine image she had constructed, both of 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Julien himself and the happiness of loving him. The future was painted in ghastly colors. She 
saw herself as contemptible. 
This  was  deeply  frightening;  her  soul  had  penetrated  unknown  places.  She  had  tasted, 
that  evening,  a  brand-new  happiness;  now  she  found  herself  plunged,  all  of  a  sudden,  into 
atrocious misery. She knew nothing of such suffering, which threatened to unhinge her mind. 
For a moment, she thought she would confess to her husband, tell him she was afraid of falling 
in  love  with  Julien.  At  least,  she  would  be  talking  about  him.  Luckily,  she  remembered  a 
warning  her  aunt  had  given  her  the  night  before  her  marriage.  It  was  about  the  dangers  of 
confiding in a husband, who was after all a woman’s master. Racked by pain, she wrung her 
hands. 
She  was  caught  up,  completely  at  random,  by  contradictory  and  miserable  images.  As 
much as she feared never being loved, the frightful idea of sin tortured her just as if, the next 
day, she were to be exposed on the public pillory, in the central square at Verrières, wearing a 
sign that identified her adultery for all who passed by. 
Madame  de  Rênal  had  no  experience  of  life.  Even  in  the  full  light  of  day,  and  with 
complete control of her faculties, she could not have seen any distinction between being guilty 
in God’s eyes and being branded, in public, with the most burning general contempt. When 
the horrible idea of adultery―and of all the scorn that, as far as she was concerned, this sin 
brought in its wake―allowed her a few moments of rest, and she began to daydream of the 
sweetness  of  living  innocently  alongside  Julien,  as  they  had  been  doing,  she  found  herself 
lurching into the equally horrible idea that he loved another woman. She could still see how 
pale he became, when he was afraid of losing that woman’s portrait, or of compromising her 
by letting anyone see it. It was the first time Madame de Rênal had ever seen fear on that calm, 
that noble face. He had never shown such emotion for her or for her children. This new sorrow 
pushed her to the boundary of misery sustainable by the human soul. Without realizing it, she 
screamed  so  loudly  that  her  chambermaid  awoke.  Suddenly,  Madame  de  Rênal  saw  a  light 
shining near her bed, and she recognized Elisa. 
“Is it you he loves?” she screamed in her madness. 
Overwhelmed by her mistress’s frightful disorder, and her obviously troubled mind, the 
chambermaid, most fortunately, paid no attention to these strange words. Madame de Rênal 
became  aware  of  her  imprudence.  “I  have  a  fever,”  she  said,  “and  I  think  I’ve  been  a  bit 
delirious. Stay with me.” Completely wakened by having to contradict her own words, she felt 
better: reason gave her back the self-control taken away in her half-waking sleep. To escape 
from  the  attentive,  watching  eyes  of  her  chambermaid,  she  directed  her  to  read  the  day’s 
newspaper, and the girl did so, in a droning monotone, sounding out a long article from The 
Legitimist,14 while Madame de Rênal made up her mind, most virtuously, to treat Julien, when 
next she saw him, with absolute coldness. 
Chapter Twelve: A Journey 
In Paris one finds elegant people; in the provinces one can find people of character. 
―Sieyès15 
                                                             
14 La Quotidienne, a conservative daily paper, virtually an organ for the conservative ultra party. 
15 Emmanuel-Joseph Sieyès (1748C1836) was an important political figure during the Revolution. A priest and 
vicar-general of Chartres under the ancien régime, in 1789 he published a political pamphlet, Qu’est-ce que le 
tiers état? (What Is the Third Estate?), which was seen as a political manifesto for liberal reforms desired by the 
Third  Estate.  A  shrewd  and  crafty  politician,  after  serving  in  the  legislatures  of  the  revolutionary  and 
Directory governments, Sieyès became one of five directors. Hoping to grab power himself, he joined forces 
 
 
Chapter Twelve: A Journey 
At five o’clock the next day, before Madame de Rênal made her appearance, Julien had 
obtained a three-day leave from her husband. He had not expected to, but he wanted to see 
her again; he kept thinking about her exceedingly pretty hand. He went down to the garden, 
where  Madame  de  Rênal was  usually  waiting  for  him.  Had  Julien  actually  been  in  love  with 
her, he would have looked up and seen her, behind the half-closed shutters on the first floor, 
her forehead leaning against the glass. She watched him. Finally, for all her good resolutions, 
she  decided  to  go  down.  Her  habitual  pallor  had  given  way  to  the  most  lively  color.  This 
entirely unsophisticated woman was plainly upset. A feeling of constraint and even of anger 
had  changed  her  expression  of  intense  serenity;  she  appeared  totally  divorced  from  all  the 
vulgar concerns of her existence; and the net effect was to add fascination to a celestial face. 
Julien went over to her at once, admiring the beautiful arms, revealed by a hastily thrown 
on shawl. The freshness of the morning air seemed to add an additional glow to a complexion 
already  showing,  after  her  long,  troubling  night,  an  extraordinary  range  of  reactions.  Her 
beauty was modest as well as touching, and even when heavy with thought―as one never saw 
among the lower classes―was apparently able to quicken in Julien aspects of his soul he had 
never  before  sensed.  Too  busy  admiring  these  surprising  charms,  his  eyes  most  attentive, 
Julien never gave a thought to the friendly greeting he was expecting. He was thus even more 
than astonished by a glacial coldness, which she seemed determined to convey, and in which, 
also, he thought he could even read an intention to put him in his place. 
The  smile  of  pleasure  died  on  his  lips;  he  remembered  his  worldly  status,  especially  as 
compared to a rich, noble heiress. All one could see in his expression, just then, was arrogance 
and anger at himself. He felt a deep regret at having delayed his departure for more than an 
hour, all for the sake of being greeted by so humiliating a reception. 
“Only a fool,” he said to himself, “gets angry at others. A stone falls because it’s heavy. Am 
I going to be forever a child? When will I acquire the good habit of giving these people my 
soul, only and exactly to the extent they pay me for it? If I want to be valued by them, as well 
as by myself, it must be by demonstrating to them that my poverty is doing business with their 
wealth,  and  yet  that  my  heart  is  a  thousand  leagues  distant  from  their  insolence,  set  in  a 
sphere too high to be affected by their petty displays of either disdain or approval.” 
While these sentiments came crowding into the young tutor’s soul, his mobile face took 
on an expression of proud suffering and ferocity. Madame de Rênal was deeply troubled. The 
virtuous frigidity with which she had meant to greet him gave way to an expression of concern, 
a concern stirred by the abrupt changes she had just witnessed. All the empty words people 
employ, in the morning, about health and the fine day we’re having, simultaneously dried up 
in them both. Julien, whose judgment was not in the least troubled by passion, quickly found a 
way to show  Madame de Rênal how  little he believed in friendly relations with her: he said 
nothing about the little trip he was taking, told her good-bye, and went away. 
As she watched him go, struck dumb by the somber arrogance she could see in his look, 
so very friendly only the night before, her oldest son, running up from the end of the garden, 
hugged her and said: 
“We’re on leave. Monsieur Julien’s going on a trip.” 
Hearing  this,  Madame  de  Rênal  felt  herself  gripped  by  a  mortal  chill.  Virtue  made  her 
miserable, and weakness made her even more miserable. 
                                                                                                                                                                    
with General Bonaparte in plotting the 1799 coup, hoping to become the éminence grise of the young military 
hero. Like all others who hoped to dominate Napoleon, he soon found himself eclipsed and out of power. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
This  new  development  completely  occupied  her  mind:  she  was  swept  far  beyond  the 
sensible resolutions she owed to the horrible night just experienced. It was no longer a matter 
of resisting this wonderfully amiable lover, but of losing him forever. 
She had to join the others for lunch. To add to her sorrow, all that Monsieur de Rênal and 
Madame Derville talked about was Julien’s departure. His Honor the Mayor had noted a bit of 
insolence in the firm tone Julien used, in requesting a leave. 
“This  little  peasant  surely  has  a  pocketful  of  offers  from  someone.  But  this  someone, 
perhaps Monsieur Valenod, must be a little discouraged by the sum of six hundred francs a 
year he’s now going to have to pay him. It used to be, back in Verrières, that one could insist 
on a delay of three days in order to think about such things, but this morning, to keep from 
having  to  give  me  a  response,  our  small  gentleman  left  for  the  mountainside.  Having  to 
bargain with a miserable workman who’s become insolent―oh, that’s where we’ve come to!” 
“Since  my  husband,  who  says  nothing  about  how  deeply  he’s  wounded  Julien,  now 
believes  Julien  intends  to  leave  us,  what  should  I  believe?”  Madame  de  Rênal  asked  herself. 
“Ah! It’s all over and done with!” 
So she could at least weep freely, and not answer Madame Derville’s questions, she said 
she had a frightful headache and put herself to bed. 
“That’s  the  way  it  is,  with  women,”  said  Monsieur  de  Rênal  once  again,  “there’s  always 
something wrong with these complicated machines. And he went away, laughing at us.” 
While  Madame  de  Rênal  was  lying,  cruelly  gripped  by  the  dreadful  passion  into  which 
chance had drawn her, Julien went cheerfully on his way, in the middle of the most gorgeous 
scenery mountains can offer. He had to cross the high range north of Vergy. The path he was 
following, which rose gradually through towering beech trees, zigzagged back and forth along 
the  slopes  of  the  prominent  great  mountain,  north  of  the  Doubs  valley.  Soon,  as  he  passed 
above the lesser hills through which, on its way south, the Doubs flowed, he could see all the 
way to the fertile plains of Burgundy and Beaujolais. Although not markedly sensitive to this 
sort  of  beauty,  the  ambitious  young  man  could  not  help  stopping,  from  time  to  time,  to 
contemplate so vast and imposing a spectacle. 
He  finally  reached  the  summit  of  the  great  mountain,  near  which  the  route  he  was 
following would take him,  leading down to the isolated valley in which lived his friend, the 
young timber merchant, Fouqué. Julien felt no urgency about seeing him, neither him nor any 
other human being. Hidden like a hunting hawk amid the bare rocks crowning the mountain, 
he could spot from a long way off anyone who might be approaching him. He found a small 
cave set in the virtually vertical slope of a boulder. He climbed up and was soon settled in this 
hideaway.  “Here,”  he  said,  his  eyes  shining  with  pleasure,  “no  one  could  ever  hurt  me.”  It 
occurred to him that he might linger, free to write out his thoughts, otherwise so risky if set 
down on paper. A square rock became his desk. His pen flew: he was not aware of where he 
was. Finally, he realized that the sun was setting behind the mountain range that went all the 
way to Beaujolais. 
“Why don’t I spend the night here?” he said to himself. “I’ve got some bread, and I’m free!” 
The echoes of these wondrous words rang in his soul: hypocrite that he was, he could not be 
free even with Fouqué. His head in his hands, Julien felt happier, in his cave, than he had ever 
been in his life, stirred by his wandering thoughts and by the sheer happiness of freedom. Not 
aware  that  he  was  watching,  he  saw  the  twilight  slowly  spreading.  In  the  middle  of  vast 
darkness, his soul lost itself in thoughts of what it might be like when he got to Paris. First of 
all, there would be a woman, both good and beautiful, and with a mind finer than anything he 
had found in the countryside. He would love her passionately, and he would be loved. If he 
 
 
Chapter Twelve: A Journey 
had to go away, though not for long, it would be to cover himself with glory, thus deserving 
her love even more. 
Even endowing him with an imagination like Julien’s, a young man brought up among the 
sad  truths  of  Paris  society  would  snap  out  of  the  novel  he’d  been  reading,  restored  by  the 
coldest irony: all the noble deeds would have vanished, along with any hope of accomplishing 
them,  and  they  would  be  replaced  by  the  familiar  saying,  “If  you  leave  your  mistress  alone, 
alas, what you risk is being betrayed two or three times a day!” Our young peasant saw nothing 
blocking him from the most heroic deeds, except the opportunity to perform them. 
Now the darkness of night had replaced the day, and he still had a good six miles to go 
before he reached Fouqué’s village. Before he left the little cave, Julien lit a fire and carefully 
burned every scrap of what he’d written. 
He startled his friend, knocking on his door at one o’clock in the morning. Fouqué was 
busy  doing  his  accounts.  He  was  a  tall  young  man,  quite  sufficiently  ugly,  with  gross,  hard 
features,  a  nose  of  infinite  length,  and  a  large  store  of  goodwill  hidden  under  his  repulsive 
appearance. 
“Are you here, on the spur of the moment, because you’ve broken with your Monsieur de 
Rênal?” 
happened the night before. 
Julien told him, carefully presenting matters as he preferred they be perceived, what had 
“Stay  here  with  me,”  Fouqué  told  him.  “I  see  you  quite  understand  Monsieur  de  Rênal, 
and Monsieur Valenod, and the assistant governor, Maugiron, and the parish priest, Chélan. 
You have a nice understanding of the fine points of these people’s characters, you’ve readied 
yourself to handle all sorts of negotiations. You know more about arithmetic than I do; you 
could  easily  handle  my  accounts.  I’m  doing  extremely  well.  Because  I  can’t  possibly  do 
everything by myself, and I’m terrified of meeting up with a scoundrel, if I take someone into 
the business, I’m losing good opportunities every day of the week. Less than a month ago, I 
passed a deal to Michaud, from Saint Armand, and he made six thousand francs. I hadn’t seen 
him in six years: we met, just by chance, at an auction in Pontarlier. Why couldn’t you have 
made―yes, you―those six thousand francs, or three thousand, anyway? Because if I’d had you 
with me that day, I could have bid for that timber cutting, and nobody could have stopped me. 
So be my partner.” 
The  offer  did  not  please  Julien:  it  got  in  the  way  of  his  craziness.  All  during  dinner, 
prepared by the two friends themselves (as the Homeric heroes had), since Fouqué lived alone, 
he showed Julien his account books, and demonstrated for his benefit what an opportunity the 
business offered. Fouqué had the loftiest notions of Julien’s mind, and of his character. 
When Julien was by himself, in his little pinewood room: 
“It’s true,” he told himself, “I could make thousands of francs out here, and then I’d be in 
a better position to become a soldier, or a priest, whichever would be better, whatever’s more 
in fashion, then. The modest savings I’ll have accumulated would remove all the petty details 
and difficulties. Alone up on this mountain, I’ll be freed from some of that awful ignorance I 
suffer from, all those things high society people take so seriously. But Fouqué doesn’t plan to 
get married, yet he keeps telling me that being alone makes him miserable. The real reason 
he’d take in a partner, someone who has no money to invest in his business, is the hope that 
he’ll find himself a companion, a person who’ll never leave him. 
“Am  I  capable  of  deceiving  my  friend?”  Julien  asked  himself  peevishly.  This  being,  for 
whom hypocrisy and an absence of all sympathy were the usual methods of protecting himself, 
could  not  bear,  this  time,  the  thought  of  the  slightest  trickiness  in  dealing  with  a  man  for 
whom he had friendly feelings. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
And then, suddenly, he was relieved, he had found a good reason for refusing. “What! Me 
turn coward and give up seven or eight years? I’d be twenty-eight, by then―but at that point 
Bonaparte had done the greatest of things!16 Having hidden myself in obscurity, and made a 
bit of money by selling timber and earning favors from assorted rascally underlings, who can 
say if I’d still have the sacred fire you need, if you’re going to make a name for yourself?” 
Next morning, Julien coolly and confidently gave his answer to his good friend, who had 
thought the partnership idea was all settled. His sacred vocation at the holy altar would not 
allow Julien to accept. Fouqué could not believe it. 
“But just think,” he kept repeating. “I could either make you a partner or, if you like that 
better, I could pay you four thousand francs a year! And you’ll go back to your Monsieur de 
Rênal, who looks down at you like mud on his shoes! When you’ve got four thousand francs in 
your  hand,  what’s  going  to  stop  you  from  going  into  the  seminary?  And  let  me  tell  you 
something else, I’ll make sure you get the best parish in the whole region. Let me tell you,” 
Fouqué added, lowering his voice, “I supply firewood for Monsieur ―――, and Monsieur ――
―, Monsieur ―――. I give them the best oak, and let them pay me as if it were ordinary white 
pine―but there’s no better investment anywhere.” 
Nothing  could  prove  victorious  over  Julien’s  vocation.  In  the  end,  Fouqué  thought  him 
slightly insane. The third day, early in the morning, Julien left his friend; he would spend the 
day  walking,  surrounded  by  the  great  mountain’s  rocks  and  boulders.  He  located  his  little 
cave, but the peace he had brought there the first time had vanished: his friend’s proposals had 
swept  it  away.  Like  Hercules,  he  felt  himself  poised  in  the  balance―not  between  good  and 
evil, but between the mediocrity of an assured livelihood and all his heroic, youthful dreams. “I 
have no real steadiness,” he told himself, “which makes doubt all the more dangerous. I’m not 
made  of  the  wood  from  which  great  men  can  be  carved,  so  I  worry  that  eight  years  spent 
earning my bread might deprive me of the sublime energy which makes extraordinary things 
possible.” 
Chapter Thirteen: Fishnet Stockings 
A novel: It’s a mirror you take for a walk down the road. 
―Saint-Réal17 
Seeing the picturesque ruins of the ancient church at Vergy, Julien realized it had been 
two days since he’d had so much as a stray thought of Madame de Rênal. “When I was leaving 
the other day, that woman reminded me of the immense distance separating us; she treated 
me  like  a  workman’s  son.  Of  course,  she  wanted  me  to  see  how  much  she  regretted  having 
given  me  her  hand,  the  previous  night...But  still,  she’s  so  pretty―and  her  hand!  What  a 
bewitching thing! And there’s such nobility in her eyes!” 
The  thought  that  he  could  have  made  money  with  Fouqué  brought  a  certain  ease  to 
Julien’s  mind:  it  was  not  so  regularly  corrupted  by  irritability  and  the  strong  sense  of  his 
poverty, his inferior status in the world’s eyes. Located as if on a high promontory, he was able 
to evaluate and, one might say, rise above both extreme poverty and the extreme comfort that, 
                                                             
16 Born in 1769, Bonaparte at age twenty-eight was the hero of the revolutionary armies; he had not yet seized 
power or declared himself emperor, moves  that  disillusioned  many early supporters, like the old  surgeon-
major. 
17  Suggests  the  César  Vichard,  Abbé  de  Saint-Réal  (1639C92),  historian,  novelist,  and  diplomat.  He  was 
criticized  for  novelizing  history;  one  of  his  novels,  The  Spanish  Conspiracy  Against  Venice,  was  in  fact  long 
believed to be a work of history. The statement given is not found in his writings. 
 
 
Chapter Thirteen: Fishnet Stockings 
still, he called wealth. He was by no means possessed of a fully elaborated philosophy, but he 
had enough insight to feel himself different, after his short trip up the mountain. 
He was struck by the signs of deep disturbance, as Madame de Rênal listened to the brief 
recital of his journey, an account she had requested of him. 
Fouqué  had  had  marriage  plans,  he  had  had  unfortunate  love  affairs;  long,  intimate 
confidences on this subject had filled the two friends’ conversation. After finding happiness far 
too soon, Fouqué had become aware that he was not his lover’s only love. All these stories had 
astonished  Julien:  he  learned  a  good  many  new  things.  His  solitary  existence,  all  his  fancies 
and  defiant  mistrust,  had  kept  him  shut  away  from  everything  that  might  have  illuminated 
him. 
While  he’d  been  away,  Madame  de  Rênal’s  life  had  been  nothing  but  a  string  of  ever-
changing tortures, all of them unbearable; she had been truly ill. 
“Above all,” Madame Derville told her, when she saw Julien returning, “sick as you are, 
you must not go down to the garden tonight. The dampness will make your illness a great deal 
worse.” 
Madame  Derville  had  seen  with  great  surprise  that  her  friend,  always  criticized  by 
Monsieur  de  Rênal  for  the  plainness  with  which  she  dressed,  had  begun  to  wear  fishnet 
stockings  and  delightful  little  shoes,  fresh  from  Paris.  For  the  last  three  days,  Madame  de 
Rênal’s only amusement had been to cut out and have sewn by Elisa, in great haste, a summer 
dress made from a pretty little fabric, eminently fashionable. The dress had been finished only 
moments after Julien’s return; Madame de Rênal immediately put it on. There was no more 
reason  for  her  friend  to  wonder.  “She’s  in  love,  the  poor  thing!”  Madame  Derville  said  to 
herself. She understood, now, all the peculiar symptoms of her friend’s illness. 
She saw her speaking to Julien. Madame de Rênal’s surging color gave way to pallor. Her 
eyes,  fixed  on  those  of  the  young  tutor,  clearly  showed  anxiety.  She  expected  that,  at  any 
moment, he was going to declare himself and announce whether he was leaving the house or 
staying. Julien had no interest in saying anything on this subject, which had not crossed his 
mind. After frightful struggles, Madame de Rênal at last had the courage to say, in a trembling 
voice in which all her passion could be heard: 
“Will you be leaving your students, for a place somewhere else?” 
Julien was struck by Madame de Rênal’s shaky voice, and by the look in her eyes. “This 
woman  loves  me,”  he  told  himself.  “But  after  this  transitory  weakness,  of  which  her  pride 
disapproves,  once  she’s  no  longer  afraid  of  my  leaving,  she’ll  go  back  to  being  proud  and 
haughty.” This insight into their respective positions was, for Julien, as quick as lightning. He 
answered, hesitantly: 
“I would be sorry to leave such pleasant children, so well born, but it may be necessary. 
There is also the duty one owes oneself.” 
Speaking  the  words  so  well  born  (one  of  the  aristocratic  phrases  Julien  had  recently 
acquired), he conveyed a sense of deep resentment. 
“In this woman’s eyes, of course,” he told himself, “I’m simply not well born.” As she stood 
listening to him, Madame de Rênal was admiring his mind, his beauty; her heart was pierced 
through  by  the  possibility  of  his  leaving,  which  he  had conjured  up  for  her  to  see.  All  their 
Verrières  friends  who’d  come  to  dinner,  while  Julien  was  away,  had  complimented  her, 
enviously, on the amazing man her husband had been fortunate enough to dig up. It was not 
that they hadn’t understood the children’s progress. Knowing the Bible by heart, and in Latin, 
had struck the inhabitants of Verrières with such wonder that it might well last for a century. 
Julien, who spoke to no one, had no knowledge of all this. Had Madame de Rênal retained 
even a bit of composure, she would have complimented him on the reputation he had won, 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
which would have comforted his pride and made him mild and friendly to her―even more so, 
because the new dress was wonderfully becoming. Madame de Rênal, who was also pleased by 
her pretty dress, and what Julien had said to her about it, wanted to walk about in the garden, 
but soon had to admit she was in no condition to continue. She had taken the traveler’s arm 
and, far from strengthening her, the feeling of her arm touching his had completely drained 
her. 
It was night. They’d just seated themselves when Julien, exercising his former privilege, 
was bold enough to set his lips on his pretty neighbor’s arm and take her hand. He thought of 
Fouqué’s daring and how well it had worked with his mistresses; he did not think of Madame 
de Rênal. The words well born still weighed heavily on his heart. He was supposed to squeeze 
her  hand;  it  gave  him  not  the  slightest  pleasure.  Rather  than  feeling  proud,  or  at  least 
recognizing the signs of her emotion, betrayed that night by perfectly obvious signs, neither 
her  beauty,  her  elegance,  nor  her  freshness  made  much  impression  on  him.  Her  soul’s 
innocence, and the fact that she had never experienced hatred, had surely helped prolong her 
youthfulness. It is in the face that age first shows itself, in most women. 
Julien  was  sullen  and  moody  all  night.  He  had  only  been  angry,  before,  at  fate  and  at 
society;  now that Fouqué had offered him a vulgar way of achieving comfort, he  was out  of 
sorts  with  himself.  Totally  wrapped  in  his  own  thoughts,  though  from  time  to  time  he 
addressed a few words to the ladies, Julien ended by letting go of Madame de Rênal’s hand, not 
even  knowing  he’d  done  so.  This  shook  the  poor  woman’s  soul;  it  seemed  to  her  a 
demonstration of her fate. 
Had  she  been  sure  of  Julien’s  affection,  perhaps  her  virtue  could  have  summoned  the 
strength  to  resist  him.  Shaking  from  fear  of  losing  him,  her  passion  came  to  the  point  of 
reaching for his hand, which in his self-absorption he had left lying along the back of a chair, 
and taking it in hers. This revived his youthful ambition. He would have preferred that what 
she had done be witnessed by all those terribly proud, noble folk who, with patronizing smiles, 
had  looked  down  at  him,  seated  with  her  children  at  the  foot  of  her  husband’s  table.  “This 
woman  can’t  really  despise  me,  not  now.  In  that  case,”  he  said  to  himself,  “I  ought  to  be 
impressed by her beauty. I owe it to myself to be her lover.” Such a thought would never have 
occurred to him, before his friend’s ingenuous confidences. 
The sudden decision he’d just taken provided a pleasant distraction. He said to himself: “I 
have to have one of these two women.” It would be distinctly nicer, he noted, paying court to 
Madame Derville, not because she would be more enjoyable, but because what she had seen 
was a tutor honored for his learning―not simply a workman, a carpenter, carrying a ratteen 
jacket under his arm, as Madame de Rênal had first seen him. 
And  it  was  indeed  precisely  as  a  young  workman,  blushing  to  the  whites  of  his  eyes, 
standing at the front door of the house and not daring to pull on the knocker, that Madame de 
Rênal fancied he was at his most charming. 
Continuing  this  review  of  his  situation,  Julien  realized  that  he  could  not  dream  of  a 
conquest  of  Madame  Derville,  who  was  more  than  likely  aware  of  the  fondness  Madame  de 
Rênal had shown for him. Obliged to return to the latter of the two women, he asked himself: 
“What do I know about this woman’s nature? Just this: Before my trip, I took her hand; she 
withdrew it. Today, I withdraw my hand, and she grasps it and squeezes it. What a wonderful 
opportunity  to  repay  her  for  all  the  contempt  she’s  shown  me.  God  only  knows  how  many 
lovers she’s had! Perhaps she picked me only because it’s so easy to meet.” 
This, alas! is the curse of overcivilization! At age twenty, a young man’s soul, given some 
degree of education, is a million miles from spontaneity, without which love is often the most 
boring of responsibilities. 
 
 
Chapter Fourteen: English Scissors 
“And  besides,”  continued  Julien’s  petty  vanity,  “I  owe  it  to  myself  to  succeed  with  this 
woman, because if I ever make my fortune, and someone brings up my vulgar post as a tutor, I 
can explain that love threw me into this position.” 
Once  again,  Julien  withdrew  his  hand  from  Madame  de  Rênal’s,  then  took  hers  and 
squeezed it. As they walked back to the drawing room, just before midnight, Madame de Rênal 
asked him, her voice lowered: 
“You’re going to leave us, you’re going to go away?” 
Sighing, he replied: 
“I have to go, because I’m passionately in love with you, which is a sin―and such a sin for 
a young priest!” 
his. 
Madame de Rênal leaned on his arm with such abandon that her cheek felt the warmth of 
Neither  of  them  had  experienced  the  same  night.  Madame  de  Rênal  felt  exalted  by the 
loftiest  of  virtuous  delight.  A  young  flirt  who  falls  in  love,  early  on,  gets  used  to  love’s 
difficulties,  so  when  she  reaches  the  age of  true  passion  the  charm  of  novelty  has  vanished. 
Since  Madame  de  Rênal  had  never  read  romantic  fiction,  every  last  shade  of  her  happiness 
was, for her, brand new. There was no sad truth to chill her, not even the specter of the future. 
She  imagined  herself  quite  as  happy,  ten  years  on,  as  she  was  right  now.  Even  the  idea  of 
virtue,  the  faithfulness  she  had  sworn  to  Monsieur  de  Rênal,  which  some  days  earlier  had 
troubled her, presented itself in vain: she sent it away like an unwelcome guest. “I’ll never have 
to give Julien anything,” she told herself. “We’ll go on living just as we have, this last month. 
He’ll be my friend.” 
Chapter Fourteen: English Scissors 
A young girl of sixteen had a rosy complexion, and wore rouge. 
―Polidori 18 
For  Julien,  Fouqué’s  offer  had  effectively  destroyed  his  happiness:  he  could  not  decide 
which way he should go. 
“Alas!  Maybe  I  lack  sufficient  character;  I’d  have  been  a  poor  soldier  for  Napoleon.  At 
least,” he added, “my little affair with the mistress of the house might distract me a bit.” 
Luckily  for  him,  even  in  this  minor  matter  his  soul,  at  bottom,  could  not  accept  such 
cavalier  language.  Her  pretty  dress  made  him  afraid  of  Madame  de  Rênal.  In  his  eyes,  this 
dress represented the very latest in Parisian fashion. Pride kept him from leaving any part of 
the  campaign  to  chance  or  to  the  inspiration  of  the  moment.  Having  heard  Fouqué’s 
revelations, he combined them with what little he had read about love in the Bible, and drew 
up a singularly detailed battle plan. Since―though he would not admit it―he was seriously 
apprehensive, he wrote the plan out in full. 
The  next  morning,  in  the  drawing  room,  he  was  left  alone,  for  just  a  moment,  with 
Madame de Rênal. 
“Don’t you have any other name but Julien?” she asked. 
Our  hero  had  no  idea  how to  respond  to  this  flattering question.  This  was  not  a  detail 
anticipated by his plan. Without the foolish plan, Julien’s lively spirit would have served him 
perfectly well: surprise would simply have increased the liveliness of his insights. 
                                                             
18 John Polidori was physician and secretary to Lord Byron, whom Stendhal had met in Milan in 1816. A very 
similar quote is also attributed to Sainte-Beuve at the beginning of part 2 (see note for p. 217, Epigraph). 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
He was inept, and then exaggerated just how inept he was. Madame de Rênal was quick 
to  forgive  him.  She  took  his  bungling  for  charming  candor.  And  to  her  eyes,  what  was 
particularly  lacking  in  this  young  man,  possessed  of  such  genius,  was  precisely  a  lack  of 
candor. 
“Your little tutor makes me seriously distrust him,” Madame Derville sometimes told her. 
“It  seems  to  me  he’s  always  thinking,  and  all  he  thinks  about  is  clever  maneuvering.  He’s  a 
sneak.” 
Julien could not shake his profound humiliation, remaining quite miserable at not having 
known how to reply to Madame de Rênal. 
“A man like me has got to reverse this defeat”―and seizing a moment when they were 
going from one room to another, he fancied himself obliged to give Madame de Rênal a kiss. 
Nothing could have been less productive, nothing less agreeable and, for him as for her, 
nothing more reckless. They were very nearly seen. Madame de Rênal thought he’d gone crazy. 
She was frightened and, above all, shocked. Such clumsy stupidity reminded her of Monsieur 
Valenod. 
“What would have happened to me,” she asked herself, “had I been alone with him?” Her 
sense of virtue was fully restored, because love was fading. 
She was careful to see to it that one of her children was always nearby. 
The day turned boring for Julien: he spent it trying, clumsily, to carry out his battle plan 
for seduction. He never looked at Madame de Rênal―not once―without question marks in 
his eyes. However, fool that he was, he could not help seeing that he was not doing well, trying 
to be agreeable, and even less well, trying to be seductive. 
Madame de Rênal could not recover from her astonishment, finding him so clumsy and at 
the same time so bold. “It’s the natural shyness of love, for a man of such spirit!” she finally 
concluded, rejoicing exceedingly. “Can it be that my rival never loved him!” 
After lunch, Madame de Rênal returned to the drawing room, where she was being visited 
by Monsieur Charcot de Maugiron, deputy governor of the Bray district. She was working at a 
small tapestry loom, raised to a good height. Madame Derville was beside her. Which is how 
things stood, in the bright light of day, when our hero deemed it appropriate to set his boot in 
motion and press it against Madame de Rênal’s pretty foot, whose fishnet stockings and pretty 
Paris shoes had obviously made an impression on the gallant deputy governor of the district. 
Madame  de  Rênal  was  absolutely  terrified.  She  let  her  scissors  drop,  and  her  ball  of 
woolen yarn, and her needle, and the forward movement of Julien’s boot was able to pass for a 
clumsy attempt at breaking the scissors’ fall, since he’d seen them sliding down. Luckily, the 
scissors,  made  of  English  steel,  managed  to  shatter,  and  Madame  de  Rênal  kept  voicing  her 
regret that Julien had not been standing closer. 
“You  saw  them  falling  before  I  did:  you  could  have  stopped  them.  Instead,  all  your 
eagerness did was give me a really good kick in the foot.” 
All this quite deceived the deputy governor of the district. But not Madame Derville. “This 
pretty boy has awfully stupid manners!” she thought. “Even the sophistication of a provincial 
capital would not tolerate such mistakes.” 
Madame de Rênal found an opportunity to say to Julien: 
“Be careful. I command you.” 
He saw how clumsy he had been and was in a surly mood. He considered for some while 
whether or not he ought to be angry about those words: I command you. He was enough of a 
fool  to  think:  “She’s  entitled  to  say  ‘I  order  you,’  if  it’s  something  about  the  children’s 
education.  But  in  dealing  with  my  love,  she’s  got  to  treat  me  as  an  equal.  How  can  I  love 
without equality ...?” And then his mind got busy, trying to track down commonplaces about 
 
 
Chapter Fifteen: Cockcrow 
equality. He repeated, angrily, a line from Corneille19 that Madame Derville had taught him a 
few days earlier: 
Love creates equalities, it doesn’t search for them. 
Stubbornly, he went on playing Don Juan―he who in all his life had never had a mistress. 
All day long, he was a ridiculous fool. He had only one good idea: bored by himself, as well as 
by Madame de Rênal, he was frightened at the prospect of sitting next to her in the garden 
that evening, in the darkness. He told Monsieur de Rênal he was going to Verrières, to see his 
confessor; he left after dinner, nor did he return that night. 
At Verrières, he found Father Chélan in the process of moving. He’d finally been forced 
out of office, and Father Maslon had replaced him. Julien helped the old priest, and had the 
notion of writing to Fouqué that the irresistible vocation he’d felt for the sacred ministry kept 
him, at first, from accepting his friend’s considerate offer, but that he’d just witnessed such an 
act of injustice that, perhaps, it would be better for his own salvation not to take holy orders. 
Julien congratulated himself on the dexterity with which he would make use of the old 
priest’s dismissal, leaving a door open through which he might return to a life of commerce, 
should melancholy prudence prevail, in his heart, over deeds of heroism. 
Chapter Fifteen: Cockcrow 
Latin’s spelling turns amour to death: 
amor, à mort―since love will stifle breath, 
informing us of what our death can cause: 
pain, tears and losses, hell, profound remorse. 
―Blason D’Amour20 
Had Julien been capable of just a bit of the shrewdness which, for no good reason, he was 
sure he possessed, he could have congratulated himself the next day on the effect produced by 
his trip to Verrières. Absence had wiped away his ineptitudes. He was abundantly moody all 
that  day,  and  that  night  a  ridiculous  idea  came  to  him,  with  which  unusual  daring  he 
communicated to Madame de Rênal. 
Hardly  had  they  seated  themselves  in  the  garden,  and  without  waiting  for  darkness  to 
truly  settle  in,  Julien  put  his  mouth  to  Madame  de  Rênal’s  ear  and,  at  the  risk  of  horribly 
compromising her, said: 
“Madame, at two o’clock I will come to your room. I have something I need to tell you.” 
Julien was very afraid that his request would not be agreed to. His seducer role weighed 
on him so horribly that, had he been free to do as he wished, he would have locked himself in 
his  room  for  days  and  never  looked  at  these  ladies.  He  understood  that  his  heavy-handed 
behavior, the night before, had ruined all the promising signs of the previous days. Really, he 
had no idea to what saint he ought to be praying. 
Madame  de  Rênal  responded  to  Julien’s  rude  announcement  with  genuine  indignation, 
not in the least exaggerated. He thought he could hear a certain scorn in her brief reply. He 
was positive that, though she spoke very softly, he could make out the words don’t be a fool. 
Pretending he had something to tell the children, he rose and went to their room, and on his 
return seated himself next to Madame Derville, as far away from Madame de Rênal as he could 
                                                             
19 With the comic playwright Molière and the great tragedian Jean Racine, Pierre Corneille (1606C84) was one 
of  the  triumvirate  of  great  playwrights  of  the  seventeenth  century.  Corneille  in  his  tragedies  was  greatly 
concerned with notions of duty and honor, while his comedies often deal with problems of love and marriage. 
20 A poetic form based on “the minute description of the qualities of an object” (Oxford Companion to French 
Literature). 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
get. He thereby relinquished any possibility of taking her hand. They were discussing weighty 
matters and Julien performed extremely well, aside from intervals of silence during which he 
sat racking his brain. “Why can’t I devise some fine maneuver,” he asked himself, “and compel 
Madame  de  Rênal  to  show  signs  of  the  undoubted  affection  that,  three  days  ago,  she 
convinced me she truly felt!” 
He  was  totally  bewildered  by  the  desperate  state  into  which  he  had  thrown  his  affairs. 
Nothing, however, would have embarrassed him more than success. 
Analyzing matters, back in his room after midnight, his pessimistic perspective led him to 
believe that Madame Derville was contemptuous of him, and things were probably not much 
better with Madame de Rênal. 
In a truly foul mood, and deeply humiliated, Julien could not sleep. He had absolutely no 
intention of giving up his dodges and devices, or of abandoning his plans and living from day 
to day alongside Madame de Rênal, happy as a child with the pleasures each day brought him. 
He  wearied  his  brain,  creating  complicated  schemes;  the  next  moment  he  found  them 
completely absurd. In a word, by the time the ch09teau’s clock sounded two in the morning, he 
was utterly miserable. 
The bells woke him as the crowing of the cock woke Saint Peter.21 He felt himself on the 
verge of a horribly painful episode. He had not given a thought to his rude proposal, from the 
moment he’d made it. How badly it had been received! 
“I told her I’d be there at two o’clock,” he said to himself, rising from his bed. “Maybe I’ll 
be clumsy and gross, the way they think a peasant’s son can’t help but be―Madame Derville 
certainly said as much―but at least I won’t be weak.” 
He was correct to appreciate his courage: never had he squeezed himself into so painfully 
tight a position. Opening his door, he shook so violently that his knees gave way beneath him, 
and he had to support himself against the wall. 
He  wore  nothing  on  his  feet.  He  went  to  listen  at  Monsieur  de  Rênal’s  door,  through 
which he could hear snoring. He was dreadfully disappointed. Now he had no reason at all not 
to go on. But, good God, what would he do in there? He had no plan, and even if he had, he 
was so shaky that he would have had no likelihood of adhering to it. 
At last, suffering all the pain he might have experienced had he been marched along to a 
firing  squad,  he  reached  the  small  antechamber  that  led  into  Madame  de  Rênal’s  room.  He 
opened the door with a trembling hand, making an incredible amount of noise. 
There was light: a small lamp was burning in front of the fireplace. He hadn’t anticipated 
this fresh bad luck. Seeing him enter, Madame de Rênal quickly leaped out of bed. 
“Wretch!” she cried. 
There  was  a  degree  of  confusion.  Julien  forgot  his  useless  plans  and  returned  to  his 
natural  role:  not  to  please  so  bewitching  a  woman  seemed  to  him  the  greatest  of  all 
misfortunes. His only answer to her accusations was to throw himself at her feet, hugging her 
knees. Since she addressed him in extremely harsh terms, he dissolved in tears. 
Several  hours  later,  when  Julien  left  Madame  de  Rênal’s  room,  one  might  have  said,  as 
they say these things in romantic novels, that he had nothing else to desire. In fact, it was the 
love  he  had  inspired,  and  the  unforeseen  effect  of  her  seductive  charms,  that  produced  his 
triumph: nothing in all his inept conniving had brought it about. 
Still,  amid  those  sweetest  of  all  moments,  he  remained  a  victim  of  his  bizarre  pride, 
pretending to be a man accustomed to subjugating women. He made unbelievable attempts to 
spoil what was lovable. Rather than being mindful of the ecstasies he evoked, and the guilty 
                                                             
21 Stendhal frequently used this biblical reference to describe a moment of awakening. 
 
 
Chapter Sixteen: The Day After 
remorse which heightened their intensity, it was the notion of duty that gripped his attention. 
He was afraid of frightful remorse and of perpetual scorn, should he discard the ideal model he 
was intending to follow. In short, it was exactly what made Julien a superior being which kept 
him from enjoying the happiness that had come his way. He was like a young girl of sixteen, 
with a magnificent complexion, who before she goes to a ball is foolish enough to daub herself 
with rouge. 
Mortally afraid that Julien might indeed come as promised, Madame de Rênal had been in 
the clutch of cruel anxiety. Julien’s tears and his despair profoundly upset her. 
Even when there was nothing left to refuse him, she pushed Julien away, her indignation 
very  real,  and  then  threw  herself  into  his  arms.  There  was  no  reason  or  consistency  in  her 
behavior. She saw herself damned for all eternity, and tried to hide hell’s images from her eyes 
by endlessly caressing him. In a word, our hero’s happiness was complete, not excluding even 
the  burning  response  he  had  elicited  from  the  woman―had  he  been  able  to  enjoy  it.  Even 
Julien’s departure did not stop the ecstasies that, in spite of herself, were shaking her, or the 
battles with remorse that tore her apart. 
“My God! Happiness―love―that’s all there is to it?” This was Julien’s first thought, as he 
came back to his room. He was in that state of shock and restless uncertainty into which souls 
fall, having just attained what they’ve so long craved. A soul accustomed to desiring now has 
nothing  left  to  desire,  but  has  not  as  yet  acquired  memories.  Like  a  soldier  newly  returned 
from  military  review,  Julien  was  busily  examining  all  the  details  of  his  conduct.  “Was  there 
anything lacking, anything I owed it to myself to do? Did I play my role to the fullest?” 
And what role was that? Why, that of a man in the habit of brilliant performances with 
women. 
Chapter Sixteen: The Day After 
He turned his lip to hers, and with his hand 
Called back the tangles of her wandering hair. 
―Byron, Don Juan, Canto 1, Stanza 170 
Luckily for Julien’s glory, Madame de Rênal had been deeply upset, deeply astonished, to 
realize that the man who, in a flash, had become the whole world to her, was an idiot. 
As she was persuading him to leave, seeing dawn was near: 
“Oh God!” she said. “If my husband’s heard anything, I’m lost.” 
Having  had  the  opportunity  to  prepare  a  few  choice  phrases,  Julien  called  this  one  to 
mind: 
“Would you regret your life?” 
“Ah,  very  much,  right  at  the  moment.  But  I  wouldn’t  regret  having  known  you.”  Julien 
thought it better suited his dignity to leave her in broad daylight, with an infinite recklessness. 
The perpetual care he lavished on even the most minor aspects of his life, while indulging 
himself  in  the  craziness  of  appearing  to  be  an  experienced  man  of  the  world,  had  a  single 
advantage: when next he saw Madame de Rênal, at lunch, his conduct was a masterpiece of 
prudence. 
As  for  her,  she  was  unable  to  look  at  him  without  blushing  to  her  eyelids,  but  neither 
could  she  live  for  a  second  without  looking  at  him.  She  was  aware  of  the  problem,  and 
redoubled her efforts to conceal it. Julien looked at her once and once only. At first, Madame 
de  Rênal  was  grateful  for  his  prudence.  Soon,  seeing  that  this  single  glance  would  not  be 
repeated, she was alarmed: “Doesn’t he love me anymore?” she said to herself. “Alas, I’m surely 
too old for him. I’m ten years his senior.” 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
As  they  left  the  dining  room  for  the  garden,  she  squeezed  Julien’s  hand.  Startled  by  so 
extraordinary  a  sign  of  love,  he  looked  at  her  passionately,  for  at  lunch  he  had  thought  her 
wonderfully pretty, and when he’d kept his eyes lowered, he’d spent the time rehearsing her 
charms. His look soothed Madame de Rênal. It did not completely quiet her anxieties, but on 
the other hand her anxieties virtually wiped out the remorse she felt toward her husband. 
At lunch, her husband had noticed nothing. Not so Madame Derville, who believed her 
friend  was  on  the  point  of  succumbing.  All  through  the  day,  her  resolute  and  mordant 
friendship did not hold back, but spoke words of wisdom to Madame de Rênal, determined to 
show her, and in hideous colors, the dangers she was running. 
Madame de Rênal was burning to be alone with Julien; she wanted to ask him if he still 
loved her. For all the unchangeable sweetness of her nature, more than once she came close to 
telling Madame Derville exactly how anxious she was. 
In  the  garden  that  evening,  Madame  Derville  managed  things  so  well  that  she  located 
herself  between  Madame  de  Rênal  and  Julien.  Madame  de  Rênal,  who’d  been  indulging  in 
delightful  anticipation  of  squeezing  Julien’s  hand,  and  bringing  it  to  her  lips,  could  not  so 
much as speak a word to him. 
Disappointment made her even more upset. Remorse began devouring her. She’d scolded 
Julien so harshly for his reckless visit, the night before, that she worried he would not come 
this night. She left the garden early, and settled herself in her room. But unable to bear her 
impatience,  she  went  and  put  her  ear  to  Julien’s  door.  Despite  the  uncertainty  and  passion 
gnawing at her, she did not dare go in. That seemed to her the most degrading thing anyone 
could do (as the provincial proverb puts it). 
The servants were not all in bed. Prudence finally forced her to go back to her room. Two 
hours of waiting were, for her, two centuries of torture. 
But Julien was so faithful to what he called his duty that he’d never have failed to carry 
out the plan he’d formulated, point by careful point. 
Just  as  one  o’clock  was  sounding,  he  made  a  stealthy  escape  from  his  room,  sure  that 
Monsieur de Rênal was deeply asleep, and came to Madame de Rênal. He found real pleasure 
in her love that day, since he was less concerned with the role he was supposed to be playing. 
He had eyes to see with, and ears that heard. What Madame de Rênal told him about her age 
helped put him at his ease. 
“Alas,  I’m  ten  years  older  than  you!  How  can  you  love  me!”  she  repeated  rather 
senselessly, and because it weighed on her. 
Julien had not thought of this misfortune, but he saw it was real, and forgot virtually all 
his fear of being laughed at. 
His  stupid  notion  of  being  seen  as  an  inferior  lover,  because  of  his  inferior  birth,  also 
disappeared.  And  as  Julien’s  ecstasy  reassured  his  timid  mistress,  she  began  to  recover  both 
happiness and her capacity for thinking more clearly about her lover. Luckily, he had almost 
entirely lost, that night, the false assumption that had transmuted their rendezvous the night 
before into a victory rather than a delight. Had she been aware of his careful role-playing, that 
mournful discovery would have forever destroyed for her every possibility of happiness. All she 
could see was a faintly wistful effect caused by the disproportion in their ages. 
Although Madame de Rênal had paid no attention to speculation about love, it happens 
that differences in age, next to differences in wealth, are one of the great themes of provincial 
wit, whenever the conversation turns to matters of love. 
Nor was it more than a few days before Julien, restored by the ardor natural to his age, 
became a wildly passionate lover. 
 
 
Chapter Sixteen: The Day After 
“I must admit,” he told himself, “that hers is a soul of angelic goodness―and how could 
she be any prettier?” 
His notion of playing a role had very nearly vanished. In a moment of abandon, he had 
confessed to her all his anxieties. This intimate avowal carried to its very fullest the passion he 
had inspired. “So I’ve never actually had a lucky rival!” she said to herself, delighted. She was 
brave enough to ask about the picture, so important to him; he swore that the painting had 
portrayed a man. 
When Madame de Rênal was calm enough for reflection, she was no longer astonished 
that such happiness existed, and that she had ever doubted it. 
“Ah,” she said to herself, “if only I had known Julien ten years ago, when I could still pass 
as pretty!” 
Julien had no such thoughts. Ambition was still his central passion: that was indeed his 
pleasure  in  possessing―he,  such  a  poor  creature,  so  unlucky,  so  despised―a  woman  as 
aristocratic as she was beautiful. His adoration of her, his ecstasies at the sight of his beloved’s 
charms,  finally  reassured  her,  at  least  a  little,  about  the  difference  in  their  ages.  Had  she 
possessed some of the sophistication a woman of thirty has long since come to enjoy, in any of 
the  world’s  more  civilized  countries,  she  would  have  been  quiveringly  concerned  about  the 
durability of a love that apparently thrived only on astonishment and the raptures of vanity. 
When he forgot ambition, briefly, Julien was extravagantly pleased even by Madame de 
Rênal’s  hats  and  by  her  dresses.  He  could  not  get  enough  of  the  pleasures  he  took  in  her 
perfume. He opened her glass cabinet and spent hours on end admiring the beauty as well as 
the placement of everything he found. His beloved, leaning against him, watched him as he 
looked  at  her  jewels  and  her  frills  and  laces,  the  presents  that,  before  a  marriage,  fill  the 
wedding baskets set out on display. 
“I should have married a man like him!” Madame de Rênal sometimes thought. “What a 
burning soul! How ravishing life would be, with him!” 
Julien  had  never  found  himself  so  close  to  these  awesome  instruments  of  feminine 
artillery. “It’s not possible,” he said to himself, “that Paris could have anything more beautiful!” 
And then he could see nothing objectionable in his happiness. Quite often honest admiration, 
and  his  mistress’s  ecstasies,  made  him  forget  the  empty  theory  that,  early  on  in  this 
relationship,  had  tied  him  into  knots  and  made  him  very  nearly  ridiculous.  There  were 
moments  when,  despite  his  habitual  hypocrisy,  he  discovered  a  wonderful  sweetness  in 
confiding  to  this  noble  lady,  for  whom  he  had  so  much  admiration,  his  ignorance  about  all 
manner  of  society’s  little  ways.  His  mistress’s  rank  seemed  to  lift  him  equally  high.  As  for 
Madame  de  Rênal,  she  found  the  sweetest  and  most  moral  of  sensual  pleasures  in  teaching 
him about this abundance of trifles―he, a young man of genius, widely regarded as someone 
who, one day, would go far. Even the deputy governor of the district, and Monsieur Valenod, 
did not hesitate to admire him; they struck her, because of that, as less stupid. 
Madame Derville could not have agreed, not at all. Depressed by what she thought she 
was seeing, and finding her wise advice hateful to a woman literally out of her mind, she left 
Vergy  without  any  explanation―which,  indeed,  no  one  bothered  to  ask  of  her.  Madame  de 
Rênal  shed  a  few  tears,  and  soon  realized  that  her  happiness  had  vastly  increased.  With 
Madame Derville gone, she could spend almost the entire day alone with her lover. 
More and more, Julien as well gave himself up to the sweet society of his beloved, though 
when he spent too long alone with her Fouqué’s fateful offer came to mind, upsetting him all 
over again. There were moments, during the first days of this new existence, when he, who had 
never  loved,  who  had  never  been  loved  by  anyone,  took  such  delicious  pleasure  in  being 
honest that, indeed, he very nearly confessed to Madame de Rênal the ambition which, until 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
then, had been the absolute essence of his being. He would have liked to consult her about the 
strange attraction he felt for Fouqué’s offer, but a small episode occurred which put an end to 
all candor. 
Chapter Seventeen: The First Deputy 
O, how this spring of love resembleth 
The uncertain glory of an April day: 
Which now shows all the beauty of the sun, 
And by and by a cloud takes all away! 
―Two Gentlemen of Verona 22 
One evening at sunset, seated beside his beloved at the far side of the orchard, too distant 
for  any  interruption,  he  was  daydreaming  most  profoundly.  “Do  such  sweet  moments,”  he 
wondered, “last forever?” Trying to find the right profession was an intense preoccupation; he 
regretted that great, fast-approaching misfortune that ends childhood and ruins the early years 
of young men without money. 
“Oh,” he exclaimed, “God obviously sent Napoleon for the youth of France! Who can take 
his place? What will they do without him, those miserable ones―richer by far than me―who 
have  precisely  enough  money  to  get  themselves  a  good  education,  but  not  enough,  at  age 
twenty, to pay off the right people and push themselves into a career! Whatever we do,” he 
added  with  a  deep  sigh,  “this  fateful,  imperishable  memory  will  forever  keep  us  from  being 
happy!” 
Suddenly he saw Madame de Rênal frowning. She took on a cold, disdainful air: that way 
of  thinking  seemed  to  her  better  suited  to  servants.  Raised  with  the  idea  that  she  was 
extremely rich, it pleased her to assume that Julien had been, too. She loved him a thousand 
times more than life itself, and never gave a thought to money. 
Julien had no idea what she was thinking. Her frown brought him back to earth. He had 
enough presence of mind to be careful how he spoke, explaining to the noble lady seated so 
close beside him, on the grassy slope, that the words he’d just repeated were ones he’d heard 
on his visit to his friend, the timber merchant. This accounted for the profanity. 
“Well then! Don’t have anything more to do with those people,” said Madame de Rênal, 
not yet abandoning the cold look that, all of a sudden, had replaced her glances of the liveliest 
tenderness. 
Her frown, or rather the regret he felt for his own carelessness, was the first blow suffered 
by the illusion that had been sweeping him away. He said to himself: “She is good and sweet; 
her liking for me is strong; but she’s been raised in the enemy camp―and they’re quite right to 
be  afraid  of  high-minded  men  with  good  educations,  yet  without  the  money  to  launch 
themselves on careers. What would become of them, these aristocrats, if we were allowed to 
fight them on equal terms! Me, for example: If I were mayor of Verrières, I’d be well meaning 
and honest, the way, at bottom, Monsieur de Rênal is! But how I’d sweep away Father Maslon 
and  Monsieur  Valenod,  with  all  their  thievish  trickery!  How  justice  would  triumph  in 
Verrières! It’s not their ability that’s stopping me. They bungle along, that’s all they do.” 
That day, Julien’s happiness had been close to stability. All that was missing was for our 
hero to have the courage of honesty. He needed the courage to do battle, but right on the spot. 
Madame de Rênal had been stunned by Julien’s words: upper-class people are always saying 
                                                             
22  Stendhal  was  a  great  admirer  of  Shakespeare;  he  wrote  a  study  entitled  Racine  and  Shakespeare  (1825), 
forcefully attacking the traditional stature given to Racine and setting up Shakespeare, instead, as a model for 
young writers (of the third decade of the nineteenth century) to emulate. 
 
 
Chapter Seventeen: The First Deputy 
that  we  could  certainly  see  Robespierre’s  return,  precisely  because  of  the  lower-class  people 
who  are  being  elevated  far  too  high.  Madame  de  Rênal’s  coldness  lasted  a  long  time,  and 
seemed to Julien unusually obvious. And the fear of having spoken unpleasantly to him, even 
indirectly, was followed by her disgust at what he had said. Unhappiness was clearly displayed 
on her face, so cloudless and simple when she was happy and untroubled. 
Julien did not dare, now, to daydream unguardedly. Calmer, and less loving, he thought it 
unwise to go to her room that night. It would be better if she came to his: if a servant saw her 
hurrying  through  the  house,  there  would  be  twenty  different  excuses  for  so  quick  paced  a 
walk. 
But this arrangement, too, had its difficulties. Fouqué had sent Julien volumes that he, as 
a student of theology, had never been able to ask for, at a bookshop. He dared open them only 
at night. He was deeply pleased that no visitor could interrupt him; before the little episode in 
the orchard, any such expectation would have rendered him unable to focus on what he was 
reading. 
Madame de Rênal had shown him an entirely new way to understand these books. He had 
ventured to ask her a horde of questions:  they were all about small issues, but ignorance of 
them  simply  checked  the  mind  of  a  young  man  not  born  into  good  society―no  matter  the 
natural genius he seemed to have. 
This education, administered by love and given him by a wonderfully ignorant woman, 
was sheer happiness. Julien immediately began to perceive society as, today, it actually is. His 
insights were not blurred by an account of what it had once been like, whether two thousand 
years  ago  or  merely  sixty  years,  in  the  days  of  Voltaire  and  Louis  XV.23  To  his  inexpressible 
pleasure, a veil dropped away from his eyes: he at last understood what had been going on in 
Verrières. 
To begin with, there were complex machinations, set in motion two years earlier by the 
governor at Besan04on. These had the support of letters from Paris, written by men at the very 
highest levels. It was all about arranging for Monsieur de Moirod―the most pious man in the 
whole region―to be the first (not the second, but the first) deputy to the mayor of Verrières. 
He was in competition with a certain very wealthy manufacturer, who absolutely had to 
be shoved down into the post of second assistant. 
This allowed Julien to understand, at last, the hints he’d overheard when the region’s high 
society came to dinner at Monsieur de Rênal’s. These men of privilege were deeply concerned 
with  who  got the  first  deputy’s  post,  though  neither  the  rest  of  the  town,  and  above  all  the 
liberals, suspected even the possibility of such an issue. What made this so important a matter, 
as everyone knows, was that the eastern side of Verrières’s main street needed to be moved 
back a good nine feet, that thoroughfare having been designated a national highway. 
Now, if Monsieur de Moirod, who owned three houses that would have to be moved to 
widen  the  road,  should  manage  to  become  first  deputy,  he  would  automatically  become 
mayor, should Monsieur de Rênal be elected to the Chamber of Deputies, and he would close 
his  eyes,  and  the  houses  jutting  out  into  the  public  road  would  be  quietly  and  invisibly 
repaired,  in  assorted  small  ways,  so  they  could  stay  where  they  were  for  another  hundred 
years.  For  all  Monsieur  de  Moirod’s  well-known  probity,  and  his  reputation  for  high  piety, 
there was no doubt that he would go along, because he had a great many children. Nine of the 
houses scheduled to be moved were owned by the best people in Verrières. 
                                                             
23  The  great  philosophe  Voltaire  (1694C1778)  and  the  legendarily  debauched  King  Louis  XV  (born  1710, 
reigned 1715C75) personify here the enlightenment and the excesses of eighteenth-century France. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
To  Julien,  this  plotting  was  far  more  important  than  the  history  of  the  Battle  of 
Fontenoy,24 an event he’d become aware of, for the first time, in one of the books Fouqué had 
sent  him.  There  had  been  things  that  astonished  Julien,  in  the  five  years  since  he’d  begun 
studying,  at  night,  with  the  parish  priest.  But  circumspection  and  humility  being  primary 
qualities for a student of theology, it had always been impossible for him to ask questions. 
One day, Madame de Rênal gave an order to her husband’s valet, Julien’s enemy. 
“But, madame, today’s the last Friday of the month,” the man replied rather strangely. 
“All right, go,” said Madame de Rênal. 
“Oh, fine,” said Julien, “he’s going to that hay warehouse, the one that used to be a church 
and, not long ago, was put back into some sort of churchly service. But what’s he going to do 
there? This is one of those mysteries I’ve never been able to unravel.” 
“It’s  a  completely  respectable  institution,  but  very  odd,”  replied  Madame  de  Rênal. 
“Women  are  not  allowed  in.  All  I  know  is  that  everyone  is  on  familiar  terms  with  everyone 
else. For example, that servant will meet Monsieur Valenod, and that proud, stupid man won’t 
be in the least put out to hear himself addressed, intimately, as ‘Saint-Jean,’ and he’ll answer 
the servant just the same way. If you’re really interested in finding out, I’ll ask Monsieur de 
Maugiron and Monsieur Valenod for the details. It costs us twenty francs for every one of the 
servants, to keep them from cutting our throats, some fine day.” 
Time  flew  on.  Thoughts  of  his  mistress’s  charms  distracted  Julien  from  his  dark 
ambitions. Although he did not realize it,  the fact that he was required not to say  anything 
about  sad  or  rational  matters,  since  they  were  each  on  different  sides,  added  both  to  his 
happiness and to the power she had acquired over him. 
When the presence of very perceptive children forced them to speak only in the language 
of cold reason, Julien watched her with the glowing eyes of love and, perfectly docile, listened 
as she explained how the world worked. Often, in the middle of her narrative of some masterly 
bit of knavery, having to do with constructing a road or providing supplies, Madame de Rênal 
would suddenly forget herself, losing control almost to the point of frenzy, and Julien would 
have to speak sharply to her, for she was allowing herself familiarities with him, exactly the 
sort of intimate gestures she used with the children. And there were days when she imagined 
loving  him  as  if  he  were  her  child.  Didn’t  she  always  have  to  answer  his  simple-minded 
questions about a thousand elementary things, matters of which no well-born child of fifteen 
would  be  ignorant?  The  next  minute,  she  adored  him  as  her  master.  His  genius  almost 
frightened her: she thought herself able to see in this young ecclesiastic, each day more clearly, 
the  great  man  of  the  future.  She  could  see  him  as  the  pope,  she  could  see  him  as  prime 
minister, like de Richelieu. 
“Will I live long enough to see you in your glory?” she would say to Julien. “There’s a place 
all ready for a great man. The monarchy and the Church both need him.” 
                                                             
24 A great French victory in 1745; at Fontenoy, in Belgium, the French, commanded by the Marshal de Saxe, 
defeated the combined forces of the British, Dutch, and Austrians. 
 
 
Chapter Eighteen: A King In Verrières 
Chapter Eighteen: A King In Verrières 
Is that all you’re good for, to be thrown away, like the corpse of a country, having no soul and your veins 
bloodless? 
―Sermon by the Bishop, at Saint Clemen’s Chapel 
On  the  third  of  September,  at  ten  o’clock  at  night,  a  gendarme  woke  up  everyone  in 
Verrières, galloping up the highway. He brought the news that His Majesty, the King of ―――
,  was  arriving  on  Friday  next,  and  would  be  staying  till  Tuesday.  The  head  of  the  district 
authorized―that  is,  ordered―a  guard  of  honor  to  be  assembled:  every  possible  pomp  and 
ceremony was to be exhibited. A mounted courier had been dispatched to Verrières. Monsieur 
de  Rênal  arrived  that  night  and  found  the  town  all  aflutter.  Everyone  had  ambitions;  those 
with the least pretentions were renting their balconies for observing the king’s entrance. 
Who would command the guard of honor? Monsieur de Rênal saw at once how vital it 
was,  on  behalf  of  those  whose  houses  might  have  to  be  moved,  that  Monsieur  de  Moirod 
should  be  the  commander.  This  could  establish  his  claim  to  be  first  deputy.  There  was  no 
difficulty  about  Monsieur  de  Moirod’s  piety,  which  was  beyond  all  comparison,  but  he  had 
never  before  ridden  a  horse.  He  was  a  man  of  thirty-six,  profoundly  fearful,  and  equally 
terrified of tumbling off and becoming an object of ridicule. 
His Honor the Mayor paid him a call at five the next morning. 
“Please be aware, monsieur, that I come seeking your advice, exactly as if you already held 
the post that all upright people wish you to have. In our unfortunate town, industrialists are 
becoming wealthy, liberals are turning into millionaires: they long for power, they know how 
to capitalize on every chance. Let us consider the interests of the king, of the monarchy and, 
above all, of our holy religion. How would you feel, monsieur, if you were offered command of 
the guard of honor?” 
In spite of the terror that horses inspired in him, Monsieur de Moirod finally accepted the 
honor, as a form of martyrdom. “I know how to behave properly,” he told the mayor. There 
was  barely  enough  time  to  put  the  uniforms  in  order:  they  had  last  been  used  seven  years 
before when a prince of royal blood passed through. 
At  seven  o’clock,  Madame  de  Rênal  arrived  from  Vergy,  together  with  Julien  and  the 
children. She found her drawing room filled with liberal ladies, preaching amalgamation of the 
two political parties, and asking her to persuade her husband to grant them, too, a place in the 
guard of honor. One of them pretended that if her husband was not chosen, grief would drive 
him  into  bankruptcy.  Madame  de  Rênal  quickly  sent  them  all  away.  She  seemed  much 
preoccupied. 
Julien was astonished but, even more, angered that she was making a mystery of whatever 
might  be  troubling  her.  “I  thought  as  much,”  he  told  himself,  bitterly.  “The  joy  of  receiving 
royalty in her house drives love from her mind. All this fussing simply dazzles her. She’ll love 
me again, when these class-inspired notions stop bothering her brain.” 
What truly amazed him was that, on these accounts, he loved her even more. 
Decorators began pouring into the house; he tried in vain to find an opportunity to say 
anything to her. He finally managed, just as she was coming out of his room, carrying off one 
of his suits. He tried to speak to her. She refused to listen. “I’m really a fool to love a woman 
like this: ambition turns her just as crazy as her husband.” 
She was crazier. One of her greatest longings, which she had never confessed to Julien, for 
fear of shocking him, was to see him out of his dreary black garments, even if only for a single 
day. With a dexterity quite remarkable in a woman so straightforward, first she got Monsieur 
de Moirod, and then the deputy governor of the district, Monsieur de Maugiron, to agree that 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Julien should be included in the guard of honor, in preference to five or six young men, sons of 
very wealthy industrialists, two of whom, at least, were of exemplary piety. Monsieur Valenod, 
who planned to loan his dashing light carriage to the prettiest women in town, and get them 
to  admire  his  handsome  Normands,  agreed  to  let  Julien  have  one  of  his  horses,  though  he 
loathed him. But all the honor guards would have, or would borrow, gorgeous sky blue outfits 
with  two  silver  colonel’s  shoulder-pieces,  last  put  on  glittering  display  seven  years  earlier. 
Madame de Rênal wanted a new costume, and it took her no more than four days to send to 
Besan04on,  and  to  receive  from  there  an  entire  uniform,  complete  with  sword  and  cap,  and 
everything else belonging to a guard of honor. Amusingly, she thought it unwise to have all 
this made in Verrières. She wanted to surprise him, him and the whole town. 
Once he had behind him the tasks of creating the guard of honor, and of building public 
spirit, the mayor was able to busy himself with a great religious ceremony. The King of ――― 
would  not  want  to  pass  through  Verrières  and  not  visit  the  famous  relic  of  Saint  Clemens, 
preserved in Upper Bray, not far from the town proper. It would be desirable to have as many 
clerics as possible, but this was the hardest thing to arrange. Father Maslon, the new parish 
priest, wished at all costs to avoid including Father Chélan. Monsieur de Rênal tried to explain 
to him that this would not be wise, but in vain. The Marquis de La Mole, whose ancestors had 
for so long been royal governors of the entire province, had been appointed to accompany the 
King of ―――. He had known Father Chélan for thirty years. He would surely ask for news of 
him, when he got to Verrières, and should he find that the old priest was out of favor, and out 
of office, he was exactly the sort who would call on the old priest, in the little house to which 
he had retired, and bring with him everyone he could from the whole attending train. What a 
slap in the face! 
“I would be dishonored both here and in Besan04on,” declared Father Maslon, “if he were 
included among my priests. Good Lord, he’s a heretic!”1 
“No matter what you say, my dear Father,” replied Monsieur de Rênal, “I cannot expose 
the  administration  of  Verrières  to  an  insult  from  Monsieur  de  La  Mole.  You’re  not  familiar 
with him: though he’s a courtier of considerable weight, out here in the countryside he wields 
a singularly wicked tongue, always trying to embarrass people. He’s quite capable, simply for 
his own amusement, of covering us with ridicule in every liberal’s eyes.” 
It was only between Saturday night and Sunday morning, after three days of bargaining, 
that Father Maslon yielded  to the mayor’s fear, which was evolving into courage. A  sugared 
letter had to be written to Father Chélan, seeking his assistance for the reliquary ceremony at 
Upper  Bray,  provided  his  great  age  and  his  physical  limitations  would  allow  him  to  come. 
Father Chélan requested, and received, a letter of invitation for Julien, who was to accompany 
him, as a subdeacon. 
Beginning Friday morning, thousands of peasants, tumbling down from the surrounding 
mountains,  inundated  the  streets  of  Verrières.  The  weather  was  bright  and  sunny.  At  last, 
toward three o’clock, the crowd was suddenly aroused: a great fire had been seen on a high 
rock  about  three  miles  from  Verrières.  This  announced  that  the  king  had  just  crossed  the 
department’s borders. Immediately, the ringing of all the bells, and repeated salutes fired by 
an old Spanish cannon owned by the town, signaled the collective joy on this grand occasion. 
Most of the inhabitants climbed onto rooftops. The women were all on balconies. The guard of 
                                                             
1 A Jansenist, used here as a sort of generic epithet, refers to the seventeenth-century Catholic sect known for 
their austere and strict devotion, as illustrated by Father Pirard. Similar to the Calvinists, believing like them 
in  predestination  and  the  need  for  divine  grace,  they  were  strictly  Catholic  in  their  belief  in  the  papal 
hierarchy, relics, miracles, etc. The Jansenists were great enemies of the more political and indulgent Jesuits, 
and Stendhal plays on that historical rivalry in The Red and the Black. 
 
 
Chapter Eighteen: A King In Verrières 
honor was set in motion. The glittering uniforms were admired; everyone recognized a parent, 
a friend. Monsieur de Moirod’s fear was laughed at: he rode with his wary hand ready, at any 
moment, to clutch at his saddlebow. But one sighting made everyone forget all the others: the 
lead horseman in the ninth rank was a very handsome young fellow, very slender, and at first 
totally unrecognized. Soon a cry of indignation from some quarters, and silent astonishment 
from others, proclaimed universal astonishment. The horseman, mounted on one of Monsieur 
Valenod’s Normand steeds, was perceived to be young Sorel, the carpenter’s son. With a single 
voice,  all  of  them,  and  especially  the  liberals,  cried  out  against  the  mayor.  Just  because  this 
little workman, disguised as an ecclesiastic, tutored his brats, he’d had the audacity to include 
him in the guard of honor, to the prejudice of so-and-so and so-and-so, wealthy industrialists! 
These  gentlemen,  declared  a  lady  banker,  really  ought  to  publicly  snub  this  impudent  little 
meddler, who’d been born on a dung heap. 
“He’s a sneaky sort, and he’s wearing a sword,” said a man nearby. “He’s vicious enough to 
slash them across the face.” 
The aristocracy’s remarks were deadlier. The ladies wondered if it had been the mayor all 
by  himself  who’d  perpetrated  this  gross  impropriety.  Most  of  them  knew  the  mayor’s 
contempt for those of low birth. 
While he was the subject of so much chatter, Julien was the happiest of men. Naturally 
bold,  he  handled  himself  better  on  horseback  than  did  most  of  the  young  men  of  this 
mountain town. He could tell from the women’s eyes that they were talking about him. 
His  silver  shoulder-pieces  shone  more  brightly,  since  they  were  new.  His  horse  kept 
rearing and bucking; he was overflowing with joy. 
But his happiness knew no bounds when, as they passed beneath the walls of the old fort, 
the sound of the little cannon made his horse jump out of line. By great good luck, he did not 
fall,  and  from  that  moment  he  felt  himself  a  hero.  He  was  an  artillery  officer  in  Napoleon’s 
army, he was charging at an enemy battery. 
There was one person still happier. She had first seen him as he passed the town hall’s 
casement  windows.  Then,  riding  in  a  light  carriage,  and  quickly  making  a  large  detour,  she 
arrived just in time to shudder as his horse drove out of the line. Finally, her carriage dashing 
at full gallop, heading out one of the other town gates, she managed to reappear at the spot 
where the king was to pass, and proceeded on just behind the slowly advancing lines, no more 
then twenty paces distant, in the middle of all the noble dust. Ten thousand peasants shouted 
when the mayor had the honor of speechifying for His Majesty: “Long live the king!” Another 
hour afterward, when all the speeches had been listened out to the very last word, the king 
actually  entered  the  town  and  the  little  cannon  began  to  fire  like  mad.  Alas,  then  came  an 
accident―not to the cannoneers, who had proven their worth at Leipzig and Montmirail,2 but 
to the future first deputy, Monsieur de Moirod. His horse threw him off, and he landed, gently, 
right in the only pool of mud along the whole route, which was scandalous, because he had to 
be hauled out of there before the king’s carriage went by. 
His Majesty descended in front of the beautiful new church, which that day was decked 
out with its crimson banners. The king then had to eat his dinner, and immediately thereafter 
get back into his carriage so he could venerate the relic of Saint Clemens. The king had barely 
reached  the  church  when  Julien  came  galloping  toward  Monsieur  de  Rênal’s  house.  There, 
with regret, he took off his lovely sky blue outfit, his sword, and his silver shoulder-pieces, in 
order  to  reassume  his  usual  shabby  black  garments.  Climbing  back  onto  the  horse,  he  was 
                                                             
2 The defeat at Leipzig (October 1813) and the victory at Montmirail (February 1814) were part of Napoleon’s 
long and ultimately doomed efforts to preserve his throne after the disastrous campaign against Russia (1812). 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
soon  at  Upper  Bray,  which  lay  along  the  heights  of  a  singularly  lovely  hill.  “Enthusiasm 
multiplies these peasants,” he thought. “Verrières is totally clogged, but here are more than ten 
thousand more, swarming around this old church.” Half ruined by revolutionary vandalism,3 it 
had been magnificently rebuilt, since the Restoration of the Monarchy, and there was already 
talk about miracles. Julien found Father Chélan, who first sharply rebuked him, and then gave 
him  a  cassock  and  a  white  overrobe.  Julien  quickly  dressed  himself  and  followed  Father 
Chélan,  who  went  looking  for  the  young  Bishop  of  Agde.  He  was  Monsieur  de  La  Mole’s 
nephew, recently elevated to the post, and was supposed to display the relic to the king. But 
the bishop could not be found. 
The  priests  grew  impatient.  They  awaited  their  leader  in  the  old  church’s  dark,  Gothic 
cloister. Forty-eight priests had been brought together, thus figuratively reconstituting the old 
Canonical Chapter of Upper Bray, which before the Revolution had been composed of forty-
eight  members.  After  three-quarters  of  an  hour  discussing  the  bishop’s  youthfulness,  the 
priests thought it appropriate that the dean of the chapter seek out the lord bishop, informing 
him that the king would soon be arriving, so he had better come to the cloister right away. 
Father Chélan’s great age had made him the dean. Despite his testiness to Julien, he indicated 
that the young man was to accompany him. Julien wore his surplice extremely well. Employing 
a  style  of  ecclesiastical  grooming  about  which  I  know  nothing,  he  had  smoothed  down  his 
beautiful  hair  so  that  it  lay  entirely  flat,  though  by  an  oversight  (which  increased  Father 
Chélan’s ill humor), under the long folds of his cassock he was visibly still wearing his guard of 
honor spurs. 
When  they  reached  the  bishop’s  chamber,  the  great  man’s  servants,  festooned  with 
decorations,  curtly  replied  to  the  old  priest  that  His  Lordship  could  not  be  seen.  And  they 
made  fun  of  him,  when  Father  Chélan  tried  to  explain  that,  given  his  status  as  dean  of  the 
noble  Canonical  Chapter  of  Upper  Bray,  he  was  entitled  to  be  admitted  to  the  presiding 
bishop’s presence whenever he liked. 
Julien was too haughty not to be shocked by these lackeys’ insolence. He began to go from 
one  door  to  another,  through  the  old  church’s  interior,  trying  every  door  he  met  with.  One 
small door opened at his touch, and he found himself in the middle of an anteroom full of His 
Lordship’s valets, all wearing black and wearing gold chains around their necks. Seeing how 
urgent he was, these gentlemen thought he’d been sent for by the bishop and allowed him to 
proceed.  A  few  more  steps,  and  Julien  found  himself  in  a  huge  Gothic  hall,  extremely  dark, 
paneled  in  black  oak;  with  a  single  exception,  the  high-pointed  Gothic  windows  had  been 
bricked over. There had been no attempt to disguise this coarse bricklaying, which was in sad 
contrast  to  the  archaic  beauty  of  the  woodwork.  The  two  longer  walls  of  the  hall,  famous 
among Burgundy’s antiquarians, and which Duke Charles the Bold had erected, about 1470, in 
expiation  of  one  or  another  sin,  were  furnished  with  wooden  stalls,  richly  carved.  All  the 
mysteries of the Apocalypse were there, portrayed by wood painted in various colors. 
Julien  was  moved  by  this  melancholy  magnificence,  so  disfigured  by  bare  bricks  and 
untouched white plaster. He stopped, silent. At the far end of the hall, near the one window 
through  which  daylight  penetrated,  he  saw  a  large  swing-mounted  mirror,  framed  in 
mahogany. A young man in a purple cassock and a lace overrobe, his head bare, was standing 
three steps from the glass. It seemed an odd furnishing for such a place; clearly, it had been 
brought from town. Julien noted how the young man was frowning; the mirror showed him 
making the sign of the cross with his right hand, in utter gravity. 
                                                             
3  Anticlerical  feeling  ran  strong  during  the  Revolution;  many  churches  and  other  religious  buildings  were 
badly damaged. 
 
 
Chapter Eighteen: A King In Verrières 
“What is this all about?” he thought. “Is it some preparatory ceremony this young priest is 
performing? Perhaps he’s the bishop’s secretary. ...He’ll be just as insolent as the other lackeys. 
Ah well, no matter: let’s give it a try.” 
He walked carefully down the length of the hall, his eyes focused on  that one window, 
watching  the  young  man,  who  went  on  giving  the  benediction,  slowly,  but  over  and  over, 
never resting for a moment. 
As he grew closer, he saw quite clearly the young man’s irritated face. The richness of his 
lace overrobe caused Julien to stop, still some steps from the magnificent mirror. 
“It’s my duty to speak,” he told himself, at last. But the hall’s beauty had moved him, and 
he felt himself already wounded in advance by the harsh words he expected to hear. 
The young man saw Julien in his mirror, turned around, and immediately dropping his air 
of irritation, spoke in the gentlest tones: 
“So, sir! Is everything finally ready?” 
Julien stood there, stunned. As the young man had swung toward him, Julien had seen 
the  great  cross  hanging  on  his  breast.  This  was  the  Bishop  of  Agde.4  “So  young,”  thought 
Julien, “no more than six or eight years older than me! ...” 
And he was ashamed of his spurs. 
“My lord,” he replied shyly, “I have been sent by the dean of the chapter, Father Chélan.” 
“Ah!  He  comes  very  highly  recommended,”  said  the  bishop,  his  courtly  manner 
redoubling Julien’s fascination. “But I must beg your pardon, sir. I took you for the person who 
was supposed to fetch my miter. They did a ghastly job of packing it in Paris: the silver foil 
toward the top is horribly damaged. It would be a most ugly sight,” the young bishop added 
sadly, “so I still have to wait!” 
“My lord, I’ll go fetch your miter, if Your Grace will allow me.” 
Julien’s beautiful eyes had their effect. 
“Do go, sir,” replied the bishop, with charming politeness. “I must have it at once. I am 
desolated, being thus obliged to keep the gentlemen of the chapter waiting.” 
When he got to the middle of the hall, Julien turned back toward the bishop, and saw him 
once  again  giving  benedictions.  “What  could  that  be?”  he  asked  himself.  “Surely,  some 
ecclesiastical  ceremony  required  by  the  ceremony  that’s  going  to  take  place.”  Back  in  the 
valets’ antechamber, he saw they had the miter in their hands. Yielding to Julien’s imperious 
look, in spite of themselves they gave him their lord’s miter. 
He  was  proud  to  carry  it.  Crossing  through  the  hall,  he  walked  deliberately,  holding  it 
with  respect.  The  bishop  was  sitting  in  front  of  the  mirror.  But  from  time  to  time  his  right 
hand, no matter how tired, kept making the sign of the cross. Julien helped him set the miter 
in place. The bishop shook his head from side to side. 
“Ah! It will stay on,” he said to Julien happily. “Would you step back a bit?” 
Then the bishop walked, extremely quickly, to the middle of the chamber, after which he 
came back toward the mirror, his stride very deliberate. He’d gone back to frowning and, most 
solemnly, making the sign of the cross. 
Julien was immobilized by astonishment, trying to understand, but unable to risk it. The 
bishop paused and looked at Julien, his face rapidly losing its grave appearance: 
“What do you think of my miter, sir? Will it go all right?” 
“Very well indeed, my lord.” 
                                                             
4 A port on the Mediterranean, west of Marseilles. Stendhal may have been thinking of the Cardinal de Retz, 
who  had  begun  his  career  as  Bishop  of  Adge.  Retz  (1613C79)  is  a  notorious  figure  in  French  history.  His 
libertinism  and  ambition  are  frankly  discussed  in  his  Mémoires,  which  recount  his  career,  especially  his 
participation in the Fronde, the aristocratic rebellion during the minority of Louis XIV (see note for p. 453, l. 3). 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
“It’s not set too far back? That would look rather silly. But it won’t do, either, to wear it 
down over the eyes, like a policeman’s cap.” 
“It looks exactly right, to me.” 
“The King of ――― is accustomed to older priests, and surely more somber ones. I would 
not want―especially because of my age―to seem too frivolous.” 
And the bishop set himself to walking, once more, and to the giving of benedictions. 
“It’s obvious,” Julien told himself, finally daring to face the fact. “He’s practicing how to 
make the sign of the cross.” 
A little later: 
“I’m  ready,”  said  the  bishop.  “Go,  sir,  and  alert  the  dean  and  the  gentlemen  of  the 
chapter.” 
Soon Father Chélan, followed by two very old priests, entered the hall by way of a great, 
sculpted  doorway  that  Julien  had  not  noticed.  But  now  he  remained  where  his  rank  placed 
him,  last  of  them  all,  unable  to  see  the  bishop  except  above  the  shoulders  of  all  the  priests 
crowding through the door. 
The bishop came slowly down the hall; when he reached the doorway, the priests fell into 
line. After a brief moment of disorder, the procession began, the marchers intoning a psalm. 
The bishop was at the rear, between Father Chélan and another exceedingly old priest. Down 
the long corridors of the Upper Bray church they went; in spite of the bright sunshine outside, 
they walked in dark and dampness. Finally they reached the portal leading into the cloister. 
Julien  was  thrilled  by  such  a  beautiful  ceremony.  The  ambition  quickened  in  him  by  the 
bishop’s youth was at war, in his heart, with the delicacy and exquisite politeness of the young 
prelate.  This  politeness  was  utterly  unlike  that  of  Monsieur  de  Rênal,  even  at  his  very  best. 
“The more you ascend toward the highest rungs of society,” Julien said to himself, “the more 
charming become the manners you find.” 
They  entered  the  cloister  through  a  side  door.  Suddenly  a  terrible  noise  shook  the 
church’s ancient vaults; Julien thought they might collapse. But it was the old cannon, once 
again. Pulled by eight galloping horses, it had just arrived, and, barely on the ground, had been 
quickly maneuvered into position by the cannoneers of Leipzig, who were firing five times a 
minute, just as if they were facing the Prussians. 
But this wonderfully worthy sound no longer had any effect on Julien; he was no longer 
dreaming of Napoleon or of military glory. “So young,” he thought, “to be Bishop of Agde! But 
where is Agde? And how much does the job bring in? Maybe two or three hundred thousand 
francs.” 
The bishop’s servants appeared, with a splendid dais. Father Chélan grasped one of the 
supporting rods, but in fact it was Julien who did the carrying. The bishop seated himself. He 
had actually begun to look older: admiration for our heroes knows no bounds. “What couldn’t 
be accomplished, with skills like that!” Julien thought. 
The  king  entered.  Julien  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  him  up  close.  The  bishop  made  an 
elegant, impressive speech, not forgetting a touch of exceedingly polite agitation, as a mark of 
respect for His Majesty. 
There is no need to go into the details of the ceremony at Upper Bray: for two weeks it 
filled  the  columns  of  every  newspaper  in  the  province.  From  the  bishop’s  speech,  Julien 
learned that the king was descended from Charles the Bold. 
One of Julien’s subsequent duties was to audit the ceremony’s accounts. Monsieur de La 
Mole, having secured a diocese for his nephew, also wanted, courteously, to pay the expenses. 
The ceremony at Upper Bray, all by itself, had cost three thousand eight hundred francs. 
 
 
Chapter Eighteen: A King In Verrières 
After the bishop’s speech, and the king’s response, His Majesty ascended the dais, after 
which he showed his deep devotion by kneeling on a pillow near the altar. The choir encircled 
the stalls, which were raised a good two steps above the floor. It was on the higher of these 
steps that Julien was seated, at the feet of Father Chélan, and alongside a train bearer, similarly 
posted at the feet of a cardinal from Rome’s Sistine Chapel. There was a Te Deum, and waves 
of  incense,  and  endless  volleys  of  muskets  and  artillery;  the  peasants  were  drunk  with 
happiness and piety. A day like this undid the work of a hundred issues of Jacobin newspapers. 
Julien  was  six  paces  away  from  the  king,  who  in  fact  was  praying  fervently.  Then  he 
noticed, for the first time, a little man with a spiritual face, wearing virtually no ornaments. 
But there was a sky blue decoration underneath his very plain garments. Julien was closer to 
him than he was to most of the other lords, whose clothing was so heavily ornamented that―
as  Julien  put  it―the  cloth  itself  could  not  be  seen.  This  little  man,  as  he  soon  learned,  was 
Monsieur de La Mole. He struck Julien as proud and even arrogant. 
“This marquis can’t be as polite as my nice bishop,” he thought. “Ah! Being a cleric makes 
you sweet and wise. But the king is here to venerate the holy relic, and I don’t see any relic. 
Where would they keep Saint Clemens?” 
A  low-ranking  priest,  his  neighbor,  informed  him  that  the  venerable  relic  was  housed 
high in the church, in a burning chapel. 
“What is a burning chapel?” Julien asked himself. 
But he did not want to seek an explanation. He redoubled his attention. 
When  it  was  a  sovereign  ruler  who  paid  a  visit,  protocol  specified  that  canons  not 
accompany the bishop. But as they started toward the burning chapel, the bishop summoned 
Father Chélan, and Julien boldly followed along. 
Having  climbed  a  long  staircase,  they  came  to  an  exceedingly  small  door,  but  with  a 
Gothic frame, magnificently gilded. The paint looked as if it had been applied just the night 
before. 
Assembled  in  front  of  the  door,  on  their  knees,  were  twenty-four  young  girls,  from 
Verrières’s  most  distinguished  families.  Before  opening  the  door,  the  bishop  knelt  in  the 
middle of these pretty girls. As he prayed in a firm voice, they seemed unable to help admiring 
his  beautiful  lacework,  his  graceful  bearing,  his  young  and  very  gentle  face.  Whatever 
remained of our hero’s rationality left him, as he saw this spectacle. At that moment, he would 
have gone to war for the Inquisition, and with deep conviction. Suddenly, the door opened. 
The  small  chapel  seemed  to  be  covered  in  light.  On  the  altar  stood  more  than  a  thousand 
candles, divided into eight rows separated from one another by bouquets of flowers. The sweet 
smell  of  the  purest  incense  swept  through  the  doorway  like  a  whirlwind.  Newly  gilded,  the 
chapel was very small indeed, but wonderfully exalted. Julien noticed that some of the altar 
candles were more than fifteen feet high. The girls could not restrain a cry of admiration. The 
only ones allowed into the chapel’s tiny vestibule were the twenty-four girls, the two priests, 
and Julien. 
Soon the king arrived, followed only by Monsieur de La Mole and his high steward. The 
guards stayed outside, on their knees, and presenting arms. 
The king knelt so hastily that his knees fairly thumped on the prayer stool. Only then was 
Julien, glued to the gilded door, able to make out, underneath one of the girls’ bare arm, the 
charming  figurine  of  Saint  Clemens.  He  was  lying  on  the  altar,  dressed  as  a  young  Roman 
soldier. There was a large wound in his neck, from which blood seemed actually to be flowing. 
The  artist  had  surpassed  himself:  the  dying  eyes,  brimming  with  grace,  were  half  closed.  A 
budding mustache decorated the delightful mouth, half shut but seeming still to be praying. 
Seeing the statue, a girl standing next to Julien wept hot tears, one of which fell on his hand. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
After a moment of the most profoundly silent prayer, disrupted only by the distant sound 
of bells, from villages thirty miles around, the Bishop of Agde asked the king’s permission to 
speak.  He  delivered  a  brief  sermon,  deeply  moving  for  its  plain  language;  the  effect  was 
obvious. 
“Never  forget,  young  Christian  ladies,  that  you’ve  seen  one  of  the  greatest  kings  in  the 
world  down  on  his  knees,  here  among  the  servants  of  God  the  All-Powerful  and  Awesome. 
These  feeble  servants,  persecuted,  murdered  on  earth,  as  you  can  see  by  the  still-bleeding 
wound of Saint Clemens, have their triumph in heaven. Isn’t this a sight, young ladies, you’ll 
remember all the rest of your days? Hate the impious. Be forever faithful to this God―so great, 
so awesome, but so good.” 
At these words the bishop rose, authoritatively. 
“Do you promise me that?” he said, holding out his arms as if inspired. 
“We promise,” said the girls, weeping. 
“I receive your promise in the name of God Himself!” the bishop continued, in a voice of 
thunder. And the ceremony was over. 
Even the king was weeping. It was a long time before Julien had the nerve to ask where 
the saint’s bones were, those bones sent from Rome to Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy.5 
He was told they were hidden in the charming wax figurine. 
His  Majesty  graciously  permitted  the  young  ladies  who  had  accompanied  him  into  the 
chapel to wear a red ribbon, inscribed Hate The Impious, Eternal Adoration. 
Monsieur de La Mole had ten thousand bottles of wine distributed among the peasants. 
That evening, in Verrières, the liberals had ten thousand times more reason to light up their 
houses  than  did  the  royalists.  Before  his  departure,  the  king  paid  a  visit  to  Monsieur  de 
Moirod. 
                                                             
5 Third Valois Duke of Burgundy (1396C1467), father of Charles the Bold, had a reputation as a philanthopist 
and patron of the arts. 
 
 
Chapter Nineteen: Thinking Leads to Suffering 
Chapter Nineteen: Thinking Leads to Suffering 
Everyday events are so grotesque they keep you from seeing the very real misfortune of our passions. 
―Barnave1 
Restoring  everyday  order  to  the  furnishings,  in  the  room  Monsieur  de  La  Mole  had 
occupied, Julien found a very thick sheet of paper, double folded. He read the bottom of the 
first page: 
To His Excellency, Marquis de La Mole, Peer of France, Knight of the King’s Orders, etc., etc. 
It was a petition written in the clumsy handwriting of a cook: 
Monsieur Marquis, 
I have been a religious man all my life. I was at Lyons, during the siege, in constant danger from mortar 
shells, in ’93, of wretched memory.2 I receive communion; every Friday I go to mass in our parish church. 
I’ve never failed to do my Easter duty, not even in ’93, of wretched memory. In my kitchen I had plenty of 
people,  before  the  Revolution;  my  kitchen  was  always  meatless  on  Friday.  I  enjoy  a  universal  good 
reputation in Verrières, and I daresay I deserve it. I carry the dais in processions, alongside monsieur the 
parish priest and His Honor the Mayor. On high occasions, I carry a great big candle, bought at my own 
expense.  All  of  which  matters  are  on  file  in  Paris,  at  the  Ministry  of  Finance.  I  ask  the  marquis  for  the 
Lottery Bureau at Verrières, which will soon be vacant, one way or another, the current holder being very 
sick, and besides is someone who votes for the wrong side, etc. 
De Cholin 
In  the  margin  of  the  petition  was  a  note  signed  “De  Moirod,”  which  began:  “I  had  the 
honor, yesterday, to speak to the good subject making this request, etc.” 
“So even that imbecile De Cholin shows me the path that needs to be taken,” Julien told 
himself. 
A  week  after  the  king  passed  through  Verrières,  what  remained  afloat,  for  all  the 
innumerable  lying  stories,  stupid  explanations,  ridiculous  debates,  etc.,  etc.,  which  had 
focused, successively, on the king, the Bishop of Agde, Marquis de La Mole, the ten thousand 
bottles  of  wine,  de  Moirod’s  pitiful  tumble―which,  in  the  hope  of  a  medal,  kept  him  from 
leaving  his  house  for  a  month  after  his  fall―was  the  incredible  indecency  of  Julien  Sorel,  a 
carpenter’s son, having been shoveled into the guard of honor. You should have heard, on this 
subject,  the  wealthy  industrialists,  manufacturers  of  printed  calico  cloth,  who,  evening  and 
morning,  made  themselves  hoarse,  in  the  cafés,  preaching  equality.  That  haughty  woman, 
Madame de Rênal, was responsible for the abomination. Why? The beautiful eyes and lovely, 
fresh cheeks of the little ecclesiastic, Sorel, said all that needed to be said. 
Not  long  after  their  return  to  Vergy,  the  youngest  of  the  children,  Stanislas-Xavier, 
developed a fever. Madame de Rênal immediately fell into a frightful state of remorse. For the 
first  time,  she  criticized  her  love  affair  rationally;  she  seemed  to  understand,  as  if  by  some 
miracle, what an enormous sin she had allowed to sweep her away. No matter how profoundly 
religious her nature, until this moment she had not realized how great was her crime in the 
eyes of God. 
Earlier, at the Sacred Heart convent, she’d loved God with a passion; even then she had 
feared Him. The struggles now lacerating her heart were even more frightful, because her fear 
had no basis in rational thought. Julien had learned that any attempt at rationality, far from 
calming  her,  proved  inflammatory:  she  saw  in  it  the  language  of  hell.  However,  since  Julien 
himself was very fond of little Stanislas, it was easier for him to talk to her about the child’s 
                                                             
1 See note for p. 6, Epigraph. 
2 In 1793, a popular uprising against the revolutionary government was brutally surpressed in Lyons. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
illness, which soon became serious. And then remorse kept pushing sleep away from her bed: 
all she could do was lie in a grim silence, for if she opened her mouth at all, what emerged 
were confessions of her sins against God and man. 
“I beg you,” said Julien, whenever they were alone, “say nothing to anyone. Let me be the 
sole confidant of your pain. If you still love me, don’t speak: all your words can’t take away our 
Stanislas’s fever.” 
But  this  was  cold  comfort  and  had  no  effect.  He  had  no  idea  if  Madame  de  Rênal  had 
gotten it into her head that, to appease the anger of a jealous God, she either had to hate Julien 
or see her child die. Her inability to hate her lover, which she knew she could not do, was what 
made her so wretched. 
“Go away from me,” she said to Julien one day. “In the name of God, leave this house. It’s 
your presence here that is killing my son. 
“God is punishing me,” she added in a low voice. “He is just. I worship His justice. My sins 
are frightful, and I have been living without remorse! All this was the first sign of God turning 
away from me: I need to be doubly punished.” 
Julien was deeply moved. There was no hypocrisy in her, no exaggeration. “She believes 
that, in loving me, she is killing her child, and yet the miserable woman loves me more than 
she  does  the  child.  No  question,  I  cannot  doubt  it:  remorse  is  killing  her,  and  thus  the 
sublimity of her emotions. But how could I have inspired such a love―me, so poor, so badly 
raised, so ignorant, sometimes so clumsy and so inept?” 
One night, the child grew still sicker. At about two in the morning, Monsieur de Rênal 
came to see him. Consumed by fever, the child was severely flushed and did not recognize his 
father.  Suddenly  Madame  de  Rênal  threw  herself  at  her  husband’s  feet:  Julien  saw  that  she 
meant to tell him everything and ruin herself forever. 
Luckily, her strange behavior annoyed Monsieur de Rênal. 
“Good-bye! Good-bye!” he said, starting to walk away. 
“No, listen to me,” his wife cried, on her knees in front of him, trying to hold him back. 
“Hear the whole truth. I’m the one who’s killing my son. I gave him life and I’m taking it away 
from him. Heaven is punishing me, in the eyes of God I am guilty of murder. I must abandon 
myself, I must humble myself. Perhaps this sacrifice will appease the Lord.” 
If  Monsieur  de  Rênal  had  been  a  man  of  any  imagination,  he  would  have  known 
everything. 
“Romantic notions,” he exclaimed, pulling away from his wife, who was trying to wrap her 
arms around his knees. “All that is just romantic gush. Julien, the moment it’s light outside, 
call the doctor.” 
And he retired to his bed. Madame de Rênal dropped back on her knees, half fainting, and 
pushed Julien away with a convulsive movement, when he tried to help her. Julien stood there, 
stunned. 
“So  here’s  the  adulteress!”  he  said  to  himself.  “Could  it  be  possible  that  these  tricky 
priests...might  be  right?  Those  who  commit  a  multitude  of  them,  may  earn  the  true 
comprehension of sin? How incredible!...” 
For twenty minutes after Monsieur de Rênal left, Julien watched the woman he loved, her 
head resting on the child’s little bed; she was completely motionless and virtually unconscious. 
“Here’s a woman of superior intellect reduced to a bundle of misery, and all because,” he told 
himself, “she’s come to know me.” 
Time sped by. “What can I do for her?” He had to make up his mind. “It’s not a question, 
anymore, just about me. What do people and their dull affectations mean to me? What can I 
do for her? ... leave her? But I’d be leaving her alone, and in the grip of the most dreadful grief. 
 
 
Chapter Nineteen: Thinking Leads to Suffering 
This automaton of a husband does her more harm than good. He’ll speak harsh words to her, 
because he’s a clod. She might go mad, throw herself out a window. 
“If  I  leave  her,  if  I  stop  watching  over  her,  she’ll  tell  him  everything.  And  who  knows? 
Maybe, for all the wealth she’s brought him, he could turn her into a slave. She’s capable of 
telling the whole thing, good Lord! to that son of a...that priest, Father Maslon, who’ll use the 
death of a six-year-old child as an excuse for moving into this house, and never leaving, nor 
will that be an accident. In her grief and her fear of God, she’ll forget everything she knows 
about the man, and all she’ll see will be the priest.” 
“Go away,” Madame de Rênal suddenly said to him, opening her eyes. 
“I’d give my life a thousand times over,” answered Julien, “if I knew what would be best for 
you. I have never been so loved, my dear angel, and perhaps only at this very moment have I 
begun,  as  never  before,  to  adore  you  as  you  deserve.  Should  I  go  away  from  you,  knowing 
you’re miserable because of me! But my pain shouldn’t matter. Yes, my love: I’ll leave. But if I 
do  leave  you,  if  I  stop  watching  over  you,  always  putting  myself  between  you  and  your 
husband, you’ll tell him everything, you’ll ruin yourself. Think: He’ll drive you from the house, 
in  disgrace;  all  Verrières,  all  Besan04on,  will  be  chattering  about  the  scandal.  All  sorts  of 
horrible things will be laid at your door; you’ll never recover from the shame....” 
“This is what I’m asking for,” she cried, standing up. “I’ll suffer: so much the better.” 
“But what you’ll do, if you create that kind of scandal, is spread your misery to him, too!” 
“But I’ll humble myself, I’ll throw myself down in the mud―and maybe, doing that, I’ll 
save  my  son.  Humiliation  like  that,  completely  in  the  public  eye―maybe  that’s  public 
penance? Even more than having my weakness publicly judged, isn’t that the greatest sacrifice 
I can offer to God?. .. Maybe He’ll look down and accept my humiliation, and leave me my son! 
Show me a more painful sacrifice, and I’ll hurry toward it.” 
“Let  me  be  punished.  I’m  as  guilty  as  you  are.  Do  you  want  me  to  shut  myself  up  in  a 
Trappist monastery? The strict severity of a life like that might appease your God...Ah, heaven! 
Why can’t I take Stanislas’s sickness on myself?” 
“Oh,  you  love  him,  you  do,”  said  Madame  de  Rênal,  standing  once  more  and  throwing 
herself into his arms. 
And even as she did so, she pushed him away in horror. 
“I believe you! I believe you!” she went on, after dropping onto her knees. “Oh, my one 
and only love! Oh, why aren’t you Stanislas’s father! Then this wouldn’t be the horrible sin of 
loving you better than I’d love your child.” 
“May I stay here, if I love you only like a brother? That’s the only rational atonement; it 
might appease the Almighty’s anger.” 
“And me,” she cried, standing up and taking Julien’s head in her hands, holding it not too 
far from her eyes. “And me, will I love you as if you were my brother? Could I ever love you like 
a brother?” 
Julien began to weep. 
“I’ll obey you,” he said, falling at her feet. “I’ll obey you no matter what you order me to 
do. That’s all I’m capable of. My soul is crooked with pride; I see no other way. If I leave you, 
you’ll  tell  your  husband  everything;  you’ll  be  ruined,  and  so  will  he.  He’ll  never  be  in  the 
Chamber of Deputies, not after such shame. If I stay, you’ll think I caused your son’s death, 
and you’ll die of grief. Do you want to see what happens, if I do leave? If you like, I’ll go and 
punish myself for our sins, leaving you for a week. I’ll spend that week in a retreat―anywhere 
you like. At the church in Upper Bray, perhaps. Just promise me you’ll confess nothing to your 
husband when I’m away. Consider: If you said I shouldn’t, I’d never return.” 
She promised, he left, but after two days was called back. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
“Without you, I cannot keep my promise. I will speak to my husband unless you’re always 
here, your looks ordering me to stay silent. Every hour of this disgusting life seems as long as a 
whole day.” 
At last, heaven had mercy on this miserable mother. Little by little, Stanislas passed out of 
danger. But the ice had been broken, her mind had grasped the extent of her sin; she could no 
longer recover her equilibrium. Remorse remained, as it had to in so honest a heart. Her life 
turned into heaven and hell: hell when she was not looking at Julien, heaven when she was at 
his feet. “I’m not deceiving myself,” she said inwardly, even when she dared surrender fully to 
her love. “I am damned, irremediably damned. You’re young, I seduced you and you yielded: 
heaven can pardon you. But me, I’m damned. I have absolute  proof of that. I’m afraid: who 
wouldn’t be afraid, looking down into hell? But in my heart of hearts I feel no repentance. If I 
were given the chance, I’d commit my sin all over again. May heaven not punish me here and 
now, while I’m in this world, and not punish me through my children, and I’ll deserve nothing 
more.  But  you,  at  least,  my  Julien,”  she  cried  aloud  at  other  times,  “are  you  happy?  Do  you 
think I love you enough?” 
Julien’s mistrust, and his wounded pride, which had above all else required a sacrificial 
love, could not withstand so exceedingly great a sacrifice, so clear and plain and so constantly 
renewed. He worshiped Madame de Rênal. “She’s had every opportunity to be noble, and I’m a 
workman’s  son―and  she  loves  me...When  I’m  with  her,  I’m  not  just  a  kind  of  valet, 
responsible for a lover’s duties.” With that fear banished, Julien fell into all the insanity of love 
and its mortal doubts. 
“At least,” she cried, when she thought she saw him unsure of her love, “let me make you 
very, very happy, for the few days we have to spend together! Let’s hurry: tomorrow, perhaps, 
I’ll  no  longer  be  yours.  Should  heaven  strike  me  through  my  children,  there  would  be  no 
possibility of trying to live just so I could love you, not knowing it was my sin that was killing 
them. I couldn’t survive that blow. If I wanted to, I still couldn’t; I’d go mad. Ah! If I could only 
take your sin on me, as you so nobly offered to take Stanislas’s burning fever!” 
This great moral crisis changed the quality of Julien’s feeling for his mistress, as well as 
the nature of their mutual bond. His love was no longer merely admiration for her beauty, but 
pride in possessing someone like her. 
Yet their happiness had become something altogether superior; the flame that devoured 
them had grown far more intense. They experienced wild, ecstatic fits. The world might have 
thought  their  happiness  had  much  increased.  But  they  never  recovered  the  delicious  calm, 
satisfaction without clouds, the easy happiness of their love’s first periods, when Madame de 
Rênal’s  only  fear  had  been  that  Julien  did  not  love  her  enough.  Sometimes,  their  happiness 
took on all the appearance of sin. 
In their happiest moments, and apparently the most tranquil ones: “Ah! God in heaven! I 
see hell,” cried Madame de Rênal, seizing Julien’s hand with a convulsive movement. “What 
ghastly  tortures!  I’ve  thoroughly  deserved  them.”  And  she  embraced  her  lover,  attaching 
herself to him like ivy against a wall. 
Julien tried, but in vain, to calm her quivering soul. She took his hand and covered it with 
kisses. Then she fell into a dark and dreamlike musing: “Hell,” she said, “hell will be good for 
me. I’ll still have the few earthly days I spend with you―but a hell here on earth, my children’s 
death.. .. But still, perhaps at that price my sin might be forgiven...Oh Almighty God! No, don’t 
pardon me at that price. These poor children haven’t offended against You, not in any way: 
me, me, I’m the only guilty one: I love a man who’s not, not my husband.” 
 
 
Chapter Twenty: Anonymous Letters 
Julien  observed  how,  after  this,  Madame  de  Rênal  would  reach  moments  of  apparent 
tranquillity. She was groping for her inner self: she loved him, she had no desire to poison his 
life. 
Amid these fluctuating times of love, of remorse, and of pleasure, the days went by, for 
them, at the speed of light. Julien lost the habit of reflecting, of pondering. 
Miss  Elisa  went  to  Verrières,  having  some  small  legal  matter  to  deal  with.  She  found 
Monsieur Valenod deeply annoyed at Julien. She hated the tutor, and spoke of him often. 
“You’ll  ruin  me,  sir,  if  I  told  you  the  truth!...”  she  said  to  Monsieur  Valenod  one  day. 
“When it comes to really important things, employers always take the same position...None of 
you ever forgives a poor servant who tells you certain things....” 
Starting from such conventional phrases, which Monsieur Valenod’s impatient curiosity 
knew how to compress and shorten, he learned things infinitely mortifying to his self-esteem. 
This  woman,  the  most  distinguished  in  the  entire  region,  around  whom  he  had  so 
carefully  and  solicitously  hovered  for  six  years,  unfortunately  in  the  full  sight,  and  the  full 
knowledge, of the whole world―this woman, so proud, whose contempt had so often made 
him redden all over, had just taken as her lover a petty laborer disguised as a tutor. And to 
complete his vexation, the director of the Pauper’s Bureau also learned that Madame de Rênal 
adored her lover. 
“And,”  the  lady’s  maid  added,  sighing,  “Monsieur  Julien  scarcely  had  to  lift  a  finger  to 
achieve this conquest. She’s had no effect at all on that fixed coldness of his.” 
Elisa had not known for sure, till they’d gone to the country, but she suspected the affair 
dated back a good deal further. 
“That’s got to be the reason,” she added spitefully, “for his refusing to marry me. And I, 
like an idiot, I went to Madame de Rênal for advice, begging her to speak to the tutor.” 
That  very  evening,  along  with  his  newspaper,  Monsieur  de  Rênal  received  a  long 
anonymous  letter,  informing  him  in  great  detail  of  what  had  been  going  on  under  his  roof. 
Julien saw him turn pale, reading this letter, written on bluish paper, and looking up at the 
tutor with malevolent glances. And the whole evening, His Honor the Mayor never let go of 
what was bothering him; Julien wasted his breath, trying to please him, asking about various 
genealogical details concerning the best families in Burgundy. 
Chapter Twenty: Anonymous Letters 
Do not give dalliance 
Too much the rein: the strongest oaths are straw 
To the fire i’ the blood. 
―SHAKESPEARE, THE TEMPEST 
At midnight, as they were leaving the drawing room, Julien was able to say to his beloved: 
“We  can’t  see  each  other,  tonight.  Your  husband  is  suspicious.  I  could  swear  that  long 
communication he was reading, sighing the whole time, was an anonymous letter.” 
Luckily, Julien locked himself in his room. Madame de Rênal had the crazy idea that his 
warning  was  just  a  pretense,  that  he  did  not  want  to  see  her.  She  absolutely  lost  her  head, 
appearing in front of his door at the usual time. Having heard sounds in the corridor, Julien 
immediately  snuffed  out  his  candle.  Someone  tried  to  open  the  door:  Was  this  Madame  de 
Rênal, or was it a jealous husband? 
Quite early the next day, the cook, who had always watched over Julien, brought him a 
book, on the cover of which he read the following, written in Italian: “Look at page 130.” 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Shuddering at her rashness, he found page 130, and there discovered, attached by a pin, 
the following hastily scribbled letter, bathed in tears and badly written: 
You didn’t want to see me tonight? It’s times like this when I think I’ve never read your 
soul down to the bottom. Your glances frighten me. I’m afraid of you. My God! Haven’t I loved 
you enough? If that’s the way it is, let my husband learn all about our love, and let him shut 
me  up  forever  in  some  country  prison,  far  away  from  my  children.  Maybe  that’s  what  God 
wants, too. I’ll die quickly enough. But you’ll be a monster. 
Don’t you love me? Are you tired of my craziness, my confessions, and my guilt, you who 
utterly lack faith? Would you like to destroy me? Here, I’ve given you an easy way to do it. Go 
on, show this letter to everyone in Verrières, or better yet just show it to Monsieur Valenod. 
Tell him I love you―but no, don’t say anything so blasphemous. Tell him I adore you, that my 
life never began until the day I saw you, that in the wildest moments of my childhood I never 
so  much  as  dreamed  of  the  happiness  I  owe  you,  that  I’ve  sacrificed  my  life  for  you,  that  I 
sacrifice my soul for you. You know that I’m sacrificing much, much more for you. 
But what does that man understand about sacrifice? Tell him―tell him, just to make him 
angry, that I defy all the wicked, and there’s no longer any ill fortune left in the world, for me, 
except to see changes in the only person who’s keeping me alive. What happiness it would be 
to lose that life, to offer it as a sacrifice, and never again have to fear for my children! 
Surely, my dear, if there is an anonymous letter, it comes from that disgusting being who, 
for  six  years,  has  pursued  me  with  his  awful  voice,  his  stories  about  how  well  he  jumps,  on 
horseback, his conceit, and the unending enumeration of all the money he makes. 
Was  there  an  anonymous  letter?  My  naughty  one,  that’s  what  I’d  like  to  discuss  with 
you―but  no,  you  did  the  right  thing.  Holding  you  in  my  arms,  perhaps  for  the  last  time,  I 
could never have been able to talk sensibly, as I do when I’m alone. From now on, happiness 
won’t be so easy for us. Will that bother you? Yes―on days when you won’t get any amusing 
books from Monsieur Fouqué. It’s now all settled: tomorrow―whether there was or wasn’t an 
anonymous letter―I’m going to tell my husband that I’ve received an anonymous letter, too, 
and he has to immediately offer you some fantastic sum, and figure out a decent excuse, and 
send you, at once, back to your father. 
Alas, my dear! We’ll have to be apart for two weeks, perhaps a month! But see? I’ll do you 
justice, you’ll suffer as much as I will. But in the end, it’s the only way to counterbalance the 
effect of that anonymous letter. It’s not the first my husband’s received, and always about me. 
Alas, how I used to laugh at all that! 
My  sole  objective  will  be  to  persuade  my  husband  the  letter  came  from  Monsieur 
Valenod. I don’t have any doubt he was in fact its author. If you leave the house, be careful to 
find yourself a place in Verrières. I’ll make sure, somehow, that my husband plans to spend 
two weeks there, to prove to all the fools that there’s no coldness between us, he and I. Once 
you’re in Verrières, be sure to be friendly to everyone, even the liberals. I know all the ladies 
will be after you. 
Don’t be angry at Monsieur Valenod. Don’t cut off his ears, as you said you would, one 
day.  On  the  contrary,  be  terribly  nice  to  him.  The  important  thing  they  have  to  believe,  in 
Verrières, is that you’re going to work for him, or for someone else, as a children’s tutor. 
Now there’s what my husband will never allow. And suppose he does? Fine! At least you’ll 
live in Verrières, and sometimes I’ll see you. Oh Lord! I think I love my children more, just 
because  they  love  you.  What  a  blow!  How  will  all  this  end?  ...  I’m  wandering.  Anyway,  you 
know  what  you  have  to  do.  Be  sweet,  be  polite,  don’t  be  nasty  even  to  the  most  vulgar 
 
Chapter Twenty-One: Conversation with the Head of the House 
 
people―I beg you on my knees. They’re going to decide our fate. Never forget for a moment 
that my husband doesn’t in any way agree with you, when it comes to what he likes to call 
public opinion. 
You’re going to supply me with the anonymous letter. Arm yourself with patience, and a 
pair of scissors. Take a book and cut out the words you need. Then use light glue and stick 
them on the sheet of bluish paper I’ve enclosed: it came to me from Monsieur Valenod. Expect 
that your room will be searched, so burn the pages from which you’ve cut words. If you can’t 
find  the  words  you  want,  be  patient  and  put  them  together,  letter  by  letter.  To  save  you 
trouble, I’ve made the anonymous letter very short. Alas! If you don’t love me anymore, as I 
fear, this letter will seem to you very long! 
ANONYMOUS LETTER 
MADAME, 
All your petty intrigues are known, but those who have an interest in curbing them have 
been notified. Because of a lingering regard for you, I pledge to totally separate you from the 
little peasant. If you are sufficiently prudent for this, your husband will be given to believe that 
the notice he received was a deception, and its erroneous nature will be made plain to him. 
Consider: I have your secret; tremble, wretched woman. From here on you have to walk the 
straight and narrow: I will be watching you. 
When you’ve finished pasting up the words that compose this letter (did you recognize 
Monsieur Valenod’s way of speaking?), go out of the house: I’ll meet you. 
I’ll go to the village, and I’ll return with a mournful face, which is indeed how I will feel. 
Good  Lord!  What  am  I  risking,  and  all  because  you  thought  you’d  guessed  there  was  an 
anonymous  letter.  In  any  case,  with  a  hangdog  look,  I’ll  give  my  husband  the  letter,  which 
someone I didn’t recognize will have delivered to me. And you, you go walking under the tall 
trees, with the children, and don’t come back till dinnertime. 
From up on the rocks, you can see the roof of the pigeon house. If everything went well 
for us, I’ll set out a white handkerchief. If not, there won’t be anything. 
You ingrate:  Won’t your heart compel  you to find some way of telling me you love me 
before  you  go  for  that  walk?  Whatever  may  come,  be  sure  of  one  thing:  if  we  are  forever 
separated, I won’t survive for a single day. Ah, you wicked mother! I’ve just written two empty 
words,  dear  Julien.  I  can’t  feel  them:  right  now,  all  I  can  think  of  is  you.  I  only  wrote  them 
because I don’t want you to scold me. Now that I can imagine losing you, what’s the point to 
pretending? Yes! I’d rather you think my  soul horrid, than lie to the man I adore! I’ve done 
only too much deceiving, in this life of mine. All right: if you don’t love me anymore, I forgive 
you. There’s no time for rereading my letter. To me it seems a trivial matter, paying with my 
life for the joyous days I’ve spent in your arms. You know that’s not all I’ll have to pay for. 
Chapter Twenty-One: Conversation with the Head of the House 
Alas, our frailty is the cause, not we: 
For such as we are made of, such we be. 
―Shakespeare, Twelfth Night 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Julien spent an hour putting together the words, enjoying himself like a child. As he was 
leaving  his  room,  he  met  his  pupils  and  their  mother.  She  took  the  letter  with  simple 
naturalness and courage, so calmly that it frightened him. 
“Is the glue sufficiently dry?” she asked him. 
“Is this the woman that remorse made so wild?” he thought. “What is she planning right 
now?”  He  was  too  proud  to  ask  her,  but―and  quite  possibly,  never―had  she  been  more 
attractive to him. 
“If this goes badly,” she added with the same cool self-mastery, “they’ll take everything I 
have. Bury this box somewhere on the mountain: one day it may be all I have.” 
She  handed  him  a  glass  box,  covered  in  red  morocco  leather,  filled  with  gold  and 
diamonds. 
“Now go,” she told him. 
She hugged the children, the youngest one twice. Julien did not move. She walked rapidly 
away, without glancing at him. 
Ever  since  opening  the  anonymous  letter,  Monsieur  de  Rênal  had  suffered  frightful 
agonies. He had not been so agitated since a duel he had just managed to avoid in 1816, and, to 
do  him  justice,  the  thought  of  being  shot  had  made  him  less  miserable.  He  scrutinized  the 
letter in every possible way: “Isn’t this a woman’s handwriting?” he said to himself. “And if it is, 
what woman wrote it?” He reviewed every woman he knew in Verrières, without being able to 
settle on any suspect. “Could a man have dictated the letter? Who?” The unknowable factors 
remained the same. He was a jealous man, and certainly hated by most of those he knew. “I 
must ask for my wife’s advice,” he said to himself, out of pure habit, rising from the armchair 
into which he had sunk. 
And, barely on his feet: “Good Lord!” he said, slapping himself on the head. “More than 
anyone, it’s she I have to watch out for. Right now, she’s my enemy.” And anger brought tears 
to his eyes. 
An appropriate reward for his flinty-heartedness, regarded by country people as wisdom’s 
only  practical  path,  was  that  the  two  men  he  most  keenly  mistrusted,  at  the  moment,  were 
also his two most intimate friends. 
“And then, I have perhaps ten friends,” and he thought about them, calculating what sort 
of consolation he could count on from each. “For all of them! For all of them!” he exclaimed 
furiously,  “my  ghastly  luck  will  be  an  intense  delight!”  Luckily,  he  believed  he  was  just  as 
intensely envied, and with good reason. In addition to his superb town house, which the King 
of ―――, by sleeping there, had just forever honored, he had built up, and most handsomely, 
his  ch09teau  in  Vergy.  It  had  been  painted  white  in  front,  and  the  windows  decorated  with 
lovely  green  shutters.  For  a  moment,  he  felt  comforted  by  the  very  thought  of  this 
magnificence.  Indeed,  this  ch09teau  was  visible  from  a  distance  of  ten  miles  or  more,  thus 
eclipsing all the country houses, or would-be ch09teaux, in the neighborhood, the humble hues 
of which had been allowed to go gray with age and weather. 
Monsieur de Rênal could count on the tears, and the pity, of one of his friends, the parish 
churchwarden, but he was an imbecile who would cry about anything. Yet this man was his 
one and only resource. 
“No one’s as miserable as I am!” he cried angrily. “What horrible loneliness! 
“Can  it  really  be,”  the  man  actually  started  to  whine,  “can  it  really  be  that,  with  all  my 
woes,  I  haven’t  got  a  single  friend  I  can  turn  to  for  advice?  Because  my  brain’s  unhinged,  I 
know  it  is!  Ah,  Falcoz!  Ah,  Ducros!”  he  cried  bitterly.  These  were  two  childhood  friends  his 
 
Chapter Twenty-One: Conversation with the Head of the House 
 
arrogance had forever alienated, in 1814.3 They were not aristocrats, and he’d wanted to break 
away from the spirit of equality in which they had lived since childhood. 
One, Falcoz, a warmhearted, spirited man, a paper merchant in Verrières, had bought a 
printing house in the province’s largest town and launched a newspaper. The Congregation of 
the Holy Virgin decided to ruin him: his newspaper had been closed up, his printing license 
had been revoked. In these difficult circumstances, he tried writing, for the first time in ten 
years,  to  Monsieur  de  Rênal.  The  mayor  of  Verrières  felt  it  his  duty  to  respond  like  an  old 
Roman: “Had the king’s minister done me the honor of asking for my advice, I would have told 
him:  ’Have  no  pity  on  the  printers  in  this  province,  ruin  them  all,  and  turn  printing  into  a 
monopoly, exactly like tobacco.’ “ Monsieur de Rênal remembered the language of this letter 
to his old friend―which at the time had earned the admiration of all Verrières―with horror. 
“Who would have said that, for all my social standing, my wealth, my awards and decorations, 
I’d one day regret it?” He was in the midst of an angry frenzy, directed equally against himself 
and everything around him, since he’d spent a dreadful night. Luckily, however, he had not 
thought of spying on his wife. 
“I’m used to Louise,” he told himself. “She knows all my business: if I were free to marry 
tomorrow,  I  couldn’t  replace  her.”  So  he  soothed  himself  with  the  notion  that  his  wife  was 
innocent. This way of looking at things did not require of him any demonstration of character, 
and it set everything in good order. “After all, how many slandered women have we seen! 
“What’s going on here?” he suddenly exclaimed, while walking wildly up and down. “Why 
should  I  let  her,  and  her  lover,  laugh  at  me  as  if  I  were  a  nobody,  some  barefoot  beggar? 
Should everyone in Verrières be gloating at how good-natured I am? What haven’t they said 
about Charmier (who was a local fellow, a notorious cuckold)? As soon as they hear his name, 
doesn’t  everybody  start  grinning?  He’s  a  fine  lawyer:  Whoever  says  anything  about  the 
speeches he makes? ‘Ho, Charmier!’ they say, ‘ Barnard’s Charmier’―which is what they call 
him, since that’s the name of the other fellow, the man who’s disgracing him.” 
“God  be  praised,”  said  Monsieur  de  Rênal,  at  other  moments,  “that  I  don’t  have  a 
daughter:  however  I  decide  to  punish  the  children’s  mother,  that  won’t  interfere  with  any 
doweries. Maybe I can catch the little peasant with my wife, and kill them both. That way, the 
tragedy might wipe away all the ridicule.” This idea made him smile; he worked it out in full 
detail. “The penal code is on my side and, no matter what happens, the Congregation of the 
Holy Virgin and my friends on the jury will save me.” He examined his hunting knife, which 
was very sharp. But the idea of blood frightened him. 
“I could beat up this arrogant tutor, and run him off. But what a scandal in Verrières, and 
even in the whole province! After Falcoz’s newspaper was shut down, and his editor in chief 
got  out  of  prison,  I  was  one  of  those  who  kept  him  from  getting  a  job  worth  six  hundred 
francs. They say this scribbler has had the nerve to show up in Besan04on: he could thoroughly 
thump me, in print, and do it so skillfully I could not sue him. Sue him! ... The arrogant fellow 
would find a thousand ways of hinting that everything he’d said was true. A well-born man 
who preserves his social standing is universally hated by the lower classes. I can just see my 
name in those ghastly Parisian newspapers. Oh God! What a bottomless pit! To see the ancient 
name of Rênal muddied with the muck of ridicule...If I ever traveled, I’d have to change my 
name.  Ha!  Give  up  this  name,  which  has  created  my  glory  and  my  power!  What  a  heap  of 
wretchedness! 
                                                             
3 The year of the first fall of Napoleon, and the initial return of the Bourbons, before the Hundred Days and 
Waterloo. Ancien régime class distinctions became important again, at least among aristocrats of the stripe of 
Monsieur  de  Rênal.  The  names  of  Rênal’s  old  friends  come  from  two  Grenoble  acquaintances  of  young 
Stendhal, whom the author remembered fondly: Falcoz was a bookseller and Ducros a librarian. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
“If  I  don’t  kill  my  wife,  just  drive  her  away  in  disgrace,  she  has  her  aunt  in  Besan04on, 
who’ll back her with her entire fortune. My wife will go live in Paris, with Julien. Everyone in 
Verrières will know about it, and I’ll still be taken for a stupid fool.” 
Then  the  miserable  man  became  aware,  by  the  thin  light  coming  from  his  lamp,  that 
dawn  was  coming.  He  went  out  to  take  a  bit  of  fresh  air  in  the  garden.  Right  then,  he  had 
virtually decided not to create a scandal―mostly because a scandal would give such immense 
pleasure to his good friends in Verrières. 
Walking in the garden calmed him a little. “No,” he exclaimed inwardly, “I’m not going to 
deprive myself of my wife, she’s much too useful to me.” He pictured to himself, with horror, 
what the house would be like without his wife. He had no relative except the Marquise de R―
――, a widow, an imbecile, and ill-natured. 
A  wonderfully  sensible  idea began  to  come  to  him―but  carrying  it  off  would  require  a 
strength of character far superior to what the poor man actually possessed. “If I keep my wife,” 
he told himself, “I know that, some day, if she provokes me, I’ll reproach her for her sin. She’s 
proud, we’ll separate―and that will happen even before she’s inherited her aunt’s estate. Oh, 
how they’ll make fun of me! My wife loves her children; in the end they’ll go to her. But me, I’ll 
be the talk of Verrières. ‘What?’ they’ll say. ‘Didn’t he even know how to get revenge on his 
wife?’ Wouldn’t it better to be satisfied with being suspicious, and not go hunting for proof? 
But then I’d be tying my own hands, I’d never again be able to reproach her for anything.” 
The next minute, having revived his wounded vanity, Monsieur de Rênal recalled, in great 
detail,  all  the  various  tricks  recited  at  Verrières’s  casino  and  at  the  gentlemen’s  club,4  when 
some sharp-tongued fellow would interrupt their play at billiards, amusing himself by cutting 
up a deluded husband. But, now, how cruel those witticisms seemed to him! 
“God!  Why  isn’t  my  wife  dead!  Then  I  wouldn’t  be  open  to  ridicule.  If  only  I  were  a 
widower!  I’d  go  to  Paris  and  spend  six  months  in  the  best  society.”  After  a  moment  of 
happiness, inspired by the thought of becoming a widower, his mind began to toy with ways of 
finding out the truth. At midnight, once everyone was in bed, could he spread a thin layer of 
bran in front of the door to Julien’s room? The next morning, at daybreak, he’d be able to see 
the footprints. 
“But what good would it be,” he swore to himself, suddenly and violently. “That slut Elisa 
would have seen it, and everyone in the house knows how jealous I am.” 
In  another  of  the  stories  told  at  the  casino,  a  husband  guaranteed  his  misfortune  by 
sticking a bit of wax, like a seal, on his wife’s door and on that of her lover. 
After so many hours of circling around and around, this way of shedding light on his fate 
struck him, decidedly, as the best of all, and he had begun to think how to work it out when 
the walkway curved and, coming toward him, there was his wife, whom he had hoped to see 
dead. 
She was coming back from the village. She had gone to hear mass at the church in Vergy. 
A  vague  tradition,  on  which  philosophers  may  cast  cold  eyes,  but  in  which  she  had  faith, 
maintained that the little church that served them today had once been the chapel of the Lord 
of Vergy. The idea so obsessed Madame de Rênal that she constantly went there to pray. She 
imagined, over and over, her husband out hunting, and killing Julien, as if by accident, then 
later that night making her eat his heart. 
                                                             
4  Monsieur  de  Rênal’s  social  clubs.  In  France,  especially  in  the  nineteenth  century,  “casino”  referred  not 
necessarily to a gambling establishment but more generally to a place designated for public entertainments, 
i.e., concerts, dancing, cards, etc. 
 
Chapter Twenty-One: Conversation with the Head of the House 
 
“My  fate,”  she  said  to  herself,  “depends  on  what  he’ll  think,  listening  to  me.  After  that 
fatal fifteen minutes, perhaps I’ll never speak to him again. He’s not someone either wise or 
rational. With my own limited intelligence, I should be able to anticipate what he’ll do or say. 
He will decide our shared fate; he has the power. But that fate hangs on my ability to direct 
such  a  temperamental  creature’s  thoughts,  blinded  by  anger,  blocked  from  seeing  half  of 
whatever’s there to be seen. Oh Lord! I’ll need ability, I’ll need self-control. Where will I get 
them?” 
Entering the garden, and seeing her husband in the distance, she found that calm, as if by 
magic. His wild hair and rumpled clothing showed he had not slept. 
She  handed  him  the  letter,  unsealed  but  refolded.  Without  opening  it,  he  stared  at  his 
wife with demented eyes. 
“Here  is  an  abomination,”  she  told  him,  “handed  to  me  by  some  shabby  fellow,  who 
pretended he knew you and you would recognize him, as I went by the notary’s garden. I ask 
only  one  thing  of  you,  which  is  that  you  send  this  Monsieur  Julien  back  to  his  father,  and 
without any delay.” Madame de Rênal hurried to say these words, perhaps speaking a bit too 
soon, in order to free herself of the horrible prospect of having to say them. 
She  was  thrilled,  seeing  the  effect  she’d  had  on  her  husband.  From  the  fixed  look  with 
which he stared at her, she understood that Julien had guessed correctly. “Instead of torturing 
himself with so real a misfortune, what genius he showed!” she thought. “What perfect tact! 
And  in  a  young  man  still  of  so  little  experience!  Where  won’t  he  get  to,  later  on?  Alas,  his 
successes will make him forget me.” 
Suddenly, this small tribute to the man she adored freed her of her difficulties. 
She  congratulated  herself  on  this  development.  “I  haven’t  been  unworthy  of  him,”  she 
told herself, with a sweet and intimate delight. 
Without saying a word, for  fear of committing himself,  Monsieur de  Rênal looked  over 
this second anonymous letter, written―as my reader may recall―in printed words, pasted on 
a light blue sheet of paper. “They’re making fun of me in all sorts of ways,” Monsieur de Rênal 
said to himself, worn out by fatigue. 
“Still more insults to look at, and always on my wife’s account!” He was at the point of 
shouting  the  most  vulgar  insults  at  her,  hardly  restrained  by  the  thought  of  the  Besan04on 
inheritance. Consumed by the need to attack her for something, he crumpled up the second 
letter  and  set  himself  to  walking  very  fast;  he  needed  to  get  away  from  his  wife.  A  few 
moments later, he came back to her, and more calmly. 
“It’s a question of making a decision and sending Julien away,” she said to him at once. 
“After all, he’s a workman’s son. You can compensate him with a handful of gold coins, and, 
besides, he’s a scholar and he can easily place himself elsewhere―for example, with Monsieur 
Valenod or at Monsieur de Maugiron’s house; they both have children. That way, you won’t do 
him any harm...” 
“You talk like the fool you are,” shouted Monsieur de Rênal, in a frightening voice. “How 
can anyone expect good sense from a woman? You never pay any attention to rationality: How 
could  you  know  a  thing?  Your  indifference,  your  laziness,  require  you  to  do  no  more  than 
chase butterflies―weak beings we’re cursed to have in our families!...” 
Madame de Rênal let him talk, and he talked for a long time. He got over his anger, as 
they say in the country. 
“Sir,”  she  finally  said  to  him,  “I  speak  as  a  woman  whose  honor  has  been  violated―in 
other words, the most precious thing a woman possesses.” 
Madame  de  Rênal  maintained  unyielding  self-control,  all  through  this  painful 
conversation, on which depended the possibility of her continuing to live under the same roof 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
as Julien. She groped for ideas most capable of guiding her husband’s blind anger. She’d paid 
no attention to all the wounding comments he’d addressed to her; she did not hear them; all 
she thought about was Julien. “Will he be pleased with me?” 
“This  little  peasant  on  whom  we  have  lavished  kindness,  and  even  gifts,  may  well  be 
innocent,” she finally said. “But nonetheless, he’s at least been the occasion for the first insults 
I’ve ever received...Sir! When I read that awful piece of paper, I promised myself that either he 
left our house, or I would. 
“Do you propose to create a scandal, which will dishonor me, and you as well? You’ll thrill 
the good folk of Verrières. 
“It’s true: there is universal jealousy for the prosperity your administration, in its wisdom, 
has attained for you, for your family, and for the town...Well! I’ll get Julien to see you about 
taking a month’s leave, at that timber merchant’s place on the mountain―a worthy friend for 
a little workman.” 
“Don’t get excited,” replied Monsieur de Rênal, now pleasantly calm. “What I ask of you, 
above all, is that you do not speak to him. You’ll make him angry, and get me into a quarrel 
with him. You know how touchy this little fellow is.” 
“The  young  man  has  absolutely  no  tact,”  answered  Madame  de  Rênal.  “He  may  be  a 
scholar: you know more about that than I do. But at bottom he’s a genuine peasant. Frankly, 
I’ve never thought well of him ever since he refused to marry Elisa, which would have been a 
guaranteed fortune, and his excuse for so doing was that, in secret, she paid visits to Monsieur 
Valenod.” 
“Ah!” said Monsieur de Rênal, his eyebrows raised unusually high. “What, did Julien tell 
you that?” 
“No, not exactly. He’s always talked about his vocation, his call for the holy ministry. But 
believe me, the primary vocation for people like him is having enough to eat. He led me to 
understand, pretty clearly, that he couldn’t ignore these secret visits.” 
“And me, I had to be ignorant of them!” exclaimed Monsieur de Rênal, flaring up  once 
again,  and  stressing  every  syllable.  “Things  go  on  in  my  house  that  I  know  nothing 
about...What’s this? Is there something between Elisa and Monsieur Valenod?” 
“Ha!  That’s  old  news,  my  dear,”  said  Madame  de  Rênal,  laughing,  “and  maybe  nothing 
wrong happened. It was when your good friend Valenod wouldn’t have been sorry if it were 
thought, in Verrières, that he and I were having―purely platonically, mind you―a bit of a love 
affair.” 
“Which  is  what  I  thought,  once,”  cried  Monsieur  de  Rênal,  angrily  slapping  his  head, 
proceeding from one discovery to another. “And you never said anything to me about it?” 
“Is there any point to making two friends quarrel, just because of our dear Valenod’s little 
flush of vanity? Show me the woman in society who hasn’t received letters that were witty, and 
even a touch gallant?” 
“He wrote to you?” 
“He wrote a lot.” 
“Show me those letters―immediately. I command it.”  And Monsieur de Rênal  grew six 
feet taller. 
“I’ve  kept  them,  indeed,”  she  answered,  with  a  sweetness  verging  on  indifference.  “I’ll 
show them to you someday, when you’re more sensible.” 
“Right now, by all that’s holy!” Monsieur de Rênal shouted, made drunk with anger―and 
yet happier than he had been in the last twelve hours. 
“Promise  me,”  said  Madame  de  Rênal  seriously,  “that  you  won’t  quarrel  with  Monsieur 
Valenod about these letters?” 
 
Chapter Twenty-One: Conversation with the Head of the House 
 
“Quarrel or no quarrel, I can take the foundling home away from him. But,” he went on, 
furious, “I want those letters right now. Where are they?” 
“In a drawer in my writing desk. But you may be sure I won’t give you the key.” 
“I’ll damn well break it,” he shouted, running to his wife’s room. 
He broke it, in fact, with an iron bar―a precious carved mahogany writing desk, brought 
from Paris, which he used to polish, often, with his coattail, whenever he thought he’d seen a 
little spot. 
Madame de Rênal went running up the hundred and twenty steps to the pigeon house; 
she tied the corner of a white handkerchief to the little window’s iron bars. She was the very 
happiest  of  women.  With  tears  in  her  eyes,  she  looked  out  toward  the  great  woods  of  the 
mountain. “Surely,” she told herself, “from under one of those shaggy birches, Julien can make 
out this happy signal.” She listened for a long time, then cursed the noisy monotone of crickets 
and birdsongs. Without these insistent sounds, a cry of joy, sent from the high rocks, would 
have reached exactly where she stood. Her greedy eyes devoured the huge, dark green slope, 
smooth as a meadow, shaped by the treetops. “Why hasn’t he got the wit,” she asked herself, 
waiting all expectant, “to think of some signal, so he can tell me his happiness is as great as 
mine?” She did not come down until she began to be afraid her husband might come looking 
for her. 
She  found  him  wildly  angry.  He  tore  through  Monsieur  Valenod’s  bland  phrases,  not 
meant to be read with so much emotion. 
Seizing  a  moment  when  her  husband’s  emphatic  performance  gave  her  a  chance  to  be 
understood: 
“I keep coming back to my idea,” Madame de Rênal declared, “that Julien really ought to 
go  on  a  trip.  Whatever  skill  he  may  have  at  Latin,  he  remains,  after  all,  only  a  peasant, 
frequently coarse and deficient in tact: every day, thinking himself terribly polite, he makes me 
exaggerated compliments, in poor taste, that he’s learned by heart from some novel....” 
“He never reads them,” Monsieur de Rênal exclaimed. “I guarantee that. Do you fancy I 
run this house like a blind man, who has no awareness of what’s going on?” 
“All right! If he hasn’t read these silly compliments, then he makes them up, and all the 
worse for him. In Verrières, too, he must have spoken to me like that...and though I can’t quite 
be sure,” said Madame de Rênal, “he must have spoken to Elisa that way: it’s how she must 
sometimes have talked to Monsieur Valenod.” 
“Ah!” shouted Monsieur de  Rênal, shaking the table and the entire room by one of  the 
fiercest fist-pounding blows ever struck. “The anonymous letter, with those cut-out words, is 
written on the same paper as Valenod’s letters to you.” 
“At  last!...”  thought  Madame  de  Rênal.  She  made  herself  seem  thunderstruck  by  this 
discovery, and, not having the courage to add a single word, went to the sofa, far away at the 
other end of the drawing room, and sat down. 
But the battle was already won. She had her hands full, stopping Monsieur de Rênal from 
going to the anonymous letter’s supposed author. 
“Why don’t you see that making a scene, without full and sufficient proof, would be to 
give Monsieur Valenod a signal of the greatest possible clumsiness? You are envied, sir, and 
who is to blame? Your own abilities: your wise administration, the tasteful construction work 
you’ve  had  done,  the  fine  dowry  I  brought  you,  and  above  all  the  large  inheritance  we  can 
expect from my aunt―an inheritance which is made to seem far more important than it is―
have made you Verrières’s leading man.” 
“You forget my birth,” said Monsieur de Rênal, smiling a bit. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
“You  are  one  of  the  most  distinguished  gentlemen  in  the  province,”  Madame  de  Rênal 
emphatically reaffirmed. “If the king were entirely free, and able to do justice to high breeding, 
you  could  imagine  yourself,  without  any  doubt  whatever,  in  the  House  of  Lords,  etc.  And 
being in so magnificent a position, you propose to give jealousy an occasion for comment? 
“To speak to Monsieur Valenod is to proclaim to all Verrières―no, what am I saying? to 
Besan04on,  to  the  whole  province―that  this  minor  shopkeeper,  who  has  been  admitted, 
perhaps unwisely, to intimacy with a Rênal, has found a way of insulting you. If these letters, 
which you’ve now obtained, were to prove I’d responded to Monsieur Valenod’s lovemaking, 
you’d be obliged to kill me, and I’d deserve it a hundred times over―but not to confront him 
in  anger.  Think:  All  your  neighbors  need  no  more  than  an  excuse,  they’ve  been  waiting  for 
revenge on your superiority. Think: In 18165 you played a part in certain people’s arrest. That 
man who was hiding on his roof―” 
“What  I  think  is  that  you  feel  neither  respect  nor  goodwill  toward  me,”  exclaimed 
Monsieur de Rênal, with all the bitterness that such a memory revived. “And I was never made 
a peer!”6 
“What I think, my dear,” Madame de Rênal responded, laughing, “is that I will be richer 
than you, that I’ve been your companion for twelve years, and that on all these matters I’m 
entitled to have a voice, and above all in today’s business. If you’d rather have Monsieur Julien 
than me,” she added with poorly masked displeasure, “I’m prepared to spend the winter with 
my aunt.” 
She phrased it masterfully, displaying a steadiness that was acting as if it were struggling 
to  wrap  itself  in  politeness.  It  was  decisive  for  Monsieur  de  Rênal.  Still,  observing  country 
procedures, he went on talking for a long time, reviewing all the arguments; his wife allowed 
him  to  talk:  there  was  still  anger  in  his  voice.  In  the  end,  two  hours  of  pointless  jabbering 
exhausted the strength of a man who had been dealing with anger the whole night. He settled 
the approach he would take to Monsieur Valenod, to Julien, and even to Elisa. 
last  night’s  anonymous 
Once  or  twice,  during  this  great  scene,  Madame  de  Rênal  was  close  to  some  degree  of 
compassion,  on  account  of  the  man’s  very  real  misery:  he  had  been  close  to  her  for  twelve 
years. But genuine passion is egotistic. Besides, from minute to minute she’d been waiting for 
him  to  acknowledge 
letter,  and  there  had  been  no  such 
acknowledgment. Madame de Rênal’s safety was not certain, lacking information about what 
ideas might have been suggested to this man, on whom her fate depended. In the countryside, 
of course, husbands are in charge of opinion. A moaning and groaning husband covers himself 
with ridicule (though from day to day this becomes less of a risk, in France), but his wife, if he 
refuses  her  money,  lapses  into  the  condition  of  a  workman  making  fifteen  cents  a  day,  and 
respectable people are not always willing to hire her. 
A harem slave can surely love her sultan; he is all-powerful; she has no hope of stealing 
his authority by a series of small subtleties. The household sultan can wreak terrible, bloody 
vengeance, but soldierlike, gracious: one dagger thrust, and it’s all over. But in this nineteenth 
century,  husbands  kill  their  wives  with  public  scorn―that  is,  by  having  all  drawing  rooms 
closed to them. 
Madame de Rênal’s awareness of danger was vividly heightened as soon as she returned to 
her room. She was shocked by how chaotic everything had become. The locks on every single 
one  of  her  pretty  little  boxes  had  been  broken;  several  of  the  thin  parquet  floorboards  had 
                                                             
5  Sometimes  referred  to  as  the  “White  Terror,”  after  the  color  of  the  royal  family;  the  early  years  of  the 
Restoration inevitably brought the arrest and prosecution of revolutionaries and imperialists. 
6 Under the Restoration, the upper house of the legislature was the Chambre des Pairs. Monsieur de Rênal 
believes his efforts in 1816 merited a peerage. 
 
Chapter Twenty-One: Conversation with the Head of the House 
 
been pried up. “He’s had absolutely no pity on me!” she said to herself. “Ruining this colored 
wood, which he loved so much: when one of the children came in with wet shoes, he’d turn 
red with anger. And now it’s ruined forever!” Seeing this violence drove away, and quickly, the 
last of her self-reproaches on account of her overly swift victory. 
A  little  before  dinnertime,  Julien  returned  with  the  children.  When  they  were  drinking 
coffee and eating cheese, and all the servants had left the room, Madame de Rênal spoke to 
Julien, exceedingly dryly: 
“You  expressed  your  desire  to  me,  that  you  might  be  permitted  to  spend  two  weeks  in 
Verrières. Monsieur de Rênal is quite agreeable to granting you a leave. You can go whenever 
you think best. But to keep the children from wasting their time, their papers will be sent to 
you, every day, for your corrections.” 
“To be sure,” added Monsieur de Rênal, his manner distinctly sour, “I won’t give you more 
than a week.” 
Julien noted, on his face, the anxiety of a deeply tormented soul. 
“He  still  hasn’t  made  up  his  mind,”  he  said  to  his  beloved,  in  the  drawing  room,  when 
they were alone for a moment. 
Madame de Rênal swiftly told him everything she’d done since that morning. 
“I’ll give you the details, later tonight,” she added, laughing. 
“Female perversity!” thought Julien. “What pleasure, what instinct, leads them to deceive 
us?” 
“It seems to me you’re both enlightened and blinded by love,” he said to her rather stiffly. 
“What  you’ve  done  today  is  admirable,  but  is  there  any  wisdom  in  seeking  to  be  together 
tonight? This  house is  packed with enemies: just think  of the passionate hate Elisa  feels for 
me.” 
“That hate much resembles the passionate indifference you apparently feel for me.” 
“Even  if  I  were  indifferent,  I  have  the  responsibility  of  saving  you  from  the  peril  into 
which I’ve plunged you. If, by some chance, Monsieur de Rênal decides to speak to Elisa, she 
can  tell  him  everything  in  very  few  words.  Suppose  he  hides  himself  near  my  room,  well 
armed....” 
“Ah! Not even courageous?” said Madame de Rênal, with the arrogance of a noble family’s 
daughter. 
“I won’t ever stoop to discussing my courage,” said Julien coldly. “That’s beneath me. Let 
the world decide, when I’ve done what I will do. But,” he added, taking her hand, “you don’t 
understand how deeply attached to you I am, and how happy it makes me to have this chance 
of taking leave of you, before our cruel separation.” 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Chapter Twenty-Two: Patterns of behavior, In 1830 
Words have been given to men in order to hide their thoughts. 
―R. P. Malagrida1 
He’d barely reached Verrières when Julien reproached himself for being unfair to Madame 
de  Rênal. “I’d  have  been  as  spiteful  as  a  little  girl,  had  weakness  made  her  avoid  that  scene 
with her husband! She behaved herself like a diplomat, and here I am, sympathizing with the 
defeated fellow who’s my enemy. I’m behaving like a petty shopkeeper. My vanity is affected, 
simply because Monsieur de Rênal is a man!―a member of that vast, illustrious guild to which 
I, too, have the honor of belonging. I’m nothing but a fool.” 
After removal  from office drove him  out  of the rectory,  Father Chélan refused lodgings 
offered him, for political reasons, by the most substantial liberals in the region. The two rooms 
he’d  rented  were  piled  all  over  with  books.  Julien,  wanting  to  show  Verrières  what  being  a 
priest  was  all  about,  got  a  dozen  pine  planks  from  his  father,  and  lugged  them  down  the 
highway  on  his  back.  Borrowing  tools  from  an  old  friend,  he  soon  constructed  a  set  of 
bookshelves, in which he arranged Father Chélan’s books. 
“I’d thought you corrupted by worldly vanity,” the old man told him, weeping with joy. 
“This is a worthy redemption for that bit of childishness, that brilliant uniform for the guard of 
honor, which made you so many enemies.” 
Monsieur de Rênal had directed Julien to live in the Rênals’ Verrières house. No one had 
any idea what had happened. On the third day after his arrival, Julien was visited in his room 
by no less a personage than Monsieur de Maugiron, the deputy governor of the district. Only 
after two long hours of insipid verbiage, and jeremiads about the wickedness of human beings, 
the dishonesty of those in charge of the public treasury, the dangers facing our poor France, 
etc., etc., was Julien able to catch a glimpse of the point to this visit. They’d already gotten to 
the staircase landing, and the poor, half-disgraced tutor was in the process of saying farewell, 
with all proper signs of respect, when the future governor of some lucky district was pleased to 
concern himself with Julien’s well-being, praising his moderation in matters that affected his 
own self-interest, etc., etc. Finally, embracing Julien in the most fatherly way, he suggested to 
him  that  he  depart  from  Monsieur  de  Rênal’s  service,  and  make  his  entrance  into  the 
household of a civil servant who had children to educate and who, like King Philip,2 thanked 
heaven  not  simply  for  giving  them  to  him  but  also  for  having  brought  them  into  a 
neighborhood  where  Monsieur  Julien  dwelled.  Their  tutor  would  enjoy  a  salary  of  eight 
hundred francs―not payable from month to month, which would not be truly generous, said 
Monsieur de Maugiron, but quarterly, and always in advance. 
It was Julien’s turn, after an hour and a half of listening to boring prattle. His reply was 
utter perfection, and above all quite as long as a pastoral letter. It left everything up in the air, 
saying nothing specific. It included respect for Monsieur de Rênal, reverence for the people of 
Verrières, and acknowledgment of so illustrious a gentleman as Monsieur de Maugiron. The 
deputy  governor,  dumbfounded  to  find  Julien  more  Jesuitical  than  he  was,  tried  in  vain  to 
secure some concrete response. Delighted, Julien took the opportunity to give himself some 
                                                             
1 Italian Jesuit who spent thirty years as a missionary in Brazil. He returned to Europe to assist victims of the 
Lisbon earthquake of 1755. Accused of plotting to assassinate the king of Portugal, he was burned at the stake 
in 1761. The quotation is usually attributed to Talleyrand, the legendarily agile diplomat (see note for p. 245, l. 
9), to whom it is far more appropriate. 
2  Refers  to  Philip  II  of  Macedonia,  who  had  the  good  fortune  to  find  in  his  neighborhood  Aristotle,  who 
became preceptor to his son, the future Alexander the Great. 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Two: Patterns of behavior, In 1830 
exercise, and began his reply all over, cast in different language. No eloquent parliamentarian, 
taking advantage of the end of a legislative session (when the elective body seems often to stir 
itself), has ever said less and employed a greater quantity of words. Monsieur de Maugiron was 
barely  out  the  door  when  Julien  began  to  laugh  like  a  crazy  man.  To  make  full  use  of  his 
Jesuitical spirits, he wrote a nine-page letter to Monsieur de Rênal, explaining everything that 
had  been  proposed  to  him,  and  humbly  requesting  his  advice.  “But,  all  the  same,  this 
scoundrel  never  mentioned  the  name  of  the  ‘civil  servant’  making  this  offer!  It  has  to  be 
Monsieur  Valenod,  who  sees  in  my  exile  to  Verrières  the  consequences  of  his  anonymous 
letter.” 
His missive sent on its way, Julien―feeling as satisfied as a hunter who, at sixA .M. on a 
beautiful autumn day, comes upon a field full of game―went to ask Father Chélan’s advice. 
But before he got to the good priest’s lodgings, heaven―wanting to contrive joyous occasions 
for him―set in his path Monsieur Valenod, from whom he did not conceal that his heart had 
been lacerated. A poor boy like him ought to be completely devoted to the vocation heaven 
had placed in his heart, but in this unspiritual world vocation is not everything. To do worthy 
work in Our Lord’s vineyard, and not to become entirely unworthy of his wise fellow workers, 
instruction was obligatory. Two expensive years must be spent in the seminary at Besan04on; 
economies were therefore necessary; and that would be a great deal easier on a salary of eight 
hundred francs, rather than six hundred francs, which was eaten up, month by month. On the 
other  hand,  in  placing  him  with  the  Rênal  children,  and  above  all  by  inspiring  him  with  a 
special affection for them, wasn’t heaven indicating that this wasn’t the time to give up that 
educational process for a different one?... 
Julien had attained so high a degree of perfection, in this sort of eloquence, which in our 
time has been substituted for the swift-moving action of the Empire, that he ended by boring 
himself with the sound of his words. 
Coming home, he found one of Monsieur Valenod’s servants, in splendid livery, who had 
been  looking  for  him  all  over  town.  A  luncheon  invitation  for  that  very  afternoon  was 
delivered. 
Julien had never been to the man’s house; only a few days earlier, all he had thought of 
was the best way to beat him with a stick, but in such a way that it would not become a matter 
for  criminal  prosecution.  Although  the  time  was  specified  as  one  o’clock,  Julien  thought  it 
more respectful to present himself at the Pauper’s Bureau office at twelve-thirty. He found his 
host  displaying  his  importance,  surrounded  on  every  side  by  file  boxes.  His  huge  black 
whiskers, his enormous shock of hair, his Greek cap set crossways on his head, his immense 
pipe, his embroidered slippers, the fat gold chains crossing every which way on his chest, and 
all the apparatus of a provincial financier who considers himself a Don Juan, had no effect on 
Julien. It only made him think, once again, of the cudgeling he owed the man. 
He requested the honor of being presented to Madame Valenod; she was at her dressing 
table  and  could  not  receive  him.  In  compensation,  he  was  given  the  favor  of  assisting  in 
Monsieur  Valenod’s  preparations.  Then  they  went  to  her  together  and  she  presented  her 
children, tears in her eyes. This lady, one of the most important in Verrières, had the coarse 
face of a man, onto which she had been applying rouge, in honor of this grand ceremony. She 
displayed quantities of maternal pathos. 
Julien  thought  of  Madame  de  Rênal.  His  mistrust  was  scarcely  susceptible  to  anything 
except this sort of recollection, summoned by contrasts, but which then gripped him almost 
tenderly. These feelings were heightened by being inside the Valenod house. He was given a 
tour. Everything he saw was magnificent and new, and he was told the price of each item. But 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Julien  found  it  rather  disgraceful,  smelling  of  stolen  money.  Everyone,  right  down  to  the 
servants, seemed to be setting their faces against contempt. 
The  tax  collector,  the  man  who  handled  indirect  taxes,  the  chief  of  police,  and  two  or 
three other government officials arrived, along with their wives. They were followed by several 
rich liberals. Lunch was announced. Julien, already in a distinctly black mood, began to reflect 
that on the other side of this dining room wall were the captive poor, from whose food they 
had  probably  been  chiseling  away  to  pay  for  all  this  luxurious  bad  taste  that  they  expected 
would overwhelm him. 
“They’re hungry, over there,” he told himself. His throat tightened. He could not eat and 
almost could not speak. It grew worse a quarter of an hour later: they could hear, as if from a 
distance, phrases from a popular song―more than a little vulgar, it must be admitted―being 
sung by one of the shut-in poor. Monsieur Valenod glanced at one of his people, wearing full 
livery, who disappeared; soon they heard no more singing. Just then, a servant brought Julien 
Rhine wine, in a green glass, and Madame Valenod took pains to explain that this cost nine 
francs a bottle, if bought locally. Julien accepted his green glass and said to Monsieur Valenod: 
“They’re not singing that ugly song anymore.” 
“Indeed! I quite believe it,” he replied triumphantly. “I’ve imposed silence on the beggars.” 
These words were too much for Julien. He had acquired the manners, but not the heart, 
of his social status. For all his hypocrisy, so frequently practiced, he felt a heavy tear rolling 
down his cheek. 
He tried to hide it behind the green glass, but it was absolutely impossible for him to do 
honor to the Rhine wine. “To stop them from singing!” he said to himself. “Oh my God! How 
can You allow it?” 
Luckily,  no  one  noticed  his  unacceptable  emotionalism.  The  tax  collector  had  been 
singing a royalist tune. As the refrain was roared out, in chorus: “There you are,” said Julien’s 
conscience. “The filthy fortune you’re after, and the only place you’ll get to enjoy it is like this, 
and in this kind of company! You’ll have a post worth maybe twenty thousand francs, but then 
you’ll find, while you stuff down your meat, that you’ll have to stop your poor prisoners from 
singing. You’ll give dinners with money you’ve stolen out of their miserable pittance, and even 
as you eat they’ll grow more miserable!―O Napoleon! It was good, in your day, to climb to 
fortune  by  fighting  battles.  But  to  accumulate  like  a  coward,  from  the  sorrows  of  the 
miserable!” 
I confess that the weakness that Julien demonstrates, in this monologue, gives me a poor 
opinion  of  him.  He’d  be  worthy  of  joining  ranks  with  those  parlor  liberals,  in  their  yellow 
gloves,3 who convince themselves they’re changing the whole way of life in a great country, but 
who can’t possibly have on their consciences the tiniest, most harmless scratch. 
Julien wrenched himself, violently, back to what he was supposed to be doing. He hadn’t 
been invited to dine in such excellent company just so he could dream and not eat a thing. 
A  retired  manufacturer  of  calico  prints,  a  corresponding  member  of  the  Besan04on 
Academy,4 and of that in Uzès, called out to him, from one end of the table to the other, to ask 
if it were true, as it was generally said to be, that he’d accomplished such astonishing things in 
the study of the New Testament. 
Immediately, a profound silence fell. A Latin New Testament appeared, as if by magic, in 
the hands of this scholarly member of two academies. After Julien replied, a half sentence of 
                                                             
3 The hallmark of the young dandy in fashionable salons, full of Romantic idealism and utterly ineffectual. 
4  Provincial  academies  gave  intellectuals  and  amateur  scholars  a  forum  for  presenting  and  publishing  the 
fruits of their labors. Such academies tended to sponsor conservative scholarship. 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Two: Patterns of behavior, In 1830 
Latin was read out, at random. He recited: his memory was found accurate, and the prodigy 
was admired with all the clamorous energy that flows at the end of a good meal. Julien looked 
at the beaming faces of the ladies; some of them were not bad. He noted the tax collector’s 
wife, he who had sung so well. 
“I  am  ashamed,  really,  to  speak  for  so  long  in  Latin,  in  front  of  these  ladies,”  he  said, 
watching  her.  “If  Monsieur  Rubigneau”―this  being  the  member  of  two  academies―”would 
have the goodness to read, at random, a Latin sentence, instead of proceeding to what follows 
in the Latin text, I’ll venture on an impromptu translation.” 
This second demonstration raised his glory to new heights. 
There were several rich liberals in attendance, also the happy fathers of children capable 
of  being  awarded  scholarships,  who  in  that  capacity  had  become  immediate  converts,  right 
after the last revivalist mission. In spite of such cunning tricks, Monsieur de Rênal had never 
cared  to  have  them  to  his  house.  These  honorable  men,  who  had  known  Julien  only  by 
reputation, and because he had been seen on horseback during the visit by the King of ―――, 
were his noisiest admirers. “When will these idiots grow weary of listening to biblical phrases, 
of which they don’t understand a thing?” he thought. But rather than the language itself, what 
amused them was its oddity. It made them laugh. But Julien grew tired. 
He  stood  up,  gravely,  as  six  o’clock  sounded,  and  told  them  of  a  new  theological 
discussion  by  Ligorio,5  which  he  had  been  studying  for  recitation,  the  next  day,  to  Father 
Chélan. “Because my business,” he added pleasantly, “is to hear lessons recited, and to recite 
them myself.” 
They laughed heartily; they admired him. This is how it is, in Verrières. Julien was already 
standing,  so  in  spite  of  decorum  all  the  others  rose:  this  is  the  power  of  genius.  Madame 
Valenod kept him for a quarter of an hour; he was required to hear the children recite their 
catechism;  they  committed  the  funniest  mistakes,  which  he  alone  noticed.  He  could  barely 
keep  from  correcting  them.  “What  ignorance  of  religion’s  first  principles!”  he  thought.  He 
finally made his farewells and thought he might escape. But he had to weather a fable by La 
Fontaine.6 
“This is a highly immoral writer,” Julien told Madame Valenod. “A fable he wrote on my 
lord Jean Chouart has the effrontery to pour ridicule on the most venerable of things. He has 
been roundly censured by the better critics.” 
Before he left, Julien received four or five invitations to dine. “This young man does honor 
to our region,” the merriest guests shouted in unison. They went so far as to talk about a grant, 
from public funds, which would even allow him to continue his studies in Paris. 
As this reckless notion was making the dining room ring, Julien nimbly got himself to the 
outer door. “Ah, scum! scum!” he exclaimed to himself three or four times, in a hushed voice, 
as he gratefully breathed in the fresh air. 
At that moment he felt himself profoundly aristocratic, he who for so long had been so 
shocked  by  the  contemptuous  smile  and  haughty  superiority  he  had  discovered,  under  the 
polite phrases addressed to him by Monsieur de Rênal. He could not help being aware of the 
enormous difference. “Let’s even put aside,” he said to himself as he walked along, “that this is 
about  money  stolen  from  captive  poor  folk―and  yet,  to  keep  them  from  singing!  Had 
                                                             
5  a  possible  reference  to  Saint  Alphonsus  Liguori,  an  eighteenth-century  Italian  theologian  who  had  been 
beatified in 1816. 
6 The verse Fables of Jean de La Fontaine (1621C95) have, since their publication, been a staple of the French 
education system, schoolchildren committing them to memory and reciting them (see note for p. 136, ll. 34C35). 
Master  Jean  Chouart  is  a  character  in  one  of  the  fables,  notable  for  its  anticlericalism.  La  Fontaine’s  Contes 
(Tales) tended toward ribaldry. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Monsieur de Rênal ever thought of telling his guests the price of every bottle of wine he offers 
them?  And  this  Monsieur  Valenod,  who  keeps  explaining  what  he  owns,  and  never  stops―
why,  when  his  wife  is  there  he  can’t  say  anything  about  his  house,  his  estate,  etc.,  without 
saying your house, your estate. 
“And  this  same  lady,  who  seems  so  aware  of  the  pleasures  of  ownership,  just  made  a 
disgusting scene, as we were dining, with a servant who’d broken a stemware glass and spoiled 
one of her dozens. And the servant had replied with infinite insolence. 
“What  a  bunch!”  Julien  told  himself.  “If  they  gave  me  half  of  everything  they  own,  I 
couldn’t live with them. Some fine day, I’ll give myself away―I won’t be able to hold back the 
contemptuous remarks they inspire in me.” 
All the same, pursuant to Madame de Rênal’s orders he had to attend a number of very 
similar occasions. Julien was fashionable: his guard of honor uniform was forgiven―or perhaps 
that  recklessness  was  the  real  reason  for  his  success.  Soon,  nothing  was  more  at  issue,  in 
Verrières, than the struggle to obtain this young scholar’s services: Who would win, Monsieur 
de Rênal or Monsieur Valenod? These two gentlemen, together with Father Maslon, had for 
years formed a triumvirate that ruled the town with an iron hand. People were jealous of the 
mayor; he gave the liberals much cause for complaint. But he was, after all, a nobleman and 
destined  to  be  superior,  while  Monsieur  Valenod’s  father  hadn’t  left  him  so  much  as  ten 
thousand  francs  a  year.  He  had  to  ascend,  starting  from  the  pity  people  felt  for  him  as  a 
youngster, on account of the ugly green apple clothes he’d always worn, to now, when he was 
envied for his Normand steeds, for his thick gold chains, for his Parisian-fashioned clothing, 
and for the whole of his current prosperity. 
In all this world so new to Julien, he thought he’d come upon an honest man. He was a 
mathematician named Gros,7 with a reputation as a Jacobin. Julien, having pledged himself to 
say nothing except what was contradictory to his true beliefs, found it necessary to hold back a 
bit, in dealing with Monsieur Gros. 
Great  packages  of  his  pupils’  writing  came  to  him  from  Vergy.  He  had  been  advised  to 
visit his father, as often as possible, and though it was a sorry necessity, he obeyed. In short, he 
did a fine job of repairing his reputation, until one morning he was surprised to find himself 
being awakened by a pair of hands placed over his eyes. 
It was Madame de Rênal, who had come into town and, climbing the stairs four at a time, 
leaving  her  children  busy  with  a  pet  rabbit  they’d  taken  on  their  trip,  had  reached  Julien’s 
room  moments  before  they  could.  It  was  a  delightful  moment,  but  very  short:  Madame  de 
Rênal had vanished by the time the children came, bringing their rabbit, which they wanted 
their friend to see. Julien gave them all a hearty welcome, including the rabbit. He felt as if 
he’d found his family once again; he felt full of love for the children, and happy to chatter with 
them.  He  was  astonished  by  the  sweetness  of  their  voices,  the  simplicity  and  generosity  of 
their little ways: he had to wash his mind clean of all the vulgar acts, the unpleasant thoughts, 
in the midst of which he lived and breathed, in Verrières. There was always the fear of having 
to  do  without,  there  were  always  luxury  and  misery  at  each  other’s  throats.  In  the  houses 
where  he  dined  on  their  roast  beef,  everyone  told  secrets  humiliating  to  themselves  and 
nauseating to those obliged to listen. 
“You’re different, you’re generous, you’re right to be proud,” he told Madame de Rênal. 
He recounted all the events at places where he’d dined. 
                                                             
7 A nod to Marie-Henri Beyle’s own mathematics tutor in Grenoble, who helped his student gain entry to the 
07cole Polytechnique and thus escape Grenoble for Paris. 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Two: Patterns of behavior, In 1830 
“So you’re all the fashion!” And she laughed heartily, thinking of the rouge that Madame 
Valenod felt herself bound to apply every time Julien was expected. “I suspect she has designs 
on your heart,” she added. 
Lunch was delicious. The children’s presence, no matter how troublesome it might have 
seemed, in fact added to the general happiness. The poor children could not fully express their 
joy at seeing Julien again. The servants had not failed to tell them how Julien had been offered 
two hundred francs more, to educate the little Valenods. 
In  the  middle  of  the  meal,  Stanislas-Xavier,  still  pale  from  his  serious  illness,  suddenly 
asked his mother how much his silver plate and the goblet he drank from were worth. 
“And why are you asking?” 
“I want to sell them so I can give the money to Monsieur Julien, so he won’t be cheated if 
he stays with us.” 
Julien  hugged  him,  tears  in  his  eyes.  The  boy’s  mother  wept  freely  as  Julien,  who  had 
taken  Stanislas  onto  his  lap,  explained  that  he  didn’t  need  to  use  the  word  cheated,  which 
when employed in this way was a servant’s way of speaking. Seeing the pleasure he was giving 
Madame de Rênal, he tried to explain, using colorful examples at which the children laughed, 
what being “cheated” really meant. 
“I understand,” said Stanislas. “It’s the crow who’s stupid enough to drop his cheese, and 
that flatterer, the fox, picks it up.”8 
Madame de Rênal, wild with happiness, covered the children with kisses, which she could 
hardly have managed without a bit of help from Julien. 
Suddenly  the  door  opened:  it  was  Monsieur  de  Rênal.  His  dour,  unhappy  face  was  in 
strange contrast to the gentle joy his presence had driven away. Madame de Rênal grew pale: 
she felt unable to deny a thing. Julien took hold of the conversation and, speaking quite loudly, 
set himself to telling His Honor the Mayor about Stanislas and the silver goblet he’d wanted to 
sell.  He  was  sure  the  story  would  not  be  well  received.  At  first,  hearing  the  word  silver, 
Monsieur de Rênal raised his eyebrows, purely out of habit. “Any mention of this metal,” he 
said, “is always prefatory to a draft drawn on my bank account.” 
But more than his concern with silver was involved: he’d experienced a surge of suspicion. 
For such happiness to be animating his family, in his absence, did not sit well with a man so 
dominated by prickly vanity. As his wife, for her husband’s benefit, praised Julien’s cheerful, 
lively way of broaching new ideas to their children: 
“Yes, yes! I quite understand, he’s making me hateful to my own children. He’s entirely 
comfortable,  being  a  hundred  times  more  likable  than  me―I  being,  in  the  end,  lord  and 
master  here.  In  our  time,  everyone  likes  to  cast  aspersions  on  legitimate  authority.9  Poor 
France!” 
Madame  de  Rênal  did  not  concern  herself  with  any  subtleties,  in  her  greeting  to  her 
husband.  She  had  been  contemplating  the  possibility,  before  he’d  appeared,  of  spending 
twelve hours with Julien. She had an enormous number of things to buy in town, and declared 
her absolute intention that they dine at a café: no matter what her husband might say or do, 
her mind was made up. The very word café completely captivated the children―this word that 
contemporary prudes mouth with such pleasure. 
                                                             
8 The Fox and the Crow,or Le Corbeau et le Renard, one of La Fontaine’s most popular fables: The clever, hungry 
fox, envying the crow’s hunk of cheese, flatters the bird by praising his beautiful singing voice and begging 
for a song. The crow opens his beak to squawk, and drops the cheese. 
9 Words loaded with political significance in France and Europe of the early nineteenth century; legitimists 
being a broad term describing supporters of the Bourbon monarchy, and the doctrine of legitimacy being the 
guiding principle of the Congress of Vienna in 1815. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Monsieur de Rênal left his wife, in order to pay some visits, when she went into the first 
drapery  shop.  He  came  back  even  glummer  than  before:  he  was  convinced  that  the  whole 
world was thinking of nothing but him and Julien. In fact, nobody had given him the slightest 
indication that, in the eyes of the public, he might be the offended party. Whatever had been 
recounted to His Honor the Mayor was exclusively concerned with Julien, and whether he’d be 
staying for six hundred francs, or accepting the eight hundred offered by Monsieur Valenod. 
And  Monsieur  Valenod,  when  he  met  Monsieur  de  Rênal,  cut  him  cold.  Nor  was  this  a 
spontaneous  maneuver:  almost  nothing,  in  the  countryside,  is  done  without  good  reason. 
Genuine emotion is so rare, out in the provinces, that it gets pushed as far down as it can go. 
Monsieur Valenod was what’s called, three hundred miles from Paris, a slick operator, a 
man  of  natural,  coarse  brazenness.  His  triumphant  career,  since  1815,  had  reinforced  these 
handsome characteristics. He ruled, in other words, subject to Monsieur de Rênal’s orders, but 
being so much more active, never squeamish about anything, able to mix with the populace, 
always  on  the  go,  writing,  speaking,  brushing  off  humiliation,  totally  devoid  of  personal 
pretentions,  he  had  come,  in  the  eyes  of  the  ecclesiastical  power,  to  quite  balance  out  his 
mayor.  Monsieur Valenod had more or less said to the  province’s  grocers: “Let me  have the 
two most stupid among you.” He’d said to the purveyors of justice: “Show me your two most 
notable ignoramuses.” To the supervisors of health: “Tell me who are your two most crooked.” 
And when he had gathered together the most brazen, in every business and profession, he’d 
said to them: “Let’s rule together.” 
These  people’s  methods  had  offended  Monsieur  de  Rênal.  Valenod’s  coarseness  was 
offended by nothing, not even by the wild denunciations spouted against him, in public, by 
little Father Maslon. 
Yet  in  the  middle  of  all  his  prosperity,  Monsieur  Valenod  felt  the  need  to  bolster  his 
confidence  by  tiny,  trivial  acts  of  haughtiness,  directed  against  the  coarse  truths  he  knew, 
quite well indeed, the whole world had the right to address to him. His activity had sharply 
multiplied  since  the  fears  he’d  experienced,  following  Monsieur  Appert’s  visit.  He’d  made 
three trips to Besan04on; every courier who’d ridden out of town carried letters from him; he’d 
sent others by the hands of people, known to no one, who came to his house when darkness 
fell.  He  had  perhaps  been  wrong  to  take  old  Father  Chélan’s  office  from  him,  for  that 
vindictive  proceeding  had  made  him  seem,  to  several  devout  people  of  good  birth  and 
breeding,  a  profoundly  evil  man.  In  addition,  the  clerical  assistance  rendered  him,  in  this 
matter,  left  him  absolutely  dependent  on  the  vicar-general,10  Monsieur  de  Frilair,  and  he’d 
already been asked to do some strange things. His political standing had reached this point 
when,  indulging  his  personal  pleasure,  he  wrote  an  anonymous  letter.  Even  worse,  his  wife 
told him she wanted Julien to dine with them, a notion vanity had put into her head. 
At  this  juncture,  Monsieur  Valenod  expected  a  decisive  scene  with  his  old  associate, 
Monsieur de Rênal. The latter had spoken harsh words to him, which did not bother Monsieur 
Valenod a bit, but de Rênal had the power of direct communication with Besan04on, and even 
with  Paris.  Some  royal  minister’s  relative  might  suddenly  drop  down  on  Verrières  and  take 
over the Pauper’s Bureau. Monsieur Valenod wondered about approaching the liberals, which 
is why several of them had been invited to the occasion at which Julien recited. He would have 
powerful support against the mayor. But elections might intervene, and it was all too obvious 
that directing a bureau and giving votes to the opposition were incompatible. 
                                                             
10 Or Grand Vicaire, was a priest who served as auxiliary to a bishop. When many bishops were still aristocratic 
political appointees, a vicar-general could wield considerable influence within a diocese. 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Two: Patterns of behavior, In 1830 
An account of these developments, very accurately puzzled out by Madame de Rênal, was 
passed along to Julien, as he lent her his arm and she went from shop to shop, until step by 
step  they  were  brought  to  Loyalty  Walkway,  where  they  spent  several  hours  almost  as 
tranquilly as at Vergy. 
While  they  were  proceeding  on  their  way,  Monsieur  Valenod  was  considering  how  to 
avoid a decisive scene with his former supporter and patron, taking a bold stance toward him. 
His approach worked, that day, but it further irritated the mayor. 
Vanity, with the pincer grip given it by the petty worship of money, had never clutched 
more bitterly or more meanly, or thrown a man into a more wretched mood, than Monsieur de 
Rênal, as he walked into the café. But never, from the opposite perspective, had his children 
been happier and more joyful. The contrast annoyed him. 
“I’m out of place in my own family, as far as I can see!” he declared at once, in a tone he 
meant to sound impressive. 
His wife’s only response was to take him aside and explain how badly they needed to send 
Julien  away.  The  happy  hours  she’d  just  experienced  lent  her  the  confidence  and  steadiness 
required, so she could carry out the plan she’d been evolving for two weeks. At bottom, what 
most  disturbed  the  poor  mayor  was  knowing  he’d  become  the  butt  of  jokes  all  over  town, 
because  of  his  fondness  for  cash.  Monsieur  Valenod  was  as  generous  as  a  burglar,  and  the 
mayor had behaved with more prudence than brilliance in the last five or six fund drives for 
the Brotherhood of Saint Joseph, the Congregation of the Holy Virgin, the Congregation of the 
Holy Sacrament, etc., etc., etc. 
Among the squires of Verrières and its surrounding neighborhoods, whose gifts the fund-
collecting friars neatly arranged in descending monetary order, Monsieur de Rênal’s name had 
more than once been on the very bottom line. It was no use arguing, as he did, that he wasn’t 
making any money. This is something the clergy cannot take lightly. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Chapter Twenty-Three: A Civil Servant’s Sorrows 
The pleasure of carrying your head high, all year long, is more than paid for by having to endure certain 
fifteen-minute intervals. 
―Casti1 
But let’s leave this petty man and his petty fears: Why did he bring a man of spirit into his 
house, when what he needed was someone with a servant’s heart? Why doesn’t he know how 
to pick people? The usual procedure in the nineteenth century is that, meeting a man of spirit, 
a powerful nobleman promptly kills him, exiles him, throws him into prison, or so humiliates 
him that he commits stupid acts and, deep in sorrow, dies for them. Here, by accident, it’s still 
not the man of spirit who’s been suffering. The great misfortune of France’s small towns, and 
of  places  governed  by  elections  (like  New  York),  is  that  they  can’t  escape  from  people  like 
Monsieur de Rênal. In a city of twenty thousand inhabitants, it’s these men who shape public 
opinion, and public opinion is a frightful thing in a country that has a constitution. A noble-
souled,  generous  man  who  ought  to  be  your  friend,  but  who  lives  five  hundred  miles  away, 
judges you by the public opinion of your city, which is formulated by fools to whom chance 
has  granted  noble  birth,  making  them  rich  and  safely  moderate.  But  woe  to  the  man  who 
stands out from the rest! 
After they had dined, the de Rênals went back to Vergy. But just two days later, Julien saw 
the whole family again in Verrières. 
They had not been there an hour when, to his great surprise, Julien learned that Madame 
de  Rênal  was  keeping  something  secret  from  him.  She  broke  off  her  conversations  with  her 
husband, whenever he appeared, and almost seemed anxious for him to go away. There was no 
need to give that warning twice, not to Julien. He became distant, reserved; though Madame 
de Rênal was aware of it, she made no attempt to explain. “Am I to have a successor?” Julien 
thought. “Just two days ago she was exceedingly friendly! But I’ve heard that’s how these great 
ladies operate. They’re like kings: a government minister, without any warning, comes home 
after seeing his lord, and his letter of dismissal is there waiting for him.” 
Julien had noticed that the de Rênals’ conversations, broken off so abruptly when he came 
near, were often about a mansion that the town owned, ancient but ample, and conveniently 
located, right across from the church, in the city’s most commercial district. “What connection 
could there be,” he asked himself, “between this house and her taking a new lover?” Morosely, 
he recalled Fran04ois I’s pretty lines, which to him were completely fresh, because only a month 
ago  had  Madame  de  Rênal  taught  them  to  him.  And  then,  how  many  oaths,  how  many 
caresses, contradicted every single line! 
Women change their minds: 
Trust them, if you’re blind. 
Monsieur de Rênal took the mail coach to Besan04on. The trip had been decided on only 
two hours earlier: he seemed deeply troubled. When he returned, he threw a large package, 
covered in gray paper, onto the table. 
“There’s that stupid business,” he told his wife. 
An  hour  later,  the  bill  poster  came  and  carried  off  the  large  package.  Julien  hurriedly 
followed after him. “At the very first street corner, I’m going to know the secret.” 
                                                             
1 Casti refers to a licentious poet of eighteenth-century Italy. 
P. 141, L. 17. Fran04ois I: King Francis I was the great model of the Renaissance prince for the French; the verses 
quoted would not have been out of character. Francis’s amorous activities inspired Victor Hugo’s play Le Roi 
s’amuse (The King Takes His Pleasure), which in turn inspired Verdi’s opera Rigoletto. 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Three: A Civil Servant’s Sorrows 
He waited impatiently, standing behind the bill poster. Taking up his big brush, the man 
spread  paste  over  the  back  of  the  poster.  It  was  scarcely  fastened  to  the  wall  when,  avidly 
curious,  Julien  found  himself  reading  a  detailed  description  of  the  huge  old  house  that 
Monsieur  de  Rênal  and  his  wife  had  been  discussing,  and  the  announcement  of  a  public 
auction.  Bidding  for  the  lease  would  take  place  in  the  town  hall  the  very  next  day,  at  two 
o’clock  sharp;  it  would  end  when  the  last  of  three  candles  had  burned  itself  out.  Julien  was 
quite disappointed. The interval struck him as exceedingly short: How would all the potential 
bidders  be  notified  in  time?  But  the  remainder  of  the  poster,  which  was  dated  two  weeks 
earlier, told him nothing more. He read it three times, from start to finish, in three different 
locations. 
He  went  to  look  at  the  house.  The  porter,  not  seeing  him,  was  quietly  saying,  to  a 
neighbor: 
“Bah! Bah! It’s a waste of time. Father Maslon promised him he’d get it for three hundred 
francs, and since the mayor wouldn’t go along, the vicar-general, Father de Frilair, sent it up to 
the bishop.” 
Seeing Julien apparently upset the two friends, who never uttered another word. 
Julien would not have missed the auction. The dimly lit room was crowded, but everyone 
was inspecting everyone else in the oddest way. Then all eyes fixed on a tin plate, on which 
Julien noticed three candles burning. The bailiff shouted: “Three hundred francs, gentlemen!” 
“Three  hundred  francs!  Now  that’s  going  too  far!”  said  a  man,  speaking  softly  to  his 
neighbor. Julien stood almost between them. “The lease is worth more than eight hundred. I’m 
going to cover that bid.” 
“You’re  just  spitting  in  the  wind.  What  good  will  it  do  to  get  their  backs  up,  Father 
Maslon, Monsieur Valenod, the bishop, the bishop’s horrible vicar, Father Frilair, and all the 
others in that gang?” 
“Three hundred and twenty francs,” the other man called out. 
“Dumb fool!” his neighbor responded. “And there’s one of the mayor’s spies,” he added, 
motioning to Julien. 
Julien  quickly  turned  around  to  pay  them  back  for  this  remark,  but  the  two  citizens  of 
Franche-Comté  paid  him  not  the  slightest  attention.  Their  steady  coolness  revived  his.  Just 
then, the last bit of candle sputtered out, and the bailiff’s dull voice announced that the house 
had  been  rented,  for  nine  years,  to  Monsieur  de  Saint-Giraud,  department  chief  in  ――― 
district, and at three hundred and thirty francs. 
The mayor having left the room, comments started up. 
“There’s thirty francs that Grogeot’s arrogance is costing the city,” someone said. 
“But Monsieur de Saint-Giraud,” said someone else, “will get back at Grogeot; he’ll make 
him feel it.” 
“Disgraceful!” said a fat man to Julien’s left. “I’d pay eight hundred francs for that house, 
eight hundred, and use it in my business―and it would be a good bargain.” 
“Bah!” answered a young industrialist, a liberal. “Monsieur de Saint-Giraud belongs to the 
Congregation of the Holy Virgin, right? His four children have scholarships, don’t they? Oh, 
the  poor  man!  The  people  of  Verrières  have  to  give  him  a  bonus,  five  hundred  francs  every 
month. That’s all there is to it.” 
“I hear the mayor couldn’t stop it!” observed a third man. “Because he’s an ultra,2 a real 
reactionary, all right, but he doesn’t steal.” 
                                                             
2  Short  for  “ultra  royaliste”;  the  ultra  party  longed  for  a  return  to  absolute  monarchy,  including  the 
reinstatement of feudal laws and customs. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
“He doesn’t steal?” answered someone else. “No, it’s the pigeons who steal, not the eagles. 
The  whole  thing  goes  into  a  big  pot,  and  when  the  year’s  over,  they  all  get  their  share.  But 
that’s little Sorel, right there. Let’s go.” 
Julien  was  in  a  foul  mood  when  he  got  back.  He  found  Madame  de  Rênal  just  as 
sorrowful. 
“You’ve been to the auction?” she asked him. 
“Yes, madame, where I had the honor to be considered a spy for His Honor the Mayor.” 
“If he’d taken my advice, he’d have gone on a trip somewhere.” 
Just  then,  Monsieur  de  Rênal  appeared.  He,  too,  seemed  very  grave.  They  dined  in 
absolute silence. Monsieur de Rênal directed Julien to return to Vergy with the children. It was 
a sad trip. Madame de Rênal consoled her husband. 
“You need to get used to these things, my dear.” 
That evening, they were sitting around the hearth, still silent. The only sound came from 
the burning beech log. It was one of those grieving times that every family experiences, even 
the most harmonious. One of the children called out, joyfully: 
“The doorbell! It rang!” 
“Good Lord! If that’s Monsieur de Saint-Giraud, coming to throw this thing in my face, 
pretending to thank me for it,” exclaimed the mayor, “I’ll tell him the truth. This is simply too 
much. He owes it all to Valenod, but it’s being charged to me. What can I say, if these cursed 
Jacobin  newspapers  decide  to  make  hay  with  such  a  tale,  and  turn  me  into  a  strawman 
monster?” 
A very handsome man, with a thick black beard, came into the room, following one of the 
servants. 
“Your Honor, I’m Signor Géronimo. May I present you with a letter given me, just before I 
made my departure, by the Chevalier de Beauvoisis, attaché to your ambassador in Naples? It 
is  addressed  to  you―and  that  was  only  nine  days  ago,”  Signor  Géronimo  added  pleasantly, 
looking at Madame de Rênal. “Madame, the chevalier is both your relative and my very good 
friend: he tells me you speak Italian.” 
The Neapolitan’s high spirits changed a sad evening into a very happy one. Madame de 
Rênal decided that, without any question, he was to be asked to dine with them. She stirred up 
everyone  in  the  house:  at  all  costs,  she  did  not  want  Julien  thinking  too  much  about  being 
called a spy―for he had heard it twice that very day. Signor Géronimo was a famous singer, 
from  good  society  and  yet  splendidly  ebullient―qualities  that,  in  France,  are  no  longer 
entirely compatible. After they had dined, he sang a little duet with Madame de Rênal. He told 
charming stories. An hour after midnight, the children protested when Julien suggested they 
go to bed. 
“Tell that story just once more,” said the oldest. 
“It’s about me, young man,” replied Signor Géronimo. “Eight years ago―at just your age, 
as I understand―I was a young student at the Naples Conservatory. Of course, I did not have 
the honor of being son to the illustrious mayor of so pretty a place as Verrières.” 
These words made Monsieur de Rênal sigh; he glanced at his wife. 
“Signor  Zingarelli,”  the  young  singer  continued,  exaggerating  his  Italian  accent  and 
making the children burst out laughing. “Signor Zingarelli, the director, was a terribly harsh 
teacher. He was not popular at the conservatory, but he wanted everyone to pretend he was. I 
got out as often as I could; I used to go to the little theater at San Carlino, where I heard music 
fit for the gods. But, oh Lord! How could I scrape up the price of a ticket in the back row? It 
was a lot of money,” he said, making a face at the children, and the children laughed. “Signor 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Three: A Civil Servant’s Sorrows 
Giovannone,  director  of  the  theater,  had  heard  me  sing.  I  was  sixteen.  ‘This  youngster’s  a 
treasure,’ he said. 
“‘Would you like me to hire you, my dear boy?’ he said, coming over to me. 
“‘What will I be paid?’ 
“‘Forty ducats a month.’ Gentlemen, that’s a hundred and sixty francs. I felt as if heaven 
had suddenly opened. 
“‘But how,’ I said to Giovannone, ‘how can I get a hard man like Zingarelli to let me go?’ 
“‘Lascia fare a me.’” 
“Leave it to me!” cried the oldest child. 
“Exactly,  young  man.  Signor  Giovannone  said:  ’My  boy,  we  start  with  just  a  tiny 
engagement.’ I signed a contract: he gave me three ducats. I’d never seen so much money. And 
then he told me what I had to do. 
“The next day, I requested an audience with terrifying Signor Zingarelli. His old servant 
showed me in. 
“‘What do you want from me, you good-for-nothing?’ said Zingarelli. 
“‘Maestro,’ I told him, ‘I repent my sins. I won’t sneak out of the conservatory anymore, 
climbing over the fence. I’m going to work twice as hard.’ 
“‘If I wasn’t worried about ruining the best bass voice I’ve ever heard, I’d lock you up for 
two weeks, on bread and water―rascal!’ 
“‘Maestro,’ I answered, ‘I’m going to be a model student, believe me. But I have to ask you 
a favor: if anyone comes to you, asking to let me sing anywhere else, don’t say yes. Please, just 
say you can’t do it.’ 
“‘And who the devil would come looking for a rascal like you? Do you think I’ll ever let 
you leave the conservatory? Are you making fun of me? Clear out, clear out!’ he said, trying to 
kick me on the rear end. ‘Or else it’s dry bread and a lock on the door.’ 
“An hour later, Signor Giovannone came to the conservatory office. 
“‘I’d like you to make me a rich man,’ he said to Signor Zingarelli. ‘Let me have Géronimo. 
If he sings in my theater, next winter I’ll be able to marry off my daughter.’ 
“‘Why would you want that good-for-nothing,’ Zingarelli said. ‘I won’t let you; you’re not 
going to get him; and besides, even if I agreed, he wouldn’t leave the conservatory―he just 
finished swearing that.’ 
“‘If it’s only a question of what he wants,’ Giovannone said with a straight face, pulling out 
the contract I’d signed, ‘here it is, in black and white! See his signature?’ 
“Absolutely  furious,  Zingarelli  rang  the  school  bell:  ’Get  that  Géronimo  out  of  the 
conservatory!’ he shouted, boiling with anger. So they threw me out, and I laughed the whole 
way. That very same night, I sang ‘The Multiplication Song.’ Pulcinella3 was thinking of getting 
married, so he was counting―on his fingers―just what he’d need to buy for his house, and 
getting angrier and angrier the higher he counted.” 
“Oh please!” said Madame de Rênal, “please sing the song for us.” 
Géronimo sang the song, and everyone laughed so hard that they cried. Signor Géronimo 
didn’t get to sleep until two, leaving the family enchanted by his fine manners, his agreeability, 
and his jolliness. 
The next day, both Monsieur and Madame de Rênal gave him the letters he would need at 
the French court. 
“So:  Falsity  is  everywhere,”  Julien  said  to  himself.  “Here’s  Signor  Géronimo  going  to 
London  with  sixty  thousand  francs  guaranteed.  Without  the  calm  worldliness  of  the  San 
                                                             
3 The fool or clown Pulcinella was a stock character in European theatre, opera, etc. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Carlino’s  director,  perhaps  his  divine  voice  might  not  have  been  known  and  admired  for 
another ten years. Really, I’d much rather be a Géronimo than a de Rênal. The singer’s not so 
honored in Italian society, but he doesn’t have to experience the misery of auctions, like the 
one earlier today, and his life is merry.” 
One thing surprised Julien: the solitary weeks in Verrières, at Monsieur de Rênal’s house, 
had been a period of happiness. He’d encountered disgust and distressing thoughts only at the 
dinners  they  gave  for  him.  Couldn’t  he  read,  and  write,  and  reflect  without  being  troubled, 
here in this empty house? He was not constantly being pulled away from shining dreams by 
the cruel necessity of studying a base soul’s behavior, and then to deceive him by hypocritical 
actions or words. 
“Will happiness be something so close to home? ... That sort of life is not expensive: if I 
chose to, I could marry Miss Elisa, or go into partnership with Fouqué...The traveler who’s just 
climbed a steep mountain sits down at the top, and finds perfect pleasure in resting. Would he 
be as happy, if were he forced to do nothing but rest?” 
Madame  de  Rênal’s  mind  had  reached  some  fateful  conclusions.  In  spite  of  all  her 
resolutions, she’d confessed to Julien the whole business behind the auction. “He makes me 
forget all my vows!” she thought. 
She would have sacrificed her life without hesitation, to save her husband’s, and she had 
seen  him  in  danger.  Hers  was  one  of  those  noble,  romantic  souls,  for  whom  seeing  the 
possibility  of  some  generous  deed,  and  not  doing  it,  creates  remorse  every  bit  as  strong  as 
committing a crime. All the same, there had been deadly days when she could not keep from 
picturing  the  enormous  happiness  she’d  taste  if,  having  become  a  widow,  she  was  able  to 
marry Julien. 
He loved her children more than their father did; in spite of his strict ways, they adored 
him. She was keenly aware that, in marrying Julien, she would be bound to leave this Vergy, a 
shady  place  very  dear  to  her.  She  pictured  herself  living  in  Paris,  continuing  to  provide  her 
children  with  an  education  that  all  the  world  admired.  Her  children,  and  she,  and  Julien: 
they’d all be perfectly happy. 
What strange effects marriage has, in the form practiced by the nineteenth century! The 
boredom  of  married  life  certainly  kills  love,  if  love  has  preceded  marriage.  But,  says  a 
philosopher, for those sufficiently wealthy not to need employment, marriage soon leads to a 
profound  boredom  with  all  balanced,  calm  pleasures.  Nor  is  it  only  dried-up  souls,  among 
women, who have no passion for love. 
These  philosophical  thoughts  lead  me  to  excuse  Madame  de  Rênal―but  she  found  no 
forgiveness in Verrières, and the whole town, though she was not aware of it, was devoted to 
nothing but the scandal of her love affair. That autumn, because of this intense business, the 
town did not suffer so much from boredom. 
Autumn, and the first part of winter, went by rather quickly. It became time to leave the 
woods  of  Vergy.  Verrières’s  high  society  became  indignant,  finding  that  their  social 
excommunication had very little effect on Monsieur de Rênal. Less than a week later, certain 
sober folk, who like to compensate for their habitual seriousness by accomplishing this sort of 
task, expressed to him the most intensely cruel suspicions, though they phrased them in the 
most measured terms. 
Monsieur Valenod, who had been playing everything close to the vest, had placed Elisa 
with an aristocratic family of high repute, which included five women. Elisa had been afraid, 
she’d said, of not finding a place all winter, so she asked these people for only two-thirds of 
what she’d been receiving at the mayor’s house. Of her own volition, the girl had the excellent 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Three: A Civil Servant’s Sorrows 
notion of making her confession to the former parish priest, Father Chélan, as well as to the 
new priest, in order to tell both of them all the details of Julien’s love affair. 
The day after his arrival, at six in the morning, Father Chélan had summoned Julien. 
“I have no questions for you,” the old priest said. “I ask you, and if I need to I will order 
you, to say nothing to me. I expect you, within three days, either to leave for the seminary in 
Besan04on or for your friend Fouqué’s home, he being still of a mind to arrange a magnificent 
place for you. I have anticipated everything, arranged everything, but you must leave and not 
return to Verrières for an entire year.” 
Julien made no reply. He was considering: Might his honor be thought offended by Father 
Chélan’s efforts on his behalf? The old priest was not, after all, his father. 
“Tomorrow, at this same hour,” he finally said, “I will have the honor of seeing you once 
again.” 
Father Chélan, who had expected to effect matters with a high hand in dealing with this 
young  man,  said  a  great  deal.  Wrapped  in  a  stance  and  a  facial  appearance  of  the  deepest 
humility, Julien did not open his mouth. 
Julien  finally  left,  and  hurried  to  warn  Madame  de  Rênal;  he  found  her  in  a  state  of 
despair.  Her  husband  had  just  been  speaking  to  her  rather  frankly.  His  natural  weakness 
having been propped up by  the expectation of the Besan04on inheritance, he had decided to 
consider her completely innocent. He had approached her in order to acknowledge the strange 
condition  of  public  opinion  in  Verrières.  They  were  wrong,  they  were  being  misled  by  the 
envious―but what should be done? 
Madame de Rênal had a fleeting notion that Julien could accept Monsieur Valenod’s offer, 
and remain in Verrières. But she was no longer the simple, shy woman she had been the year 
before:  her  fatal  passion,  and  her  remorse,  had  instructed  her.  She  soon  experienced  the 
sadness of acknowledging to herself, all the while listening to her husband, that at least some 
momentary  separation  had  become  inevitable.  “Away  from  me,  Julien  will  fall  back  into  his 
ambitious  plans,  so  natural  when  you  have  nothing.  And  me,  great  God,  I’m  rich!  And  so 
uselessly, when it comes to my happiness! He’ll forget me. Lovable as he is, he will be loved, he 
will love. Ah, miserable woman...But what am I complaining about? Heaven is just. I haven’t 
had the worthiness to stop sinning, and my sin destroys my judgment. To win Elisa over, all I 
had to do was pay her: nothing would have been easier. I didn’t bother to stop and think, not 
for a moment: crazy love thoughts took up all my time. I will perish.” 
One  thing  struck  Julien,  when  he  told  Madame  de  Rênal  the  terrible  news  that  he  was 
leaving: she made absolutely no selfish objection. She was obviously trying hard not to cry. 
“We need to be strong, my dear.” 
She cut off a lock of her hair. 
“I don’t know what I’ll do,” she told him, “but if I die, promise me you’ll never forget my 
children.  Whether  you’re  far  or  near,  try  to  make  them  decent  people.  If  there’s  another 
revolution,  all  the  aristocracy  will  have  their  throats  cut;  their  father  will  emigrate,  perhaps 
because of that peasant, killed on a roof.4 Watch over my family...Give me your hand. Farewell, 
my dear! These are our last moments. That great sacrifice having been made, I hope that, in 
public, I’ll have the courage to think of my reputation.” 
Julien had expected despair. The straightforwardness of her farewell moved him. 
“No, I won’t accept your farewell like this. I’ll leave; they want me to; you yourself want it. 
But three days after my departure, I’ll come to see you, at night.” 
                                                             
4  
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Madame de Rênal’s life was changed. Julien loved her deeply, for it was he who’d had the 
idea of seeing her again! Her frightful sorrow was transformed into one of the liveliest floods of 
joy  she  had  ever  known.  Everything  became  easy  for  her.  The  certainty  of  seeing  her  lover 
again  wiped  away,  at  these  last  moments,  all  the  things  that  had  been  tearing  them  apart. 
Beginning  at  that  moment  Madame  de  Rênal’s  face,  as  well  as  her  behavior,  became  noble, 
firm, and perfectly decorous. 
Monsieur  de  Rênal  soon  returned;  he  was  beside  himself.  He  finally  spoke  to  his  wife 
about the anonymous letter received two months before. 
“I’ll bring it to the casino, to show everyone that it’s from that disgraceful Valenod, the 
fellow I plucked out of poverty and made one of the richest bourgeois in Verrières. I’ll shame 
him in public, and then I’ll fight with him. This is simply too much.” 
“I might become a widow, good Lord!” thought Madame de Rênal. But at almost the same 
moment,  she  told  herself:  “If  I  don’t  stop  this  duel,  as  I  certainly  can,  I’ll  be  my  husband’s 
murderer.” 
Never had she managed her husband’s vanity with such skill. In less than two hours she 
made him see, and always on rational grounds he had himself brought to light, that he had to 
show even more friendliness than ever to Monsieur Valenod, and even had to bring Elisa back 
to the house. It took courage for Madame de Rênal to decide on seeing this girl, who was the 
cause of all her misfortune. But the idea had come from Julien. 
At  last,  having  started  three  or  four  times  to  leave  for  the  casino,  Monsieur  de  Rênal 
realized,  entirely  by  himself,  that  the  very  worst  thing  for  him,  fiscally,  as  well  as  the  most 
personally disagreeable, would be for Julien, in the face of the excitement and babble going on 
all over Verrières, to remain in town as tutor to Monsieur Valenod’s children. Obviously, the 
most  rewarding  thing  for  Julien  was  to  accept  Valenod’s  offer.  But  it  would  bring  glory  to 
Monsieur de Rênal, should Julien leave Verrières to enter the Besan04on seminary, or the one at 
Dijon. But how could Julien be brought to make that decision, and how would he be able to 
live there, if he did? 
Monsieur de Rênal, seeing the imminence of fiscal sacrifice, was more in despair than his 
wife. After that long conversational struggle, she was in the position of the man who, weary of 
life, has taken a dose of stramonium: he no longer reacts except by reacting, so to speak, and 
no longer feels any sense of direct interest in anything. Thus it happened to Louis XIV, when 
he was dying, and said: “When I was king.” What a wonderful remark! 
The next day, early in the morning, Monsieur de Rênal received an anonymous letter. It 
was  in  the  most  insulting  style.  The  grossest  words  that  could  be  applied  to  his  situation 
appeared  in  every  line.  It  was  the  work  of  some  envious  underling.  This  letter  brought  him 
back to thoughts of fighting with Monsieur Valenod. His courage soon reached the point of 
immediate  action.  He  left  the  house  alone  and  went  to  a  gunsmith’s  shop  to  buy  several 
revolvers, which he loaded. 
“To bring things down to brass tacks,” he said to himself: “if the harsh administration of 
the Emperor Napoleon were to return to the world, there’s not a single stolen penny to hold 
against me. The most I’ve done is close my eyes, but I’ve got the proper letters in my desk, 
authorizing everything.” 
Madame de Rênal was frightened by her husband’s cold anger; it recalled the fatal idea of 
widowhood she had tried so hard to push away. She shut herself in with him. For hours she 
talked to him, in vain: the new anonymous letter had decided him. Finally, she got to the point 
of transforming the courage required to give Monsieur Valenod a box on the ear, into an offer 
of  six  hundred  francs  to  Julien,  for  a  year’s  room  and  board  as  a  seminarian.  Monsieur  de 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Three: A Civil Servant’s Sorrows 
Rênal, cursing a thousand times over the day he had the fatal idea of bringing a tutor into the 
house, forgot about the anonymous letter. 
He  took  some  consolation  in  an  idea  he  did  not  pass  on  to  his  wife:  by  means  of  his 
mature skill, and wielding it to overcome the young man’s romantic notions, he hoped to get 
him to agree (for a small sum) not to accept Monsieur Valenod’s offer. 
Madame de Rênal found it very difficult to prove to Julien that, in acting according to her 
husband’s  convenience,  and  sacrificing  the  salary  of  eight  hundred  francs  offered  by  the 
Pauper’s Bureau director, he could without shame accept a bit of compensation. 
“But,” Julien kept saying, “I’ve never, not for a single second, intended to accept that offer. 
You’ve  gotten  me  too  accustomed  to  genteel  living:  the  vulgarity  of  the  people  over  there 
would kill me.” 
Cruel necessity, with its iron hand, forced Julien to bend his will. His pride offered him 
the illusion that he was accepting Monsieur de Rênal’s offer only as a loan, and he gave the 
mayor a note pledging reimbursement in five years, with interest. 
Madame  de  Rênal  had  kept  thousands  of  francs,  hidden  in  the  little  cave  up  on  the 
mountain. 
Trembling, she offered the money to him, feeling very sure he would angrily refuse. 
“Is it your intention,” said Julien, “to turn the memory of our love into an abomination?” 
At  last,  Julien  left  Verrières.  Monsieur  de  Rênal  was  extremely  pleased:  at  the  fatal 
moment, when it came to actually accepting the money, Julien found the sacrifice too great. 
He  flatly  refused.  Monsieur  de  Rênal  fell  on  his  shoulder,  tears  in  his  eyes.  Julien  having 
requested a certificate of good conduct, the mayor’s enthusiasm bubbled over into language 
magnificently  exalting  the  tutor’s  behavior.  Our  hero  had  saved  up  a  hundred  francs,  and 
expected to ask Fouqué for as much again. 
He was deeply moved. But by the time he was two or three miles from Verrières, where he 
had left so much love, he was no longer thinking of anything but seeing the capital city, the 
great military center, that was Besan04on. 
During this brief three-day separation, Madame de Rênal fell victim to one of love’s most 
cruel deceptions. Her life was bearable: all that existed between her and deep depression was 
the final meeting she’d have with Julien. She counted the hours, the minutes, that kept them 
apart. Finally, the third night, she heard from afar the agreed-upon signal. Having made his 
way through a thousand dangers, Julien appeared in front of her. 
From that moment, she had only a single thought: “This is the last time I’ll see him.” Far 
from  responding  to  her  lover’s  eagerness,  she  was  like  a  faintly  animated  corpse.  When  she 
forced herself to say she loved him, it was spoken so awkwardly that what it manifested was 
virtually  the  exact  opposite.  Nothing  could  free  her  from  the  cruel  concept  of  eternal 
separation. For a brief moment, Julien’s mistrustful nature made him believe he’d already been 
forgotten.  The  biting  words  with  which  he  said  this  were  met  with  nothing  but  silently 
streaming tears, and a clutching at his hand that was very nearly convulsive. 
“But,  good  God!  What  do  you  want  me  to  think?”  Julien  replied  to  his  beloved’s  stiff 
protestations. “You’d show a hundred times more warmth to Madame Derville, who’s just an 
acquaintance.” 
Petrified, all Madame de Rênal could say was: 
“No one could ever be more wretched...I hope I die...I feel my heart freezing over....” 
These were the fullest responses he could get from her. 
When  the  coming  dawn  made  departure  necessary,  Madame  de  Rênal’s  tears  suddenly 
stopped.  She  watched  him  tying  a  knotted  rope  to  the  window,  but  said  not  a  word,  never 
kissed him. Julien’s words accomplished nothing: 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
“So now we’ve gotten where you so much wanted us to be. From here on, you can live 
without remorse. You won’t be seeing your children in their tombs every time they’re the least 
bit indisposed.” 
“I’m sorry you couldn’t kiss Stanislas,” she said coldly. 
Julien  was  powerfully  affected  by  the  cold  embrace  of  this  living  corpse:  for  miles,  he 
could think of nothing else. His heart had been cut to the quick, and before he crossed over 
the mountain, he kept turning around so he could see the steeple of the church in Verrières. 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Four: A Capital City 
Chapter Twenty-Four: A Capital City 
Such noise, so many people doing business! Notions of the future in a twenty-year-old head! What a way to 
keep from thinking about love! 
―Barnave1 
He finally saw it, set on a distant mountain; its walls were black. This was the fortress of 
Besan04on.  “What  a  difference  for  me,”  he  said  with  a  sigh,  “if  I  were  coming  to  this  great 
military center as a second lieutenant, serving in one of the regiments sent to defend it!” 
Besan04on  isn’t  simply  one  of  the  prettiest  towns  in  France:  it  holds  an  abundance  of 
passionate,  spirited  people.  But  Julien  was  only  a  little  peasant,  who  had  no  way  of 
approaching these distinguished men. 
When  he’d  been  at  Fouqué’s,  he’d  taken  to  dressing  as  a  bourgeois,  and  it  was  thus 
costumed that he crossed over the drawbridges. Knowing quite well the history of the siege of 
1674,2  he  wanted  to  see,  before  he  closed  himself  up  in  the  seminary,  the  ramparts  and  the 
citadel. Two or three times, he came close to being stopped by the sentries: he got into places 
forbidden to the general public, on grounds of military security, but in fact so the armies could 
sell  hay,  for  twelve  or  fifteen  francs  a  year.  The  walls’  great  height,  the  depth  of  the 
surrounding  ditches,  the  frightening  appearance  of  the  cannons,  had  held  his  attention  for 
some hours, by the time he went past the huge café on the rampart walkway. He stood looking 
at it, motionless in wonder. He could quite readily read the wordCAF é, written in large letters 
above the two great doors; he could not believe his eyes. Shyness held him back, and then he 
risked going in, and found himself in a room thirty or forty feet long, with a ceiling at least 
twenty feet high. That day, it was all magical to him. 
Two  games  of  billiards  were  being  played.  Waiters  called  out  the  scores;  the  players 
hurried around the tables, about which spectators crowded. Billows of tobacco smoke, pouring 
from every mouth, wrapped them in a blue cloud. The men’s height, their rounded shoulders, 
their heavy step, their enormous beards, the long frock coats they wore―everything attracted 
Julien’s notice. These noble sons of ancient Besan04on spoke only at the top of their lungs; they 
thought of themselves as terrifying warriors. Julien stood there, wondering: his mind was full 
of the immensity, the magnificence, of a great capital like Besan04on. He did not feel entirely 
capable of ordering a cup of coffee, not from one of these gentlemen with their haughty looks, 
shouting out the billiard scores. 
But  the  barmaid  had  spotted  his  charming  face,  this  young  bourgeois  from  the 
countryside,  standing  three  steps  from  the  stove,  with  his  little  bundle  under  his  arm, 
contemplating a bust of the king in handsome white plaster. This tall Franche-Comté girl, with 
a  good  figure  and  dressed  very  fashionably  (to  enhance  the  café’s  reputation),  had  already 
twice  said  to  him,  in  a  soft  voice  meant  for  his  ears  alone,  “Monsieur!  Monsieur!”  Julien’s 
glance met her blue eyes, big and compassionate, and saw she’d been talking to him. 
He went over to the bar, and to the pretty girl, quick-stepping exactly as he would have 
marched  toward  a  hostile  army.  But  in  performing  this  notable  maneuver,  he  dropped  his 
bundle. 
What pity for our country bumpkin would have sprung in the hearts of Paris high school 
students, who at fifteen already know how to make a polished, terribly distinguished entrance 
to a café. Yet these children, so eminently accomplished at fifteen, at eighteen turn common. 
The  passionate  shyness  one  finds  in  the  provinces  sometimes  rises  above  itself,  and  then  it 
                                                             
1 A revolutionary politician and acquaintance of Stendhal’s family (see note for p. 6, Epigraph). 
2 The year that Louis XIV took the Franche-Comté from Spain. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
shapes  the  will.  Approaching  this  very  pretty  girl,  who’d  taken  the  trouble  to  speak  to  him, 
Julien―becoming courageous, precisely because he’d overcome shyness―thought: “I have to 
tell her the truth.” 
“Madame, I’m here in Besan04on for the first time in my life. I should like to have, and to 
pay for, some bread and a cup of coffee.” 
She smiled, and then reddened: she worried that this handsome young fellow would bring 
down on himself, from the billiard players, sarcastic remarks and jokes. He’d be frightened and 
would not come again. 
“Sit here, near me,” she said, pointing to a marble table, almost completely hidden by the 
huge mahogany bar that projected out into the room. 
The girl leaned down over the bar, allowing herself to show off her splendid figure. Julien 
noted it; all his ideas changed. The pretty girl had just set a cup in front of him, along with 
sugar and a roll. She was hesitating to call over a waiter, so he could have coffee, quite aware 
that when the waiter arrived, her tête-à-tête with Julien was going to end. 
Julien  was  thoughtful,  comparing  this  bright,  blonde  beauty  with  memories  that 
frequently stirred him. Thinking of the passion he’d evoked was almost enough to drive away 
his shyness. The pretty girl had very little time; she understood what she saw in Julien’s eyes. 
“All  this  pipe  smoke  makes  you  cough.  Come  for  breakfast,  tomorrow  morning,  before 
eight: I’m almost always alone.” 
“What’s your name?” said Julien, with a tender smile of happy shyness. 
“Amanda Binet.” 
“May I send you, in an hour, a little package the size of this one?” 
Lovely Amanda considered it. 
“I’m watched. That could get me into trouble. All the same, I’ll write my name on a card, 
so you put it on your package. Send it, don’t worry.” 
“My name’s Julien Sorel,” said the young man. “I have neither family nor friends, here in 
Besan04on.” 
“Ah! I understand,” she said cheerfully. “You’ve come for the law school?” 
“Alas, no,” said Julien. “I’ve been sent to the seminary.” 
Utter dejection crossed her face. She summoned a waiter: now she had the courage. The 
waiter poured Julien’s coffee without looking at him. 
Amanda was busy at the bar, taking in money. Julien was proud of having dared to speak 
to her. A quarrel started, over at the billiard tables. The shouting and arguing echoed through 
the whole huge room, creating an uproar that astonished Julien. Amanda was sitting dreamily, 
her eyes lowered. 
“If you like, miss,” he said to her, suddenly confident, “I’ll say I’m your cousin.” 
This  touch  of  authority  pleased  her.  “He’s  not  a  young  nobody,”  she  thought.  Quickly, 
without looking at him, her eyes busily watching for people coming toward the bar, she said: 
“Me, I come from Genlis, near Dijon. Say you’re from Genlis, too, and you’re my mother’s 
cousin.” 
of the café.” 
“Without fail,” he said. 
“Every Wednesday at five, during the summer, the seminarians go by, right here in front 
“If you’re thinking of me, as I go by, have a bouquet of violets in your hand.” 
She  looked  at  him,  very  surprised.  Her  look  turned  his  timidity  to  bravery,  though  he 
blushed quite deeply as he said: 
“I think I already love you most passionately.” 
“Don’t talk so loud,” she told him, very frightened. 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Four: A Capital City 
Julien tried to recall the words he’d read in a broken set of La Nouvelle Héloise,3 which 
he’d found at Vergy. His memory served him well: for ten minutes he recited Rousseau to Miss 
Amanda, who was in raptures. He was delighted at his gallantry, when suddenly her face took 
on a glacial coldness. One of her lovers had just walked in. 
He  came  over  to  the  bar,  whistling  and  swinging  his  shoulders.  He  glanced  at  Julien. 
Immediately,  our  hero’s  mind,  always  disposed  to  extremes,  could  not  help  brimming  with 
thoughts of a duel. He turned very pale, shoved his cup away, set himself in a stalwart posture, 
and stared fixedly toward his rival. As this gentleman bent his head, leaning down on the bar 
and casually ordering a glass of brandy, Amanda looked at Julien, silently commanding him to 
turn away his eyes. He obeyed and, for two minutes, stayed as he was, pale, determined, and 
thinking  of  nothing  except  what  was  coming.  At  that  moment,  he  looked  resplendent.  The 
rival  had  been  startled  by  Julien’s  stare:  tossing  down  his  brandy,  he  said  something  to 
Amanda,  stuck  both  hands  in  the  side  pockets  of  his  long  frock  coat,  and  went  toward  the 
billiard tables, whistling and watching Julien. Our hero leaped up, wild with anger. But he did 
not know how to act the part of someone who’s been insulted. He put down his little bundle 
and, strutting as well as he knew how, went toward the billiard tables. 
Prudence spoke, but in vain: “Fighting a duel as soon as you get to Besan04on, you throw 
away your career in the Church.” 
“Who cares? No one’s going to say I put up with an insult.” 
Amanda  saw  his  courage.  It  made  a  pretty  contrast  to  the  na07veté  of  his  behavior.  In  a 
flash, she chose him over the tall young man in his frock coat. She got up and, acting as if she 
were looking at someone going by, out on the street, she quickly got herself between him and 
the billiard tables. 
“Be careful with this gentleman. He’s my brother-in-law.” 
“Who cares? He was looking at me.” 
“Do you want to make me miserable? Sure, he was looking at you, he may even have been 
thinking  of  coming  over  and  talking  to  you.  I  told  him  you  were  my  mother’s  cousin,  just 
arrived from Genlis. He’s a Franche-Comté hick who’s never been anywhere past D00le, on the 
road to Burgundy, so you can tell him anything you like and never worry about a thing.” 
Julien still hesitated. She quickly added, drawing on her barmaid’s wit to supply all the 
lies she needed: 
“Sure, he looked at you, but that was when he was asking who you were. This is a man 
who’s rude to everyone: he didn’t mean to insult you.” 
Julien was watching the fake brother-in-law. He saw him buying a number at the table 
where  the  most  energetic  billiard  game  was  going  on.  He  heard  his  coarse  voice  crying,  in 
menacing  tones,  “It’s  my  turn!”  He  stepped  swiftly  around  Miss  Amanda  and  took  a  step 
toward the billiard table. Amanda gripped him by the arm. 
“First pay me,” she said. 
“That’s fair,” thought Julien. “She’s afraid I’ll leave without paying.” Amanda was quite as 
excited as he was, and very red in the face. She gave him his change as slowly as she could, and 
kept repeating, in a soft voice: 
“Get out of the café right away, or I’m finished with you, no matter how much you love 
me.” 
Julien did leave, but very slowly. “Isn’t it my duty,” he kept asking himself, “to take my 
turn  and  walk  over,  whistling,  and  stare  at  this  rude  fellow?”  His  doubts  kept  him  on  the 
                                                             
3 Rousseau’s sentimental romance of 1761. The novel was an immediate success and continued to be widely 
read for generations. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
street,  in  front  of  the  café,  for  an  entire  hour,  watching  everyone  who  came  out.  The  rude 
fellow did not appear, and Julien left. 
He’d been in Besan04on for no more than a few hours, and he’d already mastered one of 
his qualms. In spite of his gout, the old surgeon-major, once upon a time, had given him a few 
fencing lessons; that was the only knowledge Julien possessed, of which his anger could make 
any use. But that difficulty would not have mattered, had he known how to show his anger 
except by striking out with his hands―and, if it had come to a fistfight, his rival, an enormous 
man, would have thrashed him and left him lying flat on the floor. 
“For a poor devil like me,” Julien said to himself, “without protectors and without money, 
there won’t be much difference between a seminary and a prison. I’ve got to store my clothing 
in an inn, where I can change into my black clothing. If I ever get to leave the seminary for an 
hour  or  two,  I  might  very  well―wearing  my  bourgeois  clothes―get  to  see  Miss  Amanda 
again.” It was all very logical, but Julien walked by every inn he saw, not daring to enter any of 
them. 
At last, when he went by the Ambassador Hotel for the second time, his worried glance 
met that of a fat woman, still fairly young, very red-faced, who seemed cheerful and pleasant. 
He went over to her and told his story. 
“Of  course,  my  handsome  little  priest,”  she  told  him,  “I’ll  hold  on  to  your  bourgeois 
clothes, and I’ll even keep them well dusted. At this time of year, it’s not a good idea to leave 
clothes untouched.” She took down a key and personally conducted him to a room, suggesting 
he make a list of what he was leaving. 
“Good Lord! How fine you look like that, Father Sorel,” said the fat woman when he came 
down to the kitchen. “I’m going to give you a good dinner. And,” she added in a soft voice, “it’s 
only going to cost you twenty pence, instead of the fifty everyone else has to pay, because we 
really have to be nice to that little purse of yours.” 
“I’ve got two hundred francs,” said Julien rather proudly. 
“Ah, my God!” said the good lady, startled. “Don’t talk so loud: there are lots of bad eggs 
in Besan04on. They’d rob you of that in no time at all. Stay out of the cafés, especially: they’re 
full of crooks.” 
“Really!” said Julien, her words giving him something to think about. 
“Don’t  ever  go  anywhere  but  right  here;  I’ll  make  you  coffee.  Remember,  this  is  where 
you’ll  always  find  yourself  a  friend  and  a  good  dinner,  and  for  twenty  pence;  that’s  saying 
something, it seems to me. Right? Now go sit down at the table, and I’ll serve you myself.” 
“I couldn’t eat a thing,” Julien told her. “I’m too nervous. When I leave here, I’ll go right to 
the seminary.” 
The good woman wouldn’t let him go until she’d stuffed his pockets with food. Finally, 
Julien set out on his terrifying path. Standing in her doorway, she gave him directions. 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Five: The Seminary 
Chapter Twenty-Five: The Seminary 
Three hundred and thirty-six lunches at 83 pence, three hundred and thirty-six dinners at 28 pence, a cup of 
hot chocolate for those entitled to it: how much can I make on my bid? 
―Valenod, From Besan04on 
He could see, from a distance, the gilded iron cross over the door. He walked toward it, 
slowly. He felt as if his legs were giving way underneath him. “Here is hell on Earth, which I’ll 
never be able to leave!” He finally decided to ring the bell. The sound echoed, as if in some 
lonely place. After ten minutes, a pale man, dressed in black, came to let him in. Julien looked 
at  him  and  immediately  lowered  his  eyes.  The  porter’s  face  was  exceedingly  strange.  His 
bulging green eyes were round as a cat’s; the fixed line of his eyebrows proclaimed a complete 
absence of human empathy; his thin lips formed a tight semicircle over his teeth, which stuck 
out. These were not criminal features, but indicative of the total insensitivity which, for young 
people, can be even more frightening. The only emotion Julien’s rapid glance could imagine on 
this  narrow,  pietistic  face  was  profound  contempt  for  anything  anyone  said  to  him,  except 
words about heaven’s eternal concerns. 
It  was  hard  for  Julien  to  raise  his  eyes  and  explain,  his  heart  throbbing  and  his  voice 
trembling, that he’d like to speak to Father Pirard, director of the seminary. Without speaking 
a word, the black figure motioned him to follow along. They went up two stories, via a broad 
staircase with wooden banisters; the crooked steps slanted so sharply, on the side away from 
the  wall,  that  they  seemed  about  to  collapse.  A  small  door,  hard  to  open―above  it  a  great 
graveyard cross made of pine painted black―finally swung to, and the porter led Julien into a 
low-ceilinged,  dark  room,  its  whitewashed  walls  decorated  by  two  large,  time-blackened 
pictures.  There,  Julien  was  abandoned,  deeply  dismayed,  his  heart  beating  violently;  had  he 
dared, he would have wept. A silence like death prevailed all through the building. 
A  quarter  of  an  hour  later,  which  seemed  to  him  an  entire  day,  the  ominous-looking 
porter  reappeared,  standing  on  the  threshold  of  a  door  at  the  other  end  of  the  room;  not 
troubling  himself  to  speak,  he  signaled  Julien  to  come.  Our  hero  walked  into  a  room  even 
larger than the first, and even less well lit. Once again, the walls were whitewashed, but there 
was no furniture. Except that, in the corner nearest the door, Julien had seen a pine-board bed, 
two straw chairs, and a small armchair, also of pine, which had no cushions. At the far end of 
the room, near a small, yellow-paned window, there were some dirty flowerpots, and he saw a 
man in a shabby cassock, seated at a table. Apparently angry, he was plucking up a great many 
slips of paper, one after the other, writing a few words on each, and then arranging them on 
the table in front of him. He was not aware of Julien’s presence. The young man stayed more 
or less in the middle of the room, motionless, exactly where the porter―who had now gone 
out and shut the door―had left him. 
Ten minutes passed; the badly dressed man kept on writing. Julien’s sense of shock, and 
his  terror,  mounted;  he  felt  on  the  point  of  fainting  away.  A  philosopher  might  have  said, 
perhaps  incorrectly:  “This  is  the  violent  impression  made  by  that  which  is  ugly  on  a  soul 
fashioned for the love of beauty.” 
The man who’d been writing lifted his head. It took Julien a moment to notice and, even 
after that, he remained as motionless as if the awful glance now directed at him had struck 
him dead. His anxious eyes could barely make out a narrow face covered with red spots, except 
on the forehead, which displayed a deadly pallor. Between the reddened cheeks and the white 
forehead  shone  two  small  black  eyes,  designed  for  frightening  the  bravest  of  men.  The 
immense curve of the forehead was set off by a thick mop of straight hair, black as jade. 
“Are you coming over here, yes or no?” the man said impatiently. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Julien took a shaky step and, finally, pale and ready to topple to the floor, as he’d never 
before been in all his life, he got within three feet of the little pine table covered with slips of 
paper. 
“Nearer,” said the man. 
Julien came closer, stretching out his hand, as if trying to prop himself up on something. 
“Your name?” 
“Julien Sorel.” 
“You’re good and late,” he was told, and again the frightening eyes peered at him. 
Julien  couldn’t  endure  this  stare.  He  started  to  extend  his  hand,  as  if  to  keep  himself 
upright, then fell full length on the wooden floor. 
The man rang the porter’s bell. Julien could not see, and he could not move, but he heard 
He was picked up and set in the small white wooden armchair. He heard the awful voice 
approaching steps. 
saying to the porter: 
“He appears to have had an epileptic fit. That’s all we need.” 
When  Julien  was  able  to  open  his  eyes,  the  red-faced  man  was  writing;  the  porter  had 
disappeared. “Be brave,” our hero told himself, “and above all hide how I feel.” He was feeling 
exceedingly  nauseated.  “If  anything  happens,  God  only  knows  what  they’ll  think  of  me.” 
Finally, the man stopped writing and, out of the corner of his eye, looked at Julien. 
“Are you well enough to answer me?” 
“Yes, sir,” said Julien, his voice weak. 
“Ah, that’s good.” 
The man in black lifted himself partly out of his chair and impatiently rummaged through 
the drawer in his pine table, which creaked when he pulled on it. He found the letter he was 
looking for, slowly sat himself back down and looked at Julien, once again, as if to wrench out 
of him what little life he retained: 
“You’ve been recommended to me by Father Chélan, who was the best parish priest in the 
whole diocese, a virtuous man if ever there was one, and for thirty years my friend.” 
“Ah! I have the honor of speaking to Father Pirard,” said Julien, his voice fading away. 
“So it would seem,” replied the director of the seminary, looking at him testily. 
The light in his tiny eyes grew brighter, and then there was an involuntary twitching of 
the  muscles  in  the  corners  of  his  mouth.  It  was  the  face  of  a  tiger,  salivating  as  he 
contemplated devouring his prey. 
“Chélan’s letter is brief,” he said, as if talking to himself. “Intelligenti pauca, good minds 
don’t  need  a  lot  of  words.  The  way  things  are  going,  these  days,  it  would  be  hard  to  write 
briefly enough.” 
He read out loud: 
“I  send  you  Julien  Sorel,  of  this  parish,  who  twenty  years  ago  I  baptized,  son  of  a  rich 
carpenter who provides him with nothing. Julien will be a remarkable laborer in the vineyards 
of the Lord. His memory, his mind, are in no way deficient. He knows how to think. Will his 
vocation be an enduring one? Is it sincere? 
“Sincere!”  repeated  Father  Pirard,  astonished,  looking  over  at  Julien.  But  his  glance  was 
already less empty of all human feeling. “Sincere!” he said once more, in a low voice, and then 
returned to his reading: 
“I  ask  you  to  give  Julien  a  scholarship.  He  will  deserve  it,  once  he’s  been  given  the 
required examinations. I have taught him some theology, the good old theology of Bossuet, of 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Five: The Seminary 
Arnauld, of Fleury.1 If he seems to you unsuitable, send him back to me: the director of the 
Pauper’s Bureau, with whom you are well acquainted, has offered him eight hundred francs as 
a tutor for his children. 
My spirit is tranquil, for which God be thanked. I am getting used to the terrible blow. 
Vale et me ama, farewell, and think well of me.” 
Moderating his voice as he read the signature, Father Pirard sighed as he pronounced the 
“He’s  calm,”  said  he.  “Indeed,  his  virtues  deserve  such  a  reward.  May  God  grant  me  as 
word Chélan. 
much!” 
He looked upward and made the sign of the cross. Seeing this sacred gesture, Julien felt a 
lessening of the profound horror with which, ever since he’d entered this building, he’d been 
frozen over. 
“I  have  here  three  hundred  and  twenty-one  aspirants  for  the  holiest  of  professions,” 
Father Pirard said at last, his voice severe but not unpleasant. “Only seven or eight have been 
recommended to me by people like Father Chélan. Accordingly, among those three hundred 
and twenty-one, you will be the ninth. But my patronage is neither favoritism nor indulgence, 
but redoubled carefulness and severity against sin. Go lock that door.” 
Julien forced himself to walk to the door, and then come back, without falling. He noticed 
that a small window, right alongside the door, opened onto country fields. He looked out at 
the trees; it did him good, like seeing old friends. 
“Loquerisne  linguam  latinam?  Do  you  speak  Latin?”  Father  Pirard  asked,  when  he 
returned. 
“Ita, pater optime. Yes, kind Father,” answered Julien, beginning to come back to himself. 
Surely, no man in the world had ever seemed to him less kind than Father Pirard, half an hour 
earlier. 
The interview continued, in Latin. The priest’s eyes softened; Julien began to recover his 
confidence.  “How  weak  I  am,”  he  thought,  “to  let  myself  be  imposed  on  by  these  shows  of 
virtue! This man will be a rascal, just like Father Maslon.” And Julien congratulated himself for 
having hidden almost all his money in his boots. 
Father  Pirard  examined  him  in  theology,  and  was  surprised  by  the  extent  of  his 
knowledge. His surprise was even greater when he examined Julien on the Holy Scriptures. But 
when  he  turned  to  questions  about  the  teachings  of  the  Fathers,  he  saw  that  Julien  did  not 
even  know  the  names  of  Saint  Jerome,  Saint  Augustine,  Saint  Bonaventura,  Saint  Basil,  etc., 
etc.2 
“Really,” he thought, “here is exactly that fatal tendency to Protestantism, for which I’ve 
always scolded Chélan: deep, deep knowledge―almost too deep―of the Scriptures.” 
(Julien had just been speaking, without having been questioned on the subject, about the 
actual dates at which Genesis, the Pentateuch, etc., had been written.) 
“What’s the point to this endless scrutiny of the Holy Scriptures,” thought Father Pirard, 
“if  it  isn’t  an  inquiry  into  a  person’s  conscience?  In  other  words,  the  most  ghastly 
                                                             
1 Three highly regarded theologians of recent French history. Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet (1627C1704), Bishop of 
Meaux  and  tutor  to  the  Dauphin,  was  one  of  the  leading  religious  intellectuals  of  Louis  XIV’s  court;  he 
engaged  in  running  religious  quarrels  with  the  more  liberal  Fénelon  (see  note  for  p.  391,  Epigraph).  Antoine 
Arnauld (1612C94), le grand Arnauld, was the leading scholar and defender of Jansenism in France; exiled by 
Louis XIV, he spent the last years of his life writing pamphlets against Protestantism. Claude Fleury, principal 
author of the Histoire ecclésiastique (see note for p. 9, Epigraph). 
2 All fathers of the ancient Church, with the exception of Bonaventura (ca. 1221C74), who was a theologian and 
adviser to Pope Gregory X. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Protestantism. And in addition to this rash exploration, nothing from the Fathers that might 
counterbalance such tendencies.” 
But  the  director  of  the  seminary  was  utterly  astonished  when,  asking  Julien  about  the 
pope’s authority, and expecting to hear sayings of the church of ancient Gaul, the young man 
recited the entire book by the papal absolutist, de Maistre. 
“What a strange man, that Chélan,” thought Father Pirard. “Did he teach him this book so 
he could make fun of it?” 
Trying to see if Julien took de Maistre’s teachings seriously, he made further inquiries. In 
vain: Julien’s responses drew only on his memory. And from then on, Julien felt really fine, and 
knew he was master of himself. After a very long examination, it seemed to him that Father 
Pirard’s harshness was no more than a pretense. Indeed, had it not been for the settled rule of 
solemn  austerity,  maintained  for  fifteen  years  in  dealing  with  his  theological  students,  the 
director of the seminary would have thrown his arms around Julien, in the name of logic, for 
the abundant clarity, precision, and terseness of his answers. 
“Here’s a bold, healthy spirit,” he said to himself. “But corpus debile, a weak body.” 
“Do you often fall down like that?” he asked Julien in French, pointing at the floor. 
“That was the first time in my whole life. The porter’s face absolutely chilled my heart,” he 
added, blushing like a child. 
Father Pirard came close to smiling. 
“That’s what comes  of the world’s empty shows. You’ve  clearly gotten  used to laughing 
faces, which are true displays of falsity and lies. Truth is austere, sir. But our task in this world 
is  also  austere,  is  it  not?  How  important  it  is,  keeping  your  conscience  on  watch  for  the 
weakness of too much sensitivity to the world’s empty charms. 
“Had you not been recommended to me,” Father Pirard said, once more speaking in Latin, 
and  with  obvious  pleasure,  “if  you  had  not  been  recommended  to  me  by  a  man  like  Father 
Chélan, I would speak to you in the empty tongues of this world, with which you seem only 
too well acquainted. Obtaining the full scholarship you request, I must tell you, is the most 
difficult thing in the world. But Father Chélan would deserve very little, after fifty-six years of 
apostolic labor, if he could not command such a scholarship.” 
Having  said  this,  Father  Pirard  enjoined  against  Julien’s  participation  in  any  secret 
society, or congregation, without his consent. 
“As to that, I give you my word of honor,” said Julien, beaming like an honest man. 
The director of the seminary smiled for the first time. 
“We  don’t  use  those  words  here,”  he  said.  “They  reek  too  much  of  the  empty  honor  of 
worldly men, which lead them to commit so many errors, and often so many sins. According 
to  paragraph  seventeen  of  Pope  Pius  V’s  Bull,  Unam  Ecclesiam,3  I  am  owed  your  holy 
obedience. In this place, my very dear son, to hear is to obey. How much money do you have?” 
“Here we go,” Julien said to himself. “That’s why I’m now his very dear son.” 
“Thirty-five francs, Father.” 
“Make a careful record of how you spend your money. You will have to account to me for 
all of it.” 
The whole painful performance had lasted three hours. Julien summoned the porter. 
“Put Julien Sorel in cell number 103,” Father Pirard told the man. 
In a significant show of honor, he’d granted Julien quarters he had to share with no one. 
“Bring down his trunk,” he added. 
                                                             
3 Pope Pius V: (1504C74); “Unam Ecclesiam”: an invention of Stendhal’s. 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Five: The Seminary 
Julien  looked  down  and  saw  his  trunk  right  in  front  of  him.  He’d  been  looking  at  the 
trunk for three hours, and never recognized it. 
Number 103 was a tiny room, eight feet square, on the building’s top floor. Julien noticed 
that  it  looked  out  on  the  fortress  walls,  and  beyond  that  he  could  see  the  lovely  plain, 
separated from the city by the Doubs. 
“What  a  charming  view!”  he  exclaimed  to  himself,  and  in  saying  the  words  he  was  not 
aware of what they expressed. All the violent emotions  he’d been experiencing, in the short 
time  he’d  been  in  Besan04on,  had  completely  drained  his  strength.  He  sat  down  near  the 
window, on the single wooden chair in his cell, and sitting there fell into a deep sleep. He did 
not hear the dinner bell, nor that for evening services. He had been forgotten. 
When the first rays of the sun woke him, the next morning, he found himself lying on the 
wooden floor. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Chapter Twenty-Six: The World, or What the Rich Man is Missing 
I’m alone in the world, no one bothers to think about me. All who I see growing wealthy possess a boldness 
and a flinty heartedness I do not feel. They hate me because of my easy kindness. Ah! Soon I’ll die, maybe 
of hunger, maybe at the sight of such hard men. 
―Young 1 
He  hurriedly  brushed  his  cassock  and  went  down.  He  was  late.  An  assistant  master 
scolded him sharply. Instead of trying to justify himself, Julien crossed his arms on his chest: 
“Peccavi,  pater  optime,  I  have  sinned,  kind  Father,  I  confess  my  fault,”  he  said  with  a 
contrite air. 
His  debut  was  a  great  success.  The  clever  folk  among  the  seminarians  saw  they  were 
dealing with a man not at their profession’s starting line. 
Recess came. Julien noted that he was the object of universal curiosity. But he was neither 
withdrawn nor silent. According to the principles he’d evolved for himself, his three hundred 
and twenty-one colleagues were his enemies, the most dangerous of whom, in his eyes, was 
Father Pirard. 
A few days later, Julien had to choose a confessor. He was presented with a list. 
“Oh, Good Lord! What do they take me for?” he said to himself. “Do they think I can’t 
take a hint?” And he chose Father Pirard. 
Although he did not know it, this was a decisive step. A small and very young seminarian, 
a native of Verrières who from the first day had declared himself Julien’s friend, informed him 
that, had he chosen Father Castaneda, the assistant director of the seminary, he might have 
done better. 
“Father Castaneda is Father Pirard’s enemy. He suspects Pirard of Jansenism,”2 added the 
little fellow, bending close to Julien’s ear. 
Our  hero  considered  himself  wonderfully  cautious,  but  all  his  first  steps  were,  like  his 
choice of a confessor, distinctly careless. Misled by the intense vanity of an imaginative mind, 
he took his intentions for accomplished facts, believing himself a consummate hypocrite. His 
foolishness went so far that he took himself to task for succeeding in this weaklings’ art: 
“Alas!  It’s  my  only  weapon.  In  some  other  age,”  he  thought,  “I  would  have  earned  my 
bread by deeds that spoke for themselves, right in my enemy’s face.” 
Satisfied with his own conduct, Julien looked around, seeing everywhere the appearance 
of virtue in its purest form. 
Eight or ten of the seminarians lived as if already canonized, and had saintly visions like 
those of Saint Theresa, or Saint Francis3 when he received the stigmata of the Crucifixion, on 
Mount Verna in the Apennines. But this was a great secret, hidden by their friends. The poor 
young  visionaries  were  almost  always  in  the  infirmary.  A  hundred  of  the  others  combined 
sturdy  faith  with  indefatigable  hard  work.  They  studied,  indeed,  to  the  point  of  making 
themselves ill, though without learning much. Two or three were noteworthy for real talent, 
including one named Chazel, but Julien felt himself quite unlike any of them, and they shared 
that judgment. 
The  remainder  of  the  three  hundred  and  twenty-one  seminarians  were  simply  rough-
hewn fellows, never quite sure they’d understood the Latin words they kept repeating all day 
                                                             
1 The quotation given corresponds to  no known author  named Young. Although Stendhal typically quotes 
English authors in their original language, this quote appears in French. 
2 A rigid, austere sect of Catholicism (see note for p. 94, l. 27). 
3 Saint Theresa Avila and Saint Francis of Assisi. 
 
Chapter Twenty-Six: The World, or What the Rich Man is Missing 
 
long.  Virtually  all  were  from  peasant  families,  and  vastly  preferred  earning  their  bread  by 
repeating a few Latin phrases than by sweating it out of the soil. Seeing this, quite early on, 
Julien was confident of swift success. “In every form of labor, people with brains are necessary,” 
he told himself, “because when it comes down to it, there’s work to be done. Under Napoleon, 
I  might  have  been  a  sergeant.  Among  these  future  priests,  I’ll  be  the  pope.  All  these  poor 
devils,”  he  added,  “day  laborers  from  their  childhood  on,  have  been  living―until  they  got 
here―on sour milk and black bread. In their straw-roofed huts, they ate meat only five or six 
times  a  year.  Like  the  Roman  soldiers,  for  whom  war  was  a  peaceful  time,  these  clumsy 
peasants are fascinated by the seminary’s delights.” 
All  Julien  ever  saw  in  their  bleak  eyes  was  sheer  physical  satisfaction,  after  the  midday 
meal,  and  the  physical  pleasure  of  anticipating  another  meal.  These  were  the  people  from 
whom he had to make himself stand out―but what Julien didn’t know, and they were careful 
never to tell him, was that to place first in every class on dogma, on church history, etc., etc., 
was  in  their  eyes  nothing  more  than  the  sin  of  vanity.  Ever  since  Voltaire,  ever  since  the 
division of government into two chambers (which is fundamentally nothing but mistrust and 
self-examination,  creating  in  the  populace  the  destructive  spirit  of  suspicion),  the  French 
Church appears to have understood that its true enemies were books. In its eyes, surrender of 
the heart is everything. Success in the acquisition of learning, even sacred learning, is for the 
Church highly questionable―and rightly so. What will keep superior men from going over to 
the enemy, as did Sieyès during the Revolution, or the liberal politician, Grégoire!4 Trembling, 
the Church clings to the pope as its only chance for salvation. Only the pope can put the fear 
of God into self-examination and, by the pious, ceremonious displays of the Papal Court, make 
an impression on the weary, sick spirits of people all over the world. 
Half grasping these various truths (which everything said in his classes, however, tended 
to  refute),  Julien  fell  into  a  deep  melancholy.  He  worked  hard,  and  rapidly  acquired  things 
extremely useful for a priest, though in his eyes distinctly false and of no interest whatever. 
“Has the whole world forgotten me?” he thought. He did not know that Father Pirard had 
already received, and thrown into the fire, several letters postmarked in Dijon, on the pages of 
which,  despite  their  highly  proper  language,  he  perceived  intense  passion.  Equally  intense 
remorse appeared to struggle against that love. “So much the better,” thought Father Pirard. 
“Certainly, it’s at least better than having been in love with an impious woman.” 
One  day,  he  opened  a  letter,  apparently  half  erased  by  tears,  which  was  an  eternal 
farewell.  “Finally,”  the  writer  said  to  Julien,  “heaven  has  granted  me  its  grace  and  given  me 
hate―not  for  the  author  of  my  sin,  who  for  me  will  always  be  that  which  is  dearest  in  the 
whole world, but for my sin itself. The sacrifice has been accomplished, my dear. It has not 
been without tears, as you can see. The salvation of those for whom I am responsible, and for 
whom you felt such love, is what has accomplished this. A just but terrible God can no longer 
take revenge on them, for their mother’s sins. Farewell, Julien: be just to everyone.” 
The last lines of this letter were absolutely illegible. There was an address in Dijon, but 
there  was  every  expectation  that  Julien  would  not  be  replying,  or  at  least  that  he  would  be 
making use of words that a woman returned to virtuous living could hear without blushing. 
                                                             
4 Two priests who rejected the Church in favor of the Revolution. For Sieyès, see note for p. 65, Epigraph. Henri 
Grégoire (1750C1831), known as l’abbé Grégoire, was a deputy to the Third Estate from Grenoble in 1789, and a 
member of all the revolutionary assemblies. He voted for the execution of Louis XVI and against the Empire. 
He was a leader in the antislavery movement in France. In 1989, his remains were brought to a place of honor 
in the Pantheon, in Paris. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Julien’s melancholy, aided and abetted by the poor nourishment of meals at eighty-three 
pence each, as furnished by the seminary’s supplier, was starting to affect his mental balance 
when suddenly, one morning, Fouqué appeared in his room. 
“I finally got in. I’ve been to Besan04on five times, so help me, trying to see you. All I’ve 
gotten to see is that wooden face. I stationed a spy at the seminary door: Why the devil don’t 
you ever go out?” 
“It’s a test I’ve inflicted on myself.” 
“You’ve really changed. Finally, I’ve actually seen you. Two shiny coins, worth five francs 
each, have just taught me I was an idiot for not offering them the first time.” 
The two friends talked on and on. Julien changed color when Fouqué told him: 
“By the way, did you know this? Your pupils’ mother has become wonderfully devout.” 
He spoke matter-of-factly, which hits very hard at a passionate soul, plainly bowled over, 
its dearest concerns affected. 
“Yes, my friend, into the most exalted devotion. I’ve heard she goes on pilgrimages. But 
Father Maslon, who’s been a spy on Father Chélan all these years, is eternally shamed, because 
Madame de Rênal won’t go near him. She goes to Dijon, or Besan04on, to make confession.” 
“She comes to Besan04on?” asked Julien, his forehead reddening. 
“Pretty often,” answered Fouqué, questioningly. 
“Have you got a copy of The Constitutional?”5 
“What are you talking about?” answered Fouqué. 
“I asked you if you had a copy of The Constitutional,” answered Julien in the calmest of 
voices. “They cost thirty pence an issue here.” 
“What? Liberals, even in the seminary!” Fouqué cried. “Poor France!” he added, imitating 
the hypocritical, sweet-toned voice of Father Maslon. 
This visit would have had a profound effect on our hero, except that the next day, because 
of what he’d been told by the little seminarian from Verrières, who seemed to him so childlike, 
he  came  to  make  an  important  discovery.  From  the  moment  he’d  entered  the  seminary, 
Julien’s conduct had been simply a series of false steps. He made bitter fun of himself. 
In truth, everything important in his life had been knowledgeably done, but he’d paid no 
attention  to  details,  and  those  most  skillful  in  seminary  ways  pay  attention  to  nothing  but 
details.  In  addition,  his  classmates  had  come  to  think  of  him  as  a  freethinker.  He  had  been 
betrayed by a host of tiny actions. 
In their eyes he had been convicted of a monstrous sin: he thought, he judged for himself, 
instead of blindly following authority and example. Father Pirard had not been of the slightest 
help:  outside  the  confessional,  he  had  never  addressed  a  word  to  Julien,  and  there  too  he 
listened  more  than  he  spoke.  It  would  have  been  very  different  had  he  chosen  Father 
Castaneda. 
From the instant Julien became aware of his foolishness, there was no more boredom in 
his life. He wanted to know the extent of the damage and, to do this, he dropped a bit of the 
arrogance and stubbornness with which he had repulsed his classmates. And then they could 
take their revenge. His advances were met by a contempt that came very close to derision. He 
realized that, from the time he’d first come to the seminary, there had not been a single hour, 
especially during recess, that might not have had repercussions for or against him, that might 
not have either swelled the number of his enemies or won him the goodwill of the sincerely 
virtuous among the seminarians―or, at least, those less coarse than the others. The damage 
                                                             
5 A liberal daily newspaper, founded in 1815 in opposition to the Bourbon government. 
 
Chapter Twenty-Six: The World, or What the Rich Man is Missing 
 
needing  repair  was  huge;  the  task  was  extremely  difficult.  But  Julien  was  painstakingly, 
ceaselessly on guard: he was at work designing himself a brand-new character. 
His eye movements, for example, caused him serious difficulty. There was good reason, in 
a  place  like  this,  to  keep  one’s  eyes  lowered. “How  presumptuous  I  was  at  Verrières!”  Julien 
told himself. “I fancied myself living; I was merely preparing to live. Now I’m finally in the real 
world,  finding  it  exactly  as  I  will  go  on  finding  it,  until  I’ve  finished  playing  my  part: 
surrounded  by  genuine  enemies.  What  an  incredible  difficulty,”  he  added,  “this  constantly 
evolving,  never-ending  hypocrisy!  It  makes  the  labors  of  Hercules  pale  by  comparison.  Our 
modern Hercules would have to be Pope Sextus V,6 for fifteen years in a row using his modesty 
to  deceive  forty  cardinals  who  had  seen  him,  throughout  his  younger  years,  both  lively  and 
arrogant. 
“So:  knowledge  is  nothing  here!”  he  said  to  himself,  resentfully.  “Progress  in  dogma,  in 
Church  history,  etc.,  only  seems  to  make  any  difference.  Talking  about  knowledge  is  a 
deliberate  trap,  meant  for  fools  like  me  to  fall  into.  Alas!  All  I’ve  accomplished  is  a  swift 
mastery of all this twaddle. Do they really judge these things at their true value? Do they think 
of them as I do? And I’ve been stupid enough to feel proud! All I’ve gained, for all my long, 
unending parade of academic honors, is fierce, relentless enemies. Chazel, who really knows 
more than I do, always throws a whopping blunder into his papers, so he drops into fiftieth 
place. If he ever takes a first, it’s pure absentmindedness. Ah! How useful one word, one single 
word from Father Pirard would have been!” 
Once he’d had his eyes opened, the long exercises in aesthetic piety―saying the rosary 
five times a week, chanting canticles to the Sacred Heart of Jesus, etc., etc.―which had always 
struck  him  as  mordantly  dull,  became  the  most  fascinating  things  he  did.  In  critically 
evaluating  himself,  and  trying  not  to  exaggerate  his  capacities,  Julien  did  not  aspire  all  at 
once―like those seminarians who served as models for the others―to make every single thing 
he did significant, or in other words to bear witness to a kind of Christian perfection. There is a 
way  of  eating  a  soft-boiled  egg,  in  the  seminary,  that  testifies  to  progress  toward  a  life  of 
devotion. 
My  reader  may  be  smiling,  but  let  him  take  the  trouble  to  recall  all  the  many  errors 
committed,  precisely  in  the  eating  of  an  egg,  by  Father  Delille,7  when  invited  to  lunch  by  a 
great lady of Louis XVI’s court. 
Julien  first  tried  to  reach  a  state  of  non  culpa,  or  the  negative  virtue  of  comparative 
innocence, in which the young seminarian’s walk, the method of moving his arms, his eyes, 
etc., revealed no worldly concerns, without as yet attaining to absorption in that other, eternal 
life, and its pure nothingness. 
Julien was always finding, lettered in charcoal on the corridor walls, observations like the 
following: “What is sixty years of striving, balanced against either eternal delight or eternally 
burning in hell?” He no longer scorned them; he understood he had to keep them forever in 
front of his eyes. “What is it I’m going to do all my life?” he’d say to himself. “I’m going to be 
selling  the  faithful  a  place  in  heaven.  How  can  I  make  them  really  see  that  place?  By  the 
difference between what they view when they look at me, and when they look at others like 
themselves.” 
After months of ceaseless effort, Julien still looked like a thinker. His way of moving his 
eyes and holding his mouth did not indicate implicit faith, a readiness to believe everything 
                                                             
6 A Renaissance pope (1520C90) better known for his administrative skills than his piety. 
7 An obscure country priest who found sudden fame when he published a translation of Virgil’s Georgica; he 
was adopted as a protégé by the very rich and very literary Madame Geoffrin, in whose elegant salon he was 
something of a fish out of water. There is no record of the egg incident. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
and endure everything, even martyrdom. Julien was angry, seeing himself inferior in this sort 
of  thing  to  the  coarsest  of  coarse  peasants.  They  had  excellent  reasons  for  not  looking  like 
thinkers. 
How hard he strove to achieve a face of fervent, blind faith, prepared to believe anything 
and  suffer  everything―the  face  so  often  found  in  Italian  monasteries,  and  of  which,  among 
our nonecclesiastics, Guercino8 has left, in his religious paintings, such perfect models. 
During high festivals, the seminarians were given sausage with sauerkraut. Those who sat 
near Julien, in the refectory, noticed how indifferently pleased this made him: it was one of his 
most serious offenses. His classmates saw it as an obnoxious trait of intensely stupid hypocrisy: 
nothing  made  him  more  enemies.  “Look  at  this  bourgeois,  look  at  this  snob,”  they  said, 
“pretending  to  be  scornful  of  the  very  best  of  all  food,  sausage  and  sauerkraut!  Oh,  what  a 
rotten fellow! What conceit! What eternal damnation!” 
“Alas!”  Julien  cried,  in  his  moments  of  discouragement,  “the  ignorance  of  these  young 
peasants, my classmates, is an immense advantage for them! When they entered the seminary, 
their teachers didn’t have to free them from the fearful number of worldly ideas I bear, and 
which they can see on my face no matter what I do.” 
With  an  attentiveness  bordering  on  jealousy,  Julien  studied  the  coarsest  of  the  peasant 
seminarians. When they’d stripped off their ratteen jackets, so they could put on their black 
garments, their education had been limited to a limitless respect for money― hard or soft, as 
folk in Franche-Comté phrase it. 
This is the holy, epic way of expressing that sublime conception, cash. 
Happiness, for these seminarians, as for the heroes of Voltaire’s novels, is above all else a 
good dinner. Julien found in almost all of them an innate respect for anyone who wore cotton 
broadcloth  clothing.  Such  an  attitude  values  distributive  justice,  the  sort  we  receive  in  our 
courts of law, at exactly its true worth―or perhaps a bit less than that. “What good does it do,” 
they kept saying among themselves, “suing a big shot?” 
That’s  the  phrase  they  use  in  the  valleys  of  the  Jura,  when  they  refer  to  a  rich  man. 
Imagine their respect for the wealthiest of the wealthy―the government! 
In  these  Franche-Comté  peasants’  eyes,  not  to  smile  respectfully,  when  the  governor’s 
name  was  mentioned,  was  sheer  recklessness.  After  all,  a  poor  man’s  recklessness  is  quickly 
punished by an absence of food. 
After  having  virtually  suffocated  early  on,  in  his  feelings  of  contempt,  Julien  ended  by 
experiencing pity. Most of his classmates’ fathers well knew what it was like, coming home to 
their cottage on a winter night and finding no bread, no potatoes, no chestnuts. “Why should 
it seem surprising,” Julien said to himself, “if in their eyes a happy man is, first of all, someone 
who’s  just  had  a  good  meal,  and  next  to  that  someone  who  wears  decent  clothes?  My 
classmates  have  a  fixed  vocation,  or  in  other  words  they  see  in  the  priesthood  a  long 
continuation of exactly that happiness―eating well and having warm clothes in the winter.” 
Once, he heard a young seminarian, blessed with an imagination, saying to a companion: 
“Why shouldn’t I become pope, just like Sextus VI, who was a swineherd?” 
“Only Italians get to be pope,” said his friend. “But I’m sure they’ll pick some of us, the 
lucky  ones,  for  posts  as  vicar-generals,  canons,  and  maybe  bishops...Father  P.,  Bishop  of 
Ch09lons, is a barrel-maker’s son, and that’s what my father does.” 
                                                             
8  “See,  at  the  Louvre  Museum,  Fran04ois,  Duke  of  Aquitaine,  laying  down  his  armor  to  take  the  monk’s  habit.” 
Guercino (1591C1666), an Italian painter, pupil of Caravaggio. Stendhal had a great interest in Italian art; one 
of his early books was A History of Painting in Italy (1817). 
 
Chapter Twenty-Six: The World, or What the Rich Man is Missing 
 
One day, during a dogma lesson, Father Pirard summoned Julien. The poor young man 
was thrilled to leave the physical and moral atmosphere in which he was immersed. 
The director gave him exactly the kind of welcome he’d experienced, and been so terrified 
by, the day he’d entered the seminary. 
“Explain  what’s  written  on  this  playing  card,”  he  said,  and  the  way  he  looked  at  Julien 
made him wish he could sink down into the ground. 
Julien read: 
“Amanda Binet, at the Giraffe Café, before eight o’clock. Say you’re from Genlis, and my 
mother’s cousin.” 
address, and stolen it. 
Julien saw at once what danger he was in: Father Castaneda’s spies had sniffed out this 
“The day I entered the seminary,” he said, looking at Father Pirard’s forehead, because he 
could not endure those terrible eyes, “I was trembling. Father Chélan had warned me this was 
a  place  full  of  denunciations  and  all  kinds  of  wickedness.  Spying  on  your  classmates,  and 
denouncing them, were encouraged. Heaven wishes it to be that way, to show young priests 
life as it really is, and to inspire them with disgust for the world and all its displays.” 
“And you use your rhetoric even on me!” cried Father Pirard, furious. “You little rascal!” 
“At Verrières,” Julien replied coldly, “my brothers beat me any time they were jealous.” 
“Get to the point! the point!” Father Pirard shouted, almost beside himself. 
Not in the least intimidated, Julien went on with his story. 
“The day I came to Besan04on, about noon, I was hungry, I went into a café. I felt intense 
repugnance for such a profane place, but I thought my lunch would cost me less there than in 
an inn. A lady, who seemed to be the proprietress, took pity on me, an obvious newcomer in 
the city. ‘Besan04on is full of crooks,’ she told me. ‘I fear for you, sir. If any harm comes to you, 
just seek my help, send me word before eight o’clock. If the porter at the seminary won’t send 
your note, tell him you’re my cousin, and like me a native of Genlis’...” 
“All this jabbering will be looked into,” cried Father Pirard, unable to stay in one place, 
walking up and down his room. 
“Back to your cell!” 
The  director  followed  him  in  and  locked  the  door.  Then  he  set  himself  to  inspecting 
Julien’s trunk, at the bottom of which the fatal playing card had been carefully hidden. There 
was  nothing  missing  from  the  trunk,  but  things  had  gotten  disarranged―and  yet  he  had 
always kept the key with him. “What good luck,” Julien told himself, “that during those days of 
my blindness, I never made use of permission to go out of the seminary, so often offered by 
Father Castaneda, and with a goodwill that, now, I quite understand. If I’d been weak enough 
to change my clothes and go see pretty Amanda, I’d have been lost.  When they gave up on 
using their information that way, and not wanting to just throw it away, they denounced me.” 
Two hours later, the director summoned him again. 
“You were not lying,” he said, not looking at him as harshly. “But holding on to an address 
like this is careless beyond your conception, and profoundly serious. You miserable child! Ten 
years from now, who knows? It might disgrace you.” 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Chapter Twenty-Seven: First Experience of Life 
The present age, oh Lord! It’s like the Ark of the Covenant. Woe to anyone who touches it. 
―Diderot1 
The reader will allow us to skip over most of the clear, precise facts of this time in Julien’s 
life.  It’s  not  that  we  don’t  have  them―quite  the  contrary.  But  it  may  be  that  what  he  saw, 
there in the seminary, was entirely too black for the more moderate coloring we seek in these 
pages.  Those  who  have  suffered  certain  things  can  only  remember  them  with  a  horror  that 
paralyzes every other pleasure―even that of reading a story. 
Julien  did  not  make  much  progress  in  his  attempts  at  an  externalized  hypocrisy.  He 
lapsed  into  moments  of  disgust  and  even  of  complete  discouragement.  He  had  not  been 
successful, even in this sordid career. Any help at all, from anywhere or anyone, would have 
been enough to lift his heart; the difficulties he needed to conquer would not have seemed so 
enormous. But he was as alone as an abandoned ship in the middle of the ocean. “And if I did 
succeed,” he said to himself, “to have all the rest of my life to spend in such company! Gluttons 
who  think  only  of  the  bacon  omelet  they  gobble  down  at  dinner,  or  those  like  Father 
Castaneda, for whom there’s no such thing as a crime too black! They’ll get the power they’re 
after, but oh great God, at what a price! 
“Man  has  a  powerful  will;  I  read  this  everywhere.  But  can  it  be  powerful  enough  to 
overcome  such  disgust?  Great  men’s  tasks  used  to  be  easy.  No  matter  the  danger,  they 
appreciated its beauty. But who can understand, except me, this ugliness all around me?” 
It was, for his life, the acid test. It would have been so easy to enlist in one of the fine 
regiments  garrisoned  at  Besan04on!  Or  he  could  have  become  a  Latin  teacher:  he  needed  so 
little to live on! But then, no more career, no more future for him to imagine. That would be 
death. 
Here are the details of just one of his depressing days. 
“I’ve  congratulated  myself,  often,  for  thinking  I  was  different  from  the  other  young 
peasants! Well, I’ve lived long enough to see that difference creates hatred,” he told himself one 
morning. This great truth had just been demonstrated by one of his most stinging failures. He 
had  labored  for  a  week,  making  himself  pleasant  to  one  of  the  seminarians  who  lived  as  if 
already canonized. He walked with him in the courtyard, humbly  listening to stupid prattle 
until he couldn’t keep his eyes open. Suddenly the weather turned stormy, thunder rumbled, 
and the saintly one called out, pushing Julien away in the rudest fashion: 
“Listen, it’s everyone for himself in this world. I’m not interested in being burned up by a 
thunderbolt. God might strike you down as an infidel, just like Voltaire.” 
His teeth clenched in rage, and his wide-open eyes staring at a sky streaked by lightning: 
“I’d deserve to be swept away, if I fell asleep during a storm!” Julien cried to himself. “Let’s try 
to win over some other righteous snot!” 
The bell announced Father Castaneda’s class in ecclesiastical history. 
Instructing these young peasants, terrified by hard work and their fathers’ poverty, Father 
Castaneda  taught,  that  day,  that  the  government,  which  seemed  to  them  so  terrifying,  only 
had true and legitimate power because the pope delegated it. 
“Make yourselves worthy of the pope’s kindness and goodwill by the saintliness of your 
lives, by your obedience. Become like a rod in his hands, “ he added, “and you will ascend to 
                                                             
1 Denis Diderot (1713C84), with Voltaire and Rousseau, was one of the greatest of the philosophes. Diderot 
was founder of the  Encyclopédie; novelist; playwright; author of  Jacques the Fatalist and His Master, Rameau’s 
Nephew, and the scandalous The Nun. This quote is not to be found in his writings. 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Seven: First Experience of Life 
some noble post where you will be in charge, beyond anyone’s control, permanently in power, 
where the government pays a third of your salary, and the faithful, molded by your teaching, 
the other two-thirds.” 
Leaving his classroom, Father Castaneda stopped in the courtyard. 
“It is truly said of a parish priest that whatever the man is worth will decide how much his 
post is worth,” he said to the students standing in a circle around him. “I have myself known, I 
who  here  speak  to  you,  of  mountain  parishes  where  the  supplemental  fees  were  worth  far 
more than those of parish priests in the city. The nominal salaries were the same, but without 
counting  the  fat  capons,  the  eggs,  the  fresh  butter,  and  a  thousand  other  details,  equally 
attractive. And in the mountains the parish priest ranks highest, no doubt about it. There’s no 
good dinner to which he won’t be invited, no celebration, etc.” 
Father Castaneda had hardly gone up to his room when the students divided into groups. 
Julien was not in any of them: he was ignored, a black sheep. In every group, he saw someone 
toss a coin in the air, and if heads or tails was guessed correctly, everyone said the coin tosser 
would soon have a parish rich in supplemental fees. 
Then they swapped stories. A certain young priest, ordained barely a year, had given a pet 
rabbit  to  the  old  parish  priest’s  maidservant.  He  was  asked  to  serve  in  that  parish  and,  not 
more than a month later, when the parish priest died a quick death, the young one inherited 
the parish. Another young priest had managed to be named successor to the parish priest of a 
big, wealthy town, because he’d sat at table, every meal, with the paralyzed old parish priest, 
and gracefully cut up his chicken for him. 
Like young people in all walks of life, the seminarians dramatized the effects of these little 
maneuvers, which are colored in unusual hues and strike the imagination. 
“I’ve  got  to  participate  in  these  conversations,”  Julien  told  himself.  “When  they’re  not 
talking  about  sausages  and  good  old  priests,  they  chatter  about  the  worldly  side  of  Church 
doctrine, like quarrels between bishops and governors, or between mayors and parish priests.” 
Julien  saw  the  concept  of  a  second  God  emerging,  but  a  new  God  far  more  frightening  and 
more powerful than the other one. This second God was the pope. They would say, but in low 
voices and when they were very sure Father Pirard could not hear them, that the pope didn’t 
bother  naming  all  the  governors  and  mayors  in  France,  only  because  he’d  given  this 
responsibility to the French king when he’d declared him the Church’s elder son. 
It was just about this time when Julien thought, using de Maistre’s book On the Pope, he 
might be able to get himself into one of the groups. He truly astonished his classmates―but it 
was still a disaster. He annoyed them by presenting their opinions better than they did. Father 
Chélan had been as careless of Julien’s welfare as he had been of his own. Having trained him 
to think clearly, and not let himself settle for empty verbiage, he’d neglected to explain that, 
for someone not well respected, this habit is criminal, for in any case logical thinking is always 
offensive. 
Julien’s  elegant  rhetoric  thus  gave  rise  to  a  new  crime.  On  further  reflection,  his 
classmates compressed into a single phrase all the horror he inspired in them: they nicknamed 
him “Martin Luther”―above all, they said, because of this diabolic logic, of which he was so 
proud. 
A  number  of  young  seminarians  had  fresher  complexions,  and  might  have  been 
considered  better  looking  than  Julien,  but  he  had  pale  hands  and  could  never  hide  certain 
delicate  habits.  This  apparent  advantage  was  nothing  of  the  kind,  in  this  sad  dwelling  into 
which fate had thrown him. The unwashed peasants with whom he lived said he was clearly of 
loose morals. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
We  do  not  wish  to  bore  the  reader  by  reciting  our  hero’s  thousand  misfortunes.  For 
example, the strongest of his classmates regularly tried beating him up: he took as a weapon a 
double-pointed metal protractor and notified them, by gestures rather than words, that he’d 
use it. When spies write up their reports, it’s hard to make as much out of gestures as words. 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Procession 
Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Procession 
Every heart was moved. God’s presence seemed to have descended into the narrow, Gothic streets, extending 
in every direction and well sanded by the efforts of the faithful. 
―Young1 
Julien had tried in vain to make himself small and stupid: he could not be liked; he was 
far  too  different.  “But,”  he  told  himself,  “all  our  professors  are  notable  people  and  one  in  a 
thousand.  Why  aren’t  they  happy  about  my  humility?”  Just  one  of  them  seemed  willing  to 
waste  his  kindness  by  believing  in  and  being  fooled  by  everything.  This  was  Father  Chas-
Bernard,  director  of  ceremonials  at  the  cathedral,  where  for  fifteen  years  he’d  been  led  to 
expect  a  post  as  canon,2  and  where,  while  he  waited,  he  taught  sacred  eloquence  at  the 
seminary. In Julien’s blind period, this was one of the classes where he was regularly the top 
student. Father Chas had demonstrated affection for this prize pupil; when class was over, he 
would take Julien’s arm and walk in the garden with him. 
“What’s he after?” Julien asked himself. He noted, with astonishment, that for hours on 
end Father Chas would talk to him about the vestments owned by the cathedral. There were 
seventeen  chasubles,  all  trimmed  with  lace,  not  to  mention  mourning  garments.  They  were 
expecting more from President3 de Rubempré’s widow. Now ninety years old, this lady had, for 
at least seventy years, preserved her wedding clothes, superb Lyons silk, brocaded in gold. It 
was universally believed, in Besan04on, that by the terms of the president’s will the cathedral’s 
treasures  would  be  enriched  by  more  than  ten  chasubles,  not  counting  four  or  five  long 
mantles for high festivals. “I’d go even further,” added Father Chas, lowering his voice. “I have 
reason to believe the president left us eight magnificent candlesticks, of gilded silver, which 
are  said  to  have  been  bought  in  Italy  by  Charles  the  Bold,  Duke  of  Burgundy,  a  favorite 
minister of whose was one of the president’s ancestors.” 
“But what’s he after, with all this old-clothes stuff?” thought Julien. “He’s been building 
this up, like a master, for a hundred years, and there’s still nothing in sight. It’s got to be that 
he really mistrusts me! He’s smarter than all the others: in two weeks you can easily figure out 
their secret goal. But I understand: this fellow has been putting up with it for fifteen years!” 
One evening, in the middle of a fencing lesson, Julien was summoned by Father Pirard, 
“Tomorrow’s the Feast of Corpus Christi.4 Father Chas-Bernard needs your assistance in 
decorating the cathedral. Go, and obey him.” 
Then Father Pirard called him back. 
“You can decide for yourself, if you want to make this an occasion for wandering around 
who said: 
the city.” 
“Incedo per ignes, I have secret enemies,” Julien thought. 
Early the next day, Julien made his way to the cathedral, walking with lowered eyes. It felt 
good to see the streets and the bustle beginning everywhere in the city. Everywhere, they were 
hanging handsome cloth across house fronts. All the time he’d spent in the seminary seemed 
to him no more than a mere flicker. His thoughts were of Vergy, and of pretty Amanda Binet: 
                                                             
1 Again, in the original, the quote is given in French, and again the text cannot be identified. 
2 A post within a Church carrying greater authority―and receiving greater pay―than a simple priest. 
3 Refers here to a presiding judge of a royal court. Members of the magistrature were referred to as the noblesse 
de robe, as opposed to the noblesse de l’épée, typified in this novel by the La Mole family and their titled Parisian 
friends. 
4 In France, the Fête Dieu, a religious celebration marked by the procession of the Eucharist through the streets 
for the adoration of the faithful. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
he might meet her again, since her café was not far away. As he approached the cathedral, he 
could see Father Chas-Bernard in the distance, in the doorway. He was a fat man with a joyous 
face and a straightforward look. Right now, he seemed triumphant. 
“I’ve  been  waiting  for  you,  my  dear  son,”  he  cried  when  he  saw  Julien  coming.  “You’re 
most welcome. Our task, today, will be long and trying, so let us fortify ourselves with an early 
breakfast. We’ll have another at ten, during high mass.” 
“It is my wish, sir,” Julien said gravely, “not to be alone for an instant. Be so good as to 
note,” he added, pointing toward the cathedral clock above their heads, “that I’ve come at one 
minute to five.” 
“Ah! Those naughty fellows at the seminary have made you afraid! It’s very decent of you 
to  remember  them,”  said  Father  Chas.  “Is  a  road  less  lovely  because  there  are  thorns  in  the 
hedges alongside it? Travelers go their way and let the nasty thorns wither where they are. For 
the rest, to work, my dear friend, to work!” 
Father Chas had been right when he’d said the work would be trying. The previous night 
the cathedral had been the site of a large funeral; nothing could be put in readiness for Corpus 
Christi.  It  was  thus  necessary,  in  just  one  morning,  to  wrap  every  one  of  the  Gothic  pillars, 
along the three main aisles, in a kind of cloak of red damask, thirty feet high. The bishop had 
brought in, by mail coach, four Parisian decorators, but these gentlemen could not take care of 
everything―and rather than encourage their local helpers, less experienced and a good deal 
clumsier, they made matters worse by laughing at them. 
Julien  realized  he’d  have  to  go  up  the  ladders  himself;  his  nimbleness  clearly  came  in 
handy.  He  took  charge  of  the  local  decorators.  Father  Chas,  delighted,  watched  him  flying 
from  one  ladder  to  the  next.  Once  all  the  pillars  were  wrapped  in  damask,  huge  feather 
clusters, five in all, had to be set above the main altar canopy. It was a rich, crowning work, in 
gilded wood, supported by eight great columns of Italian marble, spiraling from top to bottom. 
But  to  reach  the  center  of  the  canopy,  it  was  necessary  to  walk  along  an  ancient  wooden 
cornice, which was perhaps worm-eaten but was certainly forty feet high. 
Seeing  this  risky  road,  the  Parisian  decorators  lost  their  merry  brightness.  They  stood 
looking  up  at  it,  saying  a  great  deal  and  staying  right  where  they  were.  Julien  snatched  the 
feather  clusters  and  fairly  ran  up  the  ladder.  He  shaped  the  clusters  like  a  beautiful  crown, 
directly in the center of the canopy. When he came down the ladder, Father Chas threw his 
arms around him. 
“Optime, superb,” cried the good priest. “I’ll tell the bishop about this.” 
Their ten o’clock breakfast was a very happy one. Father Chas had never seen his church 
so lovely. 
“My  dear  disciple,”  he  told  Julien,  “my  mother  used  to  do  the  chair  rentals  in  this 
venerable basilica, so in a sense I was nurtured in this splendid edifice. Robespierre’s Terror5 
ruined us, but at the age of eight, which I then was, I was already assisting at private masses, 
and on those days I was fed. No one was better at folding a chasuble: the gold braid never got 
frayed.  Ever  since  Napoleon  reestablished  holy  services,  I  have  had  the  good  fortune  to  run 
everything, here in this ancient cathedral. Five times every year, my eyes see it adorned with 
such wonderfully beautiful ornamentation. But it has never been so resplendent―the widths 
of damask have never been so well tied as they have been today; never have they been so well 
fitted to the pillars.” 
“Finally,” thought Julien, “he’s going to tell me his secret. He’s telling me about himself, 
it’s  pouring  out  of  him.  But  even  though  he’s  obviously  excited,  he  hasn’t  spoken  a  careless 
                                                             
5 1793C94. 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Eight: A Procession 
word. He’s worked hard, yes, and he’s happy,” Julien said to himself, “and he’s been putting 
away a lot of this first-class wine. What a man! What an example for me! He’s way ahead of all 
the others.” (He’d learned this slangy talk from the old surgeon-major.) 
As the Sanctus of the high mass began, Julien said he’d like to put on a surplice and follow 
behind the bishop in this marvelous procession. 
“The  thieves,  my  dear,  the  thieves!”  cried  Father  Chas.  “You’re  not  thinking  about  the 
thieves! The procession will go out of the church, and it will be empty―but we’ll watch over it, 
you  and  I.  We’ll  be  very  lucky  if  there  aren’t  a  couple  of  yards  missing  from  that  beautiful 
braid,  wrapped  around  the  base  of  the  pillars.  That  was  yet  another  gift  from  Madame  de 
Rubempré. It came from her great-grandfather, the famous count: it’s pure gold, my dear,” the 
priest added, bending toward Julien’s ear and speaking very softly, plainly very excited, “not 
some kind of fake. You keep watch on the north aisle: don’t leave it for an instant. I’ll take the 
middle  aisle  and  the  whole  central  part.  Keep  an  eye  on  the  confessionals:  that’s  where  the 
women hide, the ones who spy for the thieves. They watch for the very second our backs are 
turned.” 
As he finished speaking, the bells sounded a quarter to twelve, and the great clock could 
be heard as well. It gave a great peal. All these clear, solemn sounds moved Julien. His mind no 
longer felt tied to the earth. 
The scent of incense, and of the rose petals that little children, dressed as Saint John, had 
strewn in front of the holy tabernacle, completed his excited state. 
All that the clock’s somber tolling should have awakened in Julien, really, was the thought 
of twenty men toiling for half a franc, helped perhaps by fifteen or twenty of the faithful. He 
should have contemplated the ropes and their wear and tear, as well as the vulnerable wooden 
portions  of  the  building,  and  the  risky  state  of  the  clock  itself,  which  fell  down  every  other 
century, and he should at the very least have thought of some way of paying the bell ringers 
less,  or  of  paying  them  by  an  indulgence  or  two,  or  some  other  blessing  drawn  from  the 
Church’s rich treasure, and thereby keeping its cash resources intact. 
But  instead  of  these  wise  reflections,  Julien’s  soul,  exalted  by  these  clear,  bold  sounds, 
wandered in imaginary places. He’ll never make a good priest, nor a great administrator. Souls 
stirred like this are good, at best, for making artists. Here, Julien’s vanity bursts into the full 
light of day. Perhaps fifty of his fellow seminarians―whom public opinion had made mindful 
of living reality, as had the Jacobinism6 showing itself to them, lying in ambush behind every 
bush―would have heard the great clock and thought of nothing but the bell ringers’ wages. 
They  would  then  have  considered,  with  all  of  Barême’s7  mathematical  genius,  whether  the 
extent of public emotion justified what the bell ringers were paid. Had Julien cared to think 
about the cathedral’s material interests, his imagination might even have soared so far that it 
could have devised a way to save forty francs of Church funds, and how to avoid expenses of 
twenty-five pence. 
All this time, on the most beautiful day the world has ever seen, the procession proceeded 
slowly through Besan04on, pausing at the temporary altars built, in competition, one with the 
other, by the authorities, and the church remained profoundly silent. It was in half darkness, 
and there was a pleasant, cool freshness; the fragrance of flowers and the scent of incense still 
hung in the air. 
The  hushed  quiet,  the  deep  solitude,  the  cool  freshness  of  the  long  aisles―everything 
made  Julien’s  daydreaming  sweeter.  He  was  not  worried  about  Father  Chas,  who  would  not 
                                                             
6 Here referring rather generically to political radicalism and anticlericalism (see note for p. 8, l. 1). 
7 Seventeenth-century mathematician whose name became a byword for mathematical accuracy. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
bother  him,  busy  as  he  was  elsewhere  in the  building.  His  soul  had  very  nearly  deserted  its 
mortal shell, which was slowly walking down the north aisle, assigned to him for surveillance. 
He was still more tranquil because he’d made sure that all there was in the confessional booths 
was a scattering of pious women. His eyes looked but did not see. 
However,  his  abstraction  was  half  broken  by  the  sight  of  two  women,  extremely  well 
dressed and on their knees, one already in a confessional, and the other close by, on a prayer 
stool.  He  was  looking  without  seeing,  but  still,  whether  from  some  vague  sense  of  his 
responsibilities, or perhaps admiring the two ladies’ fine, simple clothes, he noticed that there 
was no priest in the confessional. “Strange,” he thought. “Why aren’t these fine ladies on their 
knees at some temporary altar, if they’re in fact so devout? Or else set advantageously in the 
front  row  of  a  balcony,  if  they’re  worldly  women?  How  well  designed  that  dress  is!  How 
charming!” He slowed down, trying to see it better. 
The  woman  who  was  on  her  knees,  inside  the  confessional,  turned  her  head  a  bit, 
hearing―in the midst of all the deep silence―the sound of Julien’s steps. Suddenly, she cried 
out and fainted. 
As  she  began  to  fall,  tumbling  backward,  her  friend,  who  was  close  by,  hurried  to  her 
assistance. At the same time, Julien saw the neck and shoulders of the fallen woman. A twisted 
rope of fine, large pearls, terribly familiar to him, caught his eye. Who can say what he felt, 
recognizing Madame de Rênal’s hair! And it was she. The lady trying to hold up her head, and 
keep her from falling full on the ground, was Madame Derville. Quite beyond thought, Julien 
ran to them: Madame de Rênal’s fall might well have carried down her friend had Julien not 
kept them both from the floor. He saw Madame de Rênal’s pallor, her blank face, loose against 
his  shoulder.  He  helped  Madame  Derville  support  this  charming  head  on  a  straw-bottomed 
chair; he was on his knees. 
Madame Derville turned and recognized him: 
“Leave, sir, leave!” she said, intensely angry. “Above all, don’t let her see you again. The 
sight of you surely shocked and horrified her: she’d been so happy, until you appeared. Your 
behavior is abominable. Leave―go away, if there is any decency left in you.” 
She spoke with such authority, and at that moment Julien felt so weak, that he went away. 
“She always hated me,” he said of Madame Derville. 
Just then, the nasal chanting of the lead priests resounded in the church. The procession 
was returning. Father Chas-Bernard called Julien, then called again; Julien did not at first hear 
him. Finally, the priest came and touched his arm, having found Julien behind a pillar where 
he had hidden himself, half dead. Father Chas had meant to present him to the bishop. 
“You’re ill, my child,” the priest said, seeing him pale and almost unable to walk. “You’ve 
worked  too  hard.”  He  gave  Julien  his  arm  to  lean  on.  “Come,  sit  down  on  this  little  bench, 
behind me. It’s for the giving of blessings, with holy water. I’ll stand in front of you, so you 
won’t  be  seen.”  They  were  standing  near  the  main  entrance.  “Calm  yourself.  We  still  have 
twenty solid minutes before the bishop appears. Try to get a grip on yourself. When he comes 
by, I’ll help you up, because I’m good and strong, despite my age.” 
But when the bishop came past, Julien was shaking so hard that Father Chas gave up the 
idea of presenting him. 
“Don’t worry,” he said to Julien. “I’ll find another opportunity.” 
That night, he sent the seminary chapel ten pounds of the candles he’d saved up, he said, 
because Julien had been so  careful, and so quick, in snuffing them out. Nothing could have 
been less truthful. The poor young fellow was himself snuffed out. There had been absolutely 
nothing in his head since he’d seen Madame de Rênal. 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Nine: The First Forward Step 
Chapter Twenty-Nine: The First Forward Step 
He knew his own time, he knew his own district, and he’s rich. 
―The Precursor [Newspaper]1 
Julien had not yet recovered from the profound trance, brought on by what had happened 
in the cathedral, when one morning harsh Father Pirard summoned him. 
“I have here a very favorable letter about you, from Father Chas-Bernard. All in all, I’m 
basically pleased by your behavior. You are extremely reckless, even harebrained, though you 
don’t appear to be. To this point, however, your heart’s been good, even generous. Your mind 
is superior. In sum, I see a spark in you that must not be neglected. 
“After  fifteen years  as  director,  I  am  about  to  leave  this  institution.  My  crime  has  been 
allowing our students freedom to make decisions for themselves, rather than championing or 
assisting that secret society, about which you spoke when you knelt in the confessional. Before 
I go, I want to do something for you. I would have done it two months sooner, because you 
deserve it, had it not been for the denunciation based on Amanda Binet’s address, found in 
your  possession.  I  hereby  make  you  assistant  master  for  both  the  New  and  the  Old 
Testaments.” 
Overwhelmed with gratitude, Julien thought of dropping to his knees and thanking God, 
but  he  yielded  to  a  more  genuine  gesture:  he  went  to  Father  Pirard,  took  his  hand,  and 
brought it to his lips. 
“What’s  this?”  exclaimed  the  director  as  if  annoyed.  But  Julien’s  eyes  spoke  even  more 
clearly than his deed. 
Father Pirard looked at him, astonished, like a man who many years ago lost the habit of 
dealing  with  tender  feelings.  His  face,  his  whole  manner,  betrayed  him;  his  voice  became 
different. 
“Well then! Yes, my child, I am fond of you. Heaven knows it’s entirely in spite of myself. 
I’ve been charged with being fair, and not manifesting either dislike or affection for anyone. 
Your career will be painful. I see something in you which offends coarse souls. Jealousy and 
slander will hound you. Wherever Providence may place you, your colleagues will never see 
you without hating you, and they will pretend to love you, the better to betray you. For which 
there  is  just  one  remedy:  put  all  your  hope  in  God,  for  He  has  caused  you  to  be  hated,  in 
punishment for your vanity. Let your behavior be pure: it is the only resource I see for you. If 
you  hold  to  the  truth,  with  an  unyielding  grip,  sooner  or  later  your  enemies  will  be 
confounded.” 
It had been so long since Julien heard a friendly voice, he was forced to forgive himself his 
weakness: he dissolved in tears. Father Pirard threw open his arms; it was a wonderfully sweet 
moment for them both. 
Julien was wild with happiness. This was the first promotion he’d gotten; the advantages 
were immense. To properly understand, you must be condemned for months on end never to 
know  solitude,  placed  in  close  contact  with  colleagues,  at  best  tiresome,  for  the  most  part 
unendurable. Their loud voices would be enough to upset a delicate constitution. The noisy 
delight of these well-nourished, well-fed peasants could not be contained, or even believed in, 
unless they yelled as loud as their lungs would let them. 
Julien now ate by himself, or very nearly so, an hour later than the other seminarians. He 
had a key to the garden and could walk there during the hours when no one else was about. 
                                                             
1 The Precursor: a newspaper published in Lyons. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
To  his  great  surprise,  Julien  perceived  that  he  was  not  as  hated  as  before:  he  had 
anticipated, in fact, that hatred for him would be doubled. His secret wish that no one speak 
to him, which had earned him many enemies, was no longer perceived as a sign of ridiculous 
arrogance. To the coarse peasants who surrounded him, this was now a proper feeling of self-
worth. Hatred faded quite significantly, especially among the youngest of his classmates, who 
had  now  become  his  students;  he  treated  them  with  great  civility.  Little  by  little  he  even 
acquired supporters; it became bad taste to refer to him as Martin Luther. 
What does it accomplish, mentioning his friends, his enemies? It’s all incredibly ugly, and 
uglier still because the picture is entirely true. Yet for ordinary people, these men are the only 
teachers  of  morality  they  possess―and  without  those  men,  what  would  happen  to  ordinary 
people? Can the newspaper ever replace the parish priest? 
Now that Julien had achieved his new dignity, Father Pirard was careful never to speak to 
him  unless  others  were  present.  This  was  sensible  conduct  for  the  master,  as  it  was  for  the 
disciple, but above all it was proof. As a harsh Jansenist, Father Pirard’s fixed principle was: Do 
you think someone is deserving? Then put obstacles between him and everything he desires, 
everything  he  tries  to  do.  If  he  is  truly  deserving,  he’ll  surely  know  how  to  overcome  or 
transform those obstacles. 
It was hunting season. Fouqué conceived the notion of sending the seminary a stag and a 
wild  boar,  in  the  name  of  Julien’s  parents.  The  dead  animals  were  placed  in  the  corridor 
between the kitchen and the dining room. This was to let everyone see them when they went 
to eat. They were all very curious. Dead as he was, the wild boar frightened the youngest of the 
seminarians:  they  reached  out  and  touched  his  tusks.  For  a  whole  week,  no  one  talked  of 
anything else. 
This  gift,  putting  Julien’s  family  into  a  social  category  that  had  to  be  respected,  was  a 
mortal blow to jealousy. His became a superiority consecrated by wealth. Chazel and the most 
distinguished among his classmates made overtures, almost as if they were upset because he 
had  not  warned  them  of  his  parents’  riches,  thus  allowing  them  to  seem  deficient  in  the 
respect due to wealth. 
Military  conscription  was  enacted;  as  a  seminary  student,  Julien  was  exempted.  This 
strongly affected him. “There goes forever the moment when, had it been twenty years earlier, 
I might have begun an heroic life!” 
He was walking alone, in the seminary garden, and overheard a conversation between two 
masons working on one of the cloister’s walls. 
“Well, I’ve got to go, we got ourselves a new conscription.” 
“In  that  other  one’s2  day,  hey,  it  was  great!  A  mason  could  get  to  be  an  officer,  even  a 
“Just look at it now! There’s only  poor folks  going.  Those what’s worth something, they 
general. It happened.” 
stay home.” 
“You’re born poor, you stay poor, and that’s that.” 
“Hey, is it really true, like they say, the other one’s dead?” a third mason asked. 
“It’s the stuffed shirts who say that, believe me! He scared them.” 
“What a difference for workingmen, in his day! And I hear his own generals turned traitor 
on him! There’s traitors for you!” 
                                                             
2 Or l’autre, a politically prudent way of referring to Napoleon under the Restoration. Napoleon died on Saint-
Helena in 1821, but rumors circulated, especially among veterans and the lower classes,  that  this was a lie 
propagated by the frightened Bourbons. Many of Napoleon’s generals had working-class origins, and many of 
them did in fact rally to the Bourbons when Napoleon returned from Elba, prudent enough to realize that the 
great European powers would never tolerate his retaking the throne. 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Nine: The First Forward Step 
This talk comforted Julien. As he went past them, he repeated, sighing: 
“The only king the people still remember!”3 
Examination  time  arrived.  Julien  replied  to  the  questions  brilliantly;  he  saw  that  even 
Chazel tried to show how much he knew. 
After the first day, the examiners named by the famed Vicar-General de Frilair were very 
annoyed, always having to put first on their list, or at worst second, Julien Sorel; they had been 
told  he  was  Father  Pirard’s  favorite.  There  had  been  bets  made  in  the  seminary  that  Julien 
would stand first on the examination list; whoever placed first was rewarded by a dinner with 
the bishop. But at the end of one session, when he had been examined on the Church Fathers, 
a clever examiner who’d first questioned him about Saint Jerome and that saint’s passion for 
Cicero, turned the subject to Horace, Virgil, and other profane writers. Julien’s classmates did 
not know it, but he had memorized a great many passages from these authors. Carried away by 
his  success,  Julien  forgot  where  he  was  and,  when  the  examiner  repeated  his  question,  he 
passionately recited several of Horace’s odes and then gave an analytical summary of each. The 
examiner  gave  him  twenty  minutes  to  bury  himself  in  his  own  trap,  then  suddenly  turned 
severe and issued a sharp scolding for the time Julien had wasted on these profane studies, and 
the useless, or sinful, ideas they had put in his head. 
“I am a fool, sir, and you are right,” said Julien modestly, recognizing the clever stratagem 
by which he’d been victimized. 
This was clearly a dirty trick; even the seminarians said so. But that did not stop Father de 
Frilair―that  shrewd  man  who’d  so  knowledgeably  organized  the  Congregation  of  the  Holy 
Virgin’s network in Besan04on, and whose communications with Paris caused trembling among 
the judges, the governors, and even the higher officers in the garrison―from placing, in his 
imposing  handwriting,  “grade-level  198”  next  to  Julien’s  name.  It  gave  him  pleasure  to  thus 
mortify his enemy, Pirard the Jansenist. 
His  major  concern,  for  a  full  ten  years,  had  been  to  remove  Pirard  as  director  of  the 
seminary. Obedient to the precepts he’d explained to Julien, Father Pirard had been honest, 
pious,  involved  in  no  intrigues,  devoted  to  his  duty.  But  heaven’s  wrath  had  fallen  on  him, 
giving him a choleric disposition, inclined to react strongly to insults and hatred. Every offense 
against  this  fiery  soul  hit  home.  He  would  have  handed  in  his  resignation  a  hundred  times 
over, but he considered himself useful in the post to which Providence had assigned him. “I’m 
blocking the advance of Jesuitism and idolatry,” he told himself. 
At examination time, it had been roughly two months since he’d spoken to Julien, and yet 
he was sick for an entire week when he got the official letter, announcing the final results, and 
saw  “grade-level  198”  assigned  to  this  student,  in  his  judgment  the  glory  of  the  institution. 
Given  his  severe  nature,  his  only  consolation  was  to  concentrate  on  Julien  every  form  of 
surveillance he could command. He was thrilled when he discovered no anger in the young 
man, no plan for revenge, no discouragement. 
Some weeks later, receiving a letter, Julien shuddered; the postmark was Paris. “At last,” 
he thought, “Madame de Rênal has remembered her promises.” Someone who signed his name 
Paul Sorel, and said he was a relative, was sending him a bill of exchange in the amount of five 
hundred francs. It was noted that, should Julien continue to study the finest Latin authors, and 
with such success, a similar sum would be sent him annually. 
“It’s  her,  it’s  her  generosity!”  Julien  told  himself,  his  heart  softening.  “She  wants  to 
comfort me. But why not a single affectionate word?” 
                                                             
3 “The people” here for  le peuple, the commoners or lower classes, among whom the cult of Napoleon was 
strongest. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
He deceived himself about the letter: Madame de Rênal, guided by her friend, Madame 
Derville, was completely lost in her profound remorse. In spite of herself, she often thought of 
the unusual being who, once he’d come into her life, had turned it upside down. But she would 
have been exceedingly careful about writing to him. 
If we spoke the seminary’s language, we could call this dispatch of five hundred francs a 
miracle; we could say the gift was from Father de Frilair himself, who had been made heaven’s 
instrument for that purpose. 
Twelve years earlier, Father de Frilair had come to Besan04on, carrying a suitcase holding 
very little indeed, and what it did contain, according to the chronicle, was in fact all he owned. 
He  found  himself,  now,  one  of  the  richest  landholders  in  the  district.  In  the  course  of  this 
prosperous  advance,  he  had  invested  in  one  half  of  a  property,  the  other  half  of  which  had 
been left to Monsieur de La Mole. This led to a protracted lawsuit between these two. 
Despite his prominence in Paris, and the position he occupied at the king’s court, Marquis 
de La Mole felt it might be risky to fight, on his home grounds, against a vicar-general who had 
a  reputation  for  making  and  unmaking  governors.  But  instead  of  seeking  a  fifty-thousand-
franc  public  gratuity―to  be  hidden  in  the  budget  under  any  authorized  name―and 
withdrawing from this paltry fifty-thousand-franc lawsuit, the marquis got angry. He thought 
he was right―as if this had anything to do with legal matters. 
Now, if I may say so: Where will we find a judge without a son, or at least a cousin, to 
push forward in the world? 
To make matters clear enough even for the blind: a week after obtaining a  preliminary 
decree,  Father  de  Frilair  borrowed  the  bishop’s  carriage  and  went,  in  person,  to  bring  his 
lawyer the medal of the Legion of Honor. Monsieur de La Mole, a bit dizzied by his adversary’s 
attitude,  and  sensing  some  yielding  on  the  part  of  his  own  lawyers,  sought  Father  Chélan’s 
advice, whereupon the marquis was introduced to Father Pirard. 
At the time of our story, the relationships just recounted had gone on for several years. 
Father Pirard brought his fiery temperament to this business. He had endless contact with the 
marquis’s lawyers; he studied the marquis’s cause; and, finding it just, he took the Marquis de 
La Mole’s side against the all-powerful vicar-general. Father de Frilair was outraged by such 
insolence―and from a little Jansenist! 
“Just see these court noblemen, who claim to be so powerful!” Father Frilair would say to 
his close friends. “Monsieur de La Mole hasn’t even sent a miserable medal to his Besan04on 
agent, and he’s simply going to let him lose his post. Still, as I hear from Paris, this fine peer of 
the realm never lets a week go by without showing off his wonderful medals and ribbons, in 
the keeper of the seal’s4 drawing room―whoever he may be.” 
In spite of Father Pirard’s energetic support, and even though Monsieur de La Mole was, 
as ever, on the very best of terms with the minister of justice, and above all with the minister’s 
subordinates, all he’d been able to accomplish, after six years of effort, had been to keep from 
definitively losing his lawsuit. 
In  constant  correspondence  with  Father  Pirard,  in  this  business  that  both  of  them 
passionately  pursued,  the  marquis  came  to  appreciate  how  the  priest’s  mind  worked.  Bit  by 
bit,  despite  the  immense  difference  in  social  standing,  their  letters  took  on  a  friendly  tone. 
Father Pirard would tell the marquis how they were trying to force him, by means of insults 
and affronts, to resign his post. In his anger at the disgraceful stratagem (as he put it) used 
against Julien, he told the marquis Julien’s history. 
                                                             
4 Or Garde des Sceaux, effectively the minister of justice. 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Nine: The First Forward Step 
Rich as he was, the noble lord was no miser. He could never persuade Father Pirard to 
accept so much as reimbursement for the lawsuit’s postal expenses. He leaped at the idea of 
sending five hundred francs to the priest’s favorite pupil. 
Monsieur de La Mole set himself to writing the letter of transmittal. And this made him 
think about Father Pirard. 
One day, the good priest received a brief note, asking him to call, on urgent business and 
without  delay,  at  an  inn  on  the  outskirts  of  Besan04on.  There  he  found  the  Marquis  de  La 
Mole’s steward. 
“Monsieur de La Mole has commissioned me to bring you his closed carriage,” said the 
man. “He hopes that, after reading the letter he sends you, by me, you’ll agree to leave for Paris 
in four or five days. I propose to use this time, the duration of which you will be so good as to 
make  known  to  me,  in  checking  on  the  marquis’s  properties,  here  in  Franche-Comté.  After 
which, on whatever day is convenient for you, we will leave for Paris.” 
The letter was short: 
Shake off, my dear sir, all the difficulties of provincial life; come breathe the calm air of 
Paris. I send you my carriage, which has been ordered to await, for four days, your fixing the 
day of departure. I myself will wait for you, here in Paris, until Tuesday. All I would need from 
you, sir, is a “yes,” in order to accept, in your name, one of the best parishes in the vicinity of 
Paris. The richest of your future parishioners has never seen you, but he is more devoted to 
you than you might believe. He is the Marquis de La Mole. 
Without suspecting it, harsh Father Pirard had loved the seminary, full of his enemies; he 
had consecrated to it, for fifteen years, all his thoughts. Monsieur de La Mole’s letter seemed 
to  him  like  the  arrival  of  a  surgeon,  come  to  perform  a  painful,  necessary  operation.  His 
dismissal was certain. He told the steward to return in three days. 
For forty-eight hours, he was in a frenzy of doubt. In the end, he wrote to Monsieur de La 
Mole  and  composed  a  letter  for  the  bishop,  a  masterpiece  of  ecclesiastical  prose,  though  a 
trifle long. It would have been difficult to find language equally beyond reproach and exuding 
a more sincere respect. And at the same time, this letter, intended to give Father de Frilair a 
difficult  hour,  in  dealing  with  his  immediate  superior,  spelled  out  all  the  matters  of  grave 
complaint, and got down to the dirty little tricks which, after enduring them all, resignedly, for 
six years, were forcing Father Pirard to leave the diocese. 
Wood had been stolen from his woodshed; his dog had been poisoned; etc., etc. 
Having  finished  this  letter,  he  had  Julien  awakened:  at  eight  o’clock,  he  was  already 
asleep, as were all the seminarians. 
“Do  you  know  where  the  bishop’s  palace  is  located?”  he  asked  in  the  very  best  Latin. 
“Bring him this letter. I will not conceal the fact that I am sending you into a pack of wolves. 
Be all eyes and all ears. Let there be no lies when you are asked questions, but be aware that 
those who question you may perhaps truly relish the power to do you harm. I am very pleased, 
my child, to give you this experience before I leave you: I will not hide from you that the letter 
you’re carrying is my resignation.” 
Julien did not move; he loved Father Pirard. Discretion tried to tell him: 
“Once this honest man leaves, the Sacred Heart people are going to take away my post, 
and may even expel me.” 
He could not think of himself. What made matters awkward was something he wanted to 
say politely, but in fact he could not focus his mind. 
“Well, my dear! Aren’t you going?” 
“I’ve  heard  it  said,  sir,”  Julien  began  shyly,  “that  all  through  your  long  administration 
you’ve never saved a thing. I’ve got six hundred francs.” 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
His tears kept him from continuing. 
“That will be noted, too,” the former director of the seminary declared coldly. “Go to the 
bishop’s. It’s getting late.” 
As luck would have it, that night Father de Frilair was on duty in the bishop’s drawing 
room. The bishop was dining with the governor. Although Julien did not know it, it was thus 
to Father de Frilair himself that he delivered the letter. 
Julien watched, astonished, as this priest boldly opened a letter addressed to the bishop. 
The  vicar-general’s  handsome  face  first  expressed  surprise,  mixed  with  lively  pleasure,  and 
then became extremely somber. While he was reading, Julien―struck by his fine appearance―
had the time to consider him more carefully. His face might have seemed a good deal more 
sober, had it not been for the sharp keenness notable in certain of its features, so marked that 
they  would  have  been  an  indication  of  duplicity,  if  the  possessor  of  so  handsome  an 
appearance  had  ever,  even  for  an  instant,  stopped  thinking  of  himself.  His  nose,  quite 
prominent,  was  shaped  in  an  unbroken  straight  line,  creating  a  profile―though  otherwise 
eminently distinguished―unfortunately and irremediably like that of a fox. For the rest, this 
ecclesiastic,  who  seemed  so  utterly  absorbed  in  Father  Pirard’s  letter  of  resignation,  was 
dressed with an elegance that Julien found most attractive, and that he had never seen on any 
other priest. 
Julien was not aware, until afterward, of Father de Frilair’s special gift. He knew how to 
amuse  his  bishop,  a  pleasant  old  fellow,  made  for  life  in  Paris,  who  regarded  Besan04on  as  a 
place of exile. The bishop’s eyesight was very bad, and he was most passionately fond of fish. 
Father de Frilair filleted every fish served to His Lordship. 
Julien was watching, silently, as the priest read the letter once again, when suddenly the 
door  was  noisily  thrown  open.  A  richly  dressed  servant  passed  rapidly  through  the  room. 
Julien barely had time to turn toward the door; he saw a little old man wearing a large cross on 
his breast. He dropped to his knees and lowered his head: the bishop gave him a kindly smile 
and continued on his way. The handsome priest followed him, and Julien was left alone in the 
drawing room, where he was able to admire, at his leisure, its pious magnificence. 
The Bishop of Besan04on, a man whose spirit had been sorely tried, but not snuffed out, by 
the  long,  hard  years  of  life  abroad5  during  the  Revolution,  was  over  seventy-five  and  not 
particularly concerned about what might happen in ten years’ time. 
“Who is this seminarian, with such a lively face, whom I seemed to see as I went by?” the 
bishop asked. “Aren’t they supposed to be asleep by now, according to the rules I laid down?” 
“This one is wide-awake, I assure you, my lord, and he is the bearer of wonderful tidings: a 
letter of resignation from the only Jansenist still in your diocese. Terrible Father Pirard finally 
managed to take the hint.” 
“Ah!”  said  the  bishop,  laughing.  “I  challenge  you  to  replace  him  with  someone  just  as 
good. And to show you how good the man truly is, I’m inviting him to dinner, tomorrow.” 
The  vicar-general  tried  to  slip  in  a  few  words  about  who  that  successor  might  be.  The 
bishop, not much interested in business matters, at the moment, said: 
“Before we put someone else in, let’s learn a little about why this one is going out. Bring 
that seminarian in here: truth comes from the mouths of babes.” 
                                                             
5 The bishop was an émigré, the name given to those aristocrats who fled France during the Revolution. The 
first notable émigré was Louis XVI’s brother, the Comte d’Artois, who fled almost immediately after the fall of 
the Bastille, and in 1824 had become King Charles X. Many émigrés returned after Robespierre’s downfall, 
many more when Bonaparte declared an amnesty in 1801. Among ultras, it was a badge of honor, a sign of 
right-thinking loyalty, to have remained in exile until 1814. 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Nine: The First Forward Step 
Julien was summoned. “I’m going to have an inquisitor on each side of me,” he thought. 
But he had never felt braver. 
As he entered, two valets, better dressed than Monsieur Valenod himself, were disrobing 
the  bishop.  Before  he  got  to  the  question  of  Father  Pirard,  His  Lordship  felt  it  his  duty  to 
inquire into Julien’s studies. He mentioned a few issues of dogma, and was surprised by what 
he heard in response. Soon he turned to the humanities, to Virgil, to Horace, to Cicero. “These 
writers,” thought Julien, “earned me my one-hundred-ninety-eighth place. I’ve got nothing to 
lose:  Why  not  try  to  shine?”  He  succeeded.  The  bishop,  himself  a  fine  humanist,  was 
enchanted. 
Earlier  that  evening,  when  the  bishop  had  dined  with  the  governor,  a  young  woman, 
deservedly celebrated, had recited a contemporary poem on Mary Magdalene.6 He was more 
than  ready  to  discuss  literature,  and  at  once  forgot  about  Father  Pirard  and  everything 
connected with him, so he could consider, together with this seminarian, whether Horace had 
been  rich  or  poor.  The  bishop  quoted  from  several  odes,  but  sometimes  his  memory  was 
sluggish,  and  Julien  each  time  promptly  recited,  always  modestly,  the  entire  ode.  What 
particularly  struck  the  bishop  was  that,  when  thus  reciting,  Julien  maintained  his 
conversational tone: he would speak twenty or thirty Latin verses exactly as he might have told 
what went on in his seminary. They spoke at length about Virgil, and about Cicero. Finally, the 
bishop could not help but pay the seminarian a compliment. 
“To have pursued your studies better would be impossible.” 
“My lord,” Julien said, “your seminary can present you with one hundred and ninety-seven 
students much less unworthy of such high approval.” 
“What?” said the bishop, astonished at this figure. 
“What I’ve had the honor to tell Your Lordship can be fully supported, by official proof. 
“At  our  annual  examinations,  responding  to  questions  on  precisely  these  matters,  for 
which Your Lordship has just praised me, I was placed one hundred ninety-eighth.” 
“Ah,”  the  bishop  cried,  laughing  and  glancing  over  at  Father  de  Frilair,  “you’re  Father 
Pirard’s favorite. I should have realized. But it’s an amusing war. Isn’t it true, my young friend,” 
he added, turning back to Julien, “that you had to be awakened in order to be sent here?” 
“Yes, my lord. I have left the seminary unaccompanied only once before, to assist Father 
Chas-Bernard in decorating the cathedral, the day of Corpus Christi.” 
“Optime,  wonderful,”  said  the  bishop.  “But  was  that  you,  who  had  the  courage  to  put 
those feather clusters on top of the canopy? Every year, they make me shudder: I always worry 
they’ll  cost  me  someone’s  life.  My  friend,  you’ll  go  far―but  I  have  no  desire  to  check  your 
career, which will be brilliant, by making you die of hunger.” 
And  at  the  bishop’s  order,  biscuits  and  Malaga  wine  were  brought,  to  which  Julien  did 
honor, and Father de Frilair even more so, for he knew his bishop loved to see people eating 
happily and with a good appetite. 
Happier and happier with how his evening was ending, the bishop spoke for a bit about 
Church history. He saw that Julien did not understand. He went on to the moral condition of 
the  Roman  Empire,  under  the  emperors  of  Constantine’s7  time.  Paganism’s  fall  had  been 
accompanied  by  the  same  uncertainty  and  doubt  that,  in  the  nineteenth  century,  afflicted 
sorrowful, weary minds. His Lordship noted that Julien barely knew Tacitus’s name. 
                                                             
6  “La  Madeleine”  was  written  by  young  Delphine  Gay,  the  future  wife  of  Emile  de  Girardin―the  famous 
publisher―and a literary figure in her own right. 
7 Constantine I (ca. 275C337), the Roman emperor who converted to Christianity. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Julien replied frankly, to the bishop’s astonishment, that this author was not to be found 
in the seminary’s library. 
“That really makes me feel better,” said the bishop cheerfully. “You’ve saved me from an 
embarrassment: for the past ten minutes I’ve been trying to think of a way of thanking you for 
the  pleasant  evening  you’ve  given  me,  and  certainly  most  unexpectedly.  I  did  not  expect  a 
student in my seminary to be an accomplished scholar. Although it may not be a particularly 
canonical gift, I’d like to give you a Tacitus.” 
The bishop had them bring in eight volumes, beautifully bound, and on the title page of 
the first he wrote, in his own hand, a Latin inscription for Julien Sorel. He prided himself on 
his fine command of Latin. And he finished by saying, in a serious manner, totally different 
from that he had displayed all through the evening: 
“Young man, if you’re sensible, one day you’ll have the best parish in my diocese, and it 
won’t be a hundred miles from this palace. But you must be sensible.” 
Burdened  with  these  books,  Julien  left  the  palace,  still  in  shock,  just  as  midnight  was 
sounding. 
His Lordship had not said a word about Father Pirard. Julien was especially startled by the 
bishop’s  extraordinary  politeness.  It  had  never  occurred  to  him  that  such  formal  courtesy 
could  coexist  with  an  equally  natural,  dignified  bearing.  This  contrast  seemed  particularly 
striking, seeing somber Father Pirard, who was waiting for him so impatiently. 
“Quid tibi dixerunt? What did they say to you?” he called out, loudly, as soon as he saw 
him, in the distance. 
Julien got himself rather tangled up, translating the bishop’s discourse into Latin. 
“Speak French, and repeat His Lordship’s own words, without adding or omitting a thing,” 
said the former director of the seminary in his harsh way, his manners profoundly inelegant. 
“What a queer gift for a bishop to give a young seminarian,” he said, leafing through the 
superb Tacitus, the gilt edging of which seemed to fill him with horror. 
Two o’clock was sounding when, after an exceedingly detailed account had been supplied, 
he allowed his favorite pupil to return to his room. 
“Leave me the first volume of your Tacitus, with the inscription from the Lord Bishop,” 
Father Pirard said. “This line in Latin will be your lightning rod, here, after I leave. 
“Erit tibi, fili mi, successor meus tanquam leo quaerens quem devoret. Because for you, my 
son, my successor will be like a raging lion, hunting someone to devour.” 
The next morning, Julien noticed something strange in the way his classmates spoke to 
him.  It  made  him  even  more  reserved.  “Here  we  have,”  he  thought,  “the  effect  of  Father 
Pirard’s  resignation.  They  all  know  it,  and  I’m  supposed  to  be  his  favorite.  There  must  be 
something  nasty  about  this  behavior.”  But  he  could  not  see  anything  of  the  sort.  On  the 
contrary: he saw no hatred in the eyes of those he met, walking through the dormitory. “What 
does  this  mean?  It  must  be  a  trap.  Let  me  play  this  very  close  to  the  vest.”  Then  the  little 
seminarian from Verrières shouted, laughing: “ Corneli Taciti opera omnia, the complete works 
of Tacitus!” 
Everyone  overhead  these  words,  and  they  began  to  outdo  each  other,  complimenting 
Julien not only for the magnificent gift he’d received from His Lordship, but also on the two-
hour conversation with which he’d been honored. They knew everything, down to the smallest 
details. And after this, there was no more jealousy; they all paid him the most servile court; 
Father Castaneda, who had treated him, the evening before, with the utmost insolence, came 
and took him by the arm, inviting Julien to have lunch with him. 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Nine: The First Forward Step 
But  there  was  a  fatal  flaw  in  Julien’s  character.  Insolence  from  these  coarse  beings  had 
caused him a great deal of pain; their abasement of themselves left him disgusted. There was 
nothing pleasant about it. 
Toward midday, Father Pirard left his pupils, but not before making a stern speech: “Is it 
worldly honors you want?” he said to them. “All the social advantages? The delights of giving 
orders, of paying no attention to the law and being safely insolent to everyone? Or is it eternal 
salvation you long for? Even the least advanced among you need only open his eyes, to see the 
difference between these two paths.” 
He  had  barely  left  the  building  when  the  devotees  of  the  Sacred  Heart  chanted  a  Te 
Deum8  in  the  chapel.  No  one  in  the  seminary  paid  any  attention  to  the  former  director’s 
speech. “He’s in a sour mood, because he’s lost his job,” was what most of them said. Not a 
single  seminarian  was  simple  enough  to  believe  in  a  voluntary  resignation,  not  from  a  post 
that offered so many contacts with large suppliers. 
Father  Pirard  went  to  stay  at  the  very  best  inn  in  Besan04on.  Under  the  pretext  of 
unfinished business, of which he had none whatever, he planned to stay there for two days. 
The bishop had indeed invited him to dinner: to have fun with his vicar-general, Father 
de Frilair, he sought to have Father Pirard shown to the best advantage. They were at dessert 
when  the  strange  news  came  from  Paris:  Father  Pirard  had  been  named  priest  to  the 
magnificent parish of N―――, six miles from the capital. The good bishop congratulated him 
most sincerely. He saw in this whole business a capital joke, which put him in a fine mood and 
gave him the highest opinion of Father Pirard’s abilities. He gave him a splendid testimonial of 
character, in Latin, and, when Father de Frilair ventured to object, ordered him to be silent. 
That evening, His Lordship brought his news and his admiration to the house of Marquise 
de Rubempré. This was a great event in Besan04on’s high society; everyone wondered at such an 
extraordinary mark of favor. They considered Father Pirard already as good as a bishop. The 
most subtle among them believed Marquis de La Mole had been made a cabinet minister, and 
allowed  themselves,  that  day,  to  smile  at  the  imperial  airs  put  on,  in  society,  by  Father  de 
Frilair. 
The  next  morning,  Father  Pirard  had  something  of  a  following  out  in  the  streets,  and 
merchants stood in the doorway of their shops when he went visiting the judges in Marquis de 
La  Mole’s  lawsuit.  For  the  very  first  time,  they  received  him  politely.  The  harsh  Jansenist, 
outraged by everything he’d seen, put in a long day’s work with the lawyers he’d chosen for the 
Marquis de La Mole. And then he left for Paris. He was weak enough to tell two or three of his 
own classmates, who escorted him to the carriage, that after directing the seminary for fifteen 
years,  he  was  leaving  Besan04on  with  savings  amounting  to  five  hundred  and  twenty  francs. 
These friends embraced him, weeping, and said, among themselves: “The good Father might 
have spared himself this falsehood. It really makes him look foolish.” 
Those of more vulgar minds, blinded by the love of money, simply could not understand 
that it was his honesty that had given Father Pirard the strength to fight, for six long years, 
against Marie Alocoque9 and the order she had founded, the Sacred Heart of Jesus, and against 
the Jesuits, and against his own bishop. 
                                                             
8 Ceremony of thanksgiving to God. 
9 Saint Marguerite-Marie; a Burgundian peasant girl (1647C90) who entered a convent and there had a vision 
of  the  Sacred  Heart  of  Jesus,  who  ordered  her  to  establish  a  feast  day  in  honor  of  the  Sacred  Heart.  She 
succeeded in 1686. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Chapter Thirty: An Ambitious Man 
There’s only one true nobility, and that’s someone who’s a duke; being a “marquis” is a joke, but people 
turn their heads at the word duke. 
―Edinburgh Review1 
The  Marquis  de  La  Mole  received  Father  Pirard  without  any  of  those  “great  man” 
mannerisms, so very very polite and yet so rude to those who understand them. This would 
have been a waste of time, and the marquis was sufficiently deep in matters of high import 
that, truthfully, he had no time to waste. 
For  six  months  he’d  been  scheming  to  have  both  the  king  and  the  country  accept  a 
certain ruling ministry, which would then, in gratitude, have him made a duke. 
For many years, the marquis had been asking, in vain, to have his Besan04on lawyer give 
him a clear, precise analysis of his Franche-Comté lawsuit. But how could the famous lawyer 
have explained to him what he did not understand himself? Father Pirard gave him a little slip 
of paper that explained everything. 
“My dear Father,” said the marquis, after complying, in less than five minutes, with all the 
formulas of politeness and queries about personal matters, “my dear Father, in the midst of my 
so-called prosperity, I don’t have the time to seriously concern myself with two minor matters, 
which are however of some importance: namely, my family and my finances. I look after my 
family’s fortune, and most intensively: I can accomplish a lot, in these regards. I look after my 
own pleasures, which ought to be most important of all, at least to me,” he added, surprising 
and even astonishing Father Pirard. Although a sensible man, the priest was amazed to hear an 
old man speaking so frankly of his pleasures. 
“There  are  people  who  work,  here  in  Paris,”  continued  the  great  man,  “but  only  those 
roosting high on the fifth floor. As soon as I establish relations with a man, he gets himself an 
apartment on the second floor,2 and his wife announces a day for receiving visitors, and then 
there’s no more working, and no doing anything more than being―or appearing to be―a man 
of the world. That’s all they care about, as soon as they have enough to eat. 
“As for my lawsuit, to tell the truth, and even more for each one among them, separately 
considered, I have lawyers who are killing themselves: one of them died of consumption just 
the day before yesterday. But as to my financial affairs in general, would you believe, sir, that 
three years ago I gave up all hope of finding a man who, as he writes my letters, bothers to 
think seriously, even just a little, about just what he’s doing? Now, this is simply a preface. 
“I think very well of you and, I dare say, although I’m seeing you for the first time, I like 
you. Would you become my secretary, with a salary of eight thousand francs―or even double 
that? I will still come out ahead, I swear to you, and I’ll make it my business to save your fine 
new parish for you, in case there comes a day when we don’t get along anymore.” 
The  priest  declined.  But  toward  the  end  of  the  conversation,  the  marquis’s  very  real 
difficulty made him think of an alternative. 
“Back  in  my  seminary,  I’ve  left  a  poor  young  man  who,  unless  I  deceive  myself,  will  be 
harshly persecuted. If he were no more than a simple monk, he’d already be in pace [at peace: 
i.e., dead]. 
                                                             
1 Edinburgh Review: The quotation given is an invention, but the Edinburgh Review was a real newspaper that 
featured Romantic writers and which Stendhal read regularly. 
2 In Paris, the best apartments were located on the first floor―one flight above ground level―and the fifth 
floor was the proverbial garret. Monsieur de La Mole’s protégés, appropriately, move to the second floor, not 
quite the best. 
 
 
Chapter Thirty: An Ambitious Man 
“To this point, all this young man knows is Latin and the Holy Scriptures, but it is not 
impossible that, some day, he’ll show very large abilities as a preacher or perhaps as a spiritual 
guide. I don’t know what he’ll do, but he has a sacred passion; he’s capable of going far. I had 
planned to assign him to our bishop―if one ever came to us who had even a little of your way 
of viewing men and their affairs.” 
“Where does your young man come from?” asked the marquis. 
“He’s said to be the son of a carpenter, from our mountains, but I’d sooner believe him 
the  illegitimate  son  of  some  wealthy  man.  I  saw  him  receive  an  anonymous,  or  perhaps  a 
pseudonymous, letter, containing a bill for five hundred francs.” 
“Ah! That’s Julien Sorel,” said the marquis. 
“How  do  you  know  his  name?”  said  the  astonished  priest,  and  then  he  blushed  at  his 
“I’m not prepared to tell you that,” answered the marquis. 
“In any case,” the priest went on, “you might try him as your secretary. He has energy, and 
he has a mind. In a word, it’s an experiment worth attempting.” 
“Why not?” said the marquis. “But would he be the sort who’d let the chief of police, or 
someone else, grease his paws for spying on me? That’s the only difficulty I see.” 
After  positive  assurances  from  Father  Pirard,  the  marquis  picked  up  a  thousand-franc 
question. 
note. 
“Send this to Julien Sorel, as travel money. Let him come to me.” 
“It’s very clear,” said Father Pirard, “that you’re a resident of Paris. You don’t understand 
the tyranny that oppresses us all, we poor provincials, and presses especially on priests who 
are not allies of the Jesuits. They won’t let Julien go; they know how to cover themselves with 
the cleverest excuses; they’ll tell me he’s sick, the letters were lost in the post, etc., etc.” 
“Some day soon,” said the marquis, “I’ll bring the bishop a letter from the minister.” 
“I forgot one warning,” said the priest. “Although he’s of low birth, the young man has a 
noble heart. He won’t be of any use if his pride is wounded. You’ll turn him into an idiot.” 
“I like that,” said the marquis. “I’ll make him my son’s companion. Will that do it?” 
Sometime afterward, Julien received a letter, written in an unknown hand and bearing a 
postmark from Ch09lons. It contained a money order drawn on a merchant in Besan04on, and a 
notice to proceed, without delay, to Paris. The letter was signed with a made-up name, but in 
opening  it  Julien  had  been  thrilled:  a  leaf  had  fallen  at  his  feet,  and  this  was  the  sign  he’d 
agreed upon with Father Pirard. 
Less  than  an  hour  later,  Julien  was  summoned  to  the  bishop’s  palace,  where  he  was 
greeted with entirely paternal benevolence. Even as he was quoting Horace, His Lordship paid 
him wonderfully shrewd compliments, on account of the high destiny awaiting him in Paris, 
which, in return, deserved further explanation. But Julien could not tell him a thing, primarily 
because he knew nothing about it, and His Lordship was abundantly considerate. One of the 
minor  clerics  at  the  palace  wrote  to  the  mayor,  who  came  hurrying  over  with  a  passport, 
signed, but with the name of the traveler left blank. 
At  midnight,  Julien  was  at  Fouqué’s,  whose  knowing  mind  was  more  astonished  than 
excited by the future apparently awaiting his friend. 
“You’ll end up,” said this liberal voter, “with a place in the government, which will compel 
you to do something for which the newspapers will run you down. That’s how I’ll hear news 
about you―by seeing you disgraced. Remember, even financially speaking, it’s better to earn 
four hundred francs in the solid timber business, where you’re your own boss, than to get four 
thousand francs from a government, even were it that of King Solomon.” 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
All Julien saw in this was the petty spirit of a provincial bourgeois. He was finally going to 
make his appearance in the theater of great events. The happiness of going to Paris―which he 
imagined peopled by cleverly scheming minds, distinctly hypocritical, but as polished as the 
Bishop  of  Besan04on,  or  the  Bishop  of  Agde―overshadowed  thoughts  of  anything  else.  He 
explained to his friend that Father Pirard’s letter left him no other choice. 
The  next  day,  about  noon,  and  the  happiest  of  men,  he  came  to  Verrières.  He  was 
counting  on  seeing  Madame  de  Rênal  once  again.  But  first  he  went  to  see  his  original 
protector, Father Chélan. He met with a harsh reception. 
“Do  you  think  you  owe  me  something?”  Father  Chélan  said,  not  responding  to  his 
greeting. “Come to lunch with me, and during that time someone will lend you another horse, 
and you’ll leave Verrières, without seeing anyone else.” 
“To hear is to obey,” replied Julien, like a seminarian, and as if all they were discussing 
were theology and classically correct Latin. 
He  mounted  his  horse,  rode  a  mile  or  two,  at  which  point  he  saw  a  wood  and  nobody 
around  to  see  him  ride  into  it,  so  in  he  went.  When  the  sun  went  down,  he  sent  back  the 
horse. Later, he walked into a peasant’s house, where the man agreed to sell him a ladder and 
follow after him, carrying it, until they reached the little wood overlooking Loyalty Walkway, 
in Verrières. 
“I’ve  been  walking  along  behind  some  poor  conscript,  who’s  deserted  ...or  maybe  a 
smuggler,” the peasant said, taking leave of him. “But who cares? I’ve gotten a good price for 
my ladder, and in all these years I’ve had to do some pretty fancy stepping, myself.” 
It was now pitch dark. At about  one  o’clock in the morning,  carrying his ladder,  Julien 
entered Verrières. As quickly as he could, he went down into the old streambed, now enclosed 
by  two  walls  and  crossing  Monsieur  de  Rênal’s  magnificent  gardens  at  a  depth  of  ten  feet. 
Julien climbed up easily, on his ladder. “How will the guard dogs react to me?” he wondered. 
“That’s  the  whole  question.”  The  dogs  barked  and  started  to  dash  at  him,  but  he  whistled 
softly, and they wagged their tails and licked his hands. 
Climbing  up  from  terrace  to  terrace,  though  all  the  gates  were  locked,  he  quite  easily 
found  himself  underneath  Madame  de  Rênal’s  bedroom  window;  overlooking  the  garden,  it 
was no more than eight or ten feet above the ground. 
The shutters had a small, heart-shaped opening, which Julien knew well. He was deeply 
disappointed: no glow from a night-light shone through this little opening. 
“Good Lord!” he said to himself. “Madame de Rênal isn’t using the room tonight. Where 
could she be sleeping? The family must be at Verrières, since the dogs were on guard outside, 
but if I went into the dark room, I might meet up with Monsieur de Rênal himself, or some 
stranger―and then, what a scandal!” 
The most prudent thing would be to leave, but to Julien that seemed a horrible choice. “If 
it’s a stranger, I can save myself by running as fast as my legs will carry me, leaving my ladder 
behind. But if it’s her, what sort of reception will I find? She’s fallen into deep remorse, and 
become incredibly pious: that’s for sure. Still, her memory of me is still alive: she’s just written 
to me.” That argument settled the matter. 
His  heart  trembling,  but  determined  to  see  her  or  to  perish,  he  threw  pebbles  at  the 
shutters. There was no response. He leaned his ladder against the wall, alongside the window, 
and  tapped  on  the  shutters,  softly  at  first,  but  then  harder.  “No  matter  how  dark  it  is,  they 
could  shoot  at  me,”  he  thought.  That  idea  reduced  the  whole  wild  affair  to  a  question  of 
courage. 
 
 
Chapter Thirty: An Ambitious Man 
“Either  there’s  no  one  in  the  room,  tonight,”  he  pondered,  “or  else  whoever  may  be 
sleeping  there  is  now  awake.  So  I  don’t  need  to  go  on  tiptoes  anymore.  All  I  have  to  worry 
about is not being heard by people sleeping in the other rooms.” 
He climbed down, repositioned the ladder directly against one of the shutters, climbed 
back  up,  and  put  his  hand  through  the  heart-shaped  opening.  He  was  lucky,  and  quickly 
located the wire from which hung a hook: this hook locked the shutter. He pulled on the wire, 
and felt an inexpressible joy, realizing that the shutter had been released, and could now be 
opened. “I have to open it gently, a little at a time, and let her recognize my voice.” He opened 
it enough so he could put his head past the shutter, then said, very softly, “It’s a friend.” 
He could tell, listening carefully, that the silence remained unbroken. But he could also 
see that there was indeed no night-light set above the fireplace, not even one turned very low. 
This was truly a bad sign. 
“Watch out for gunshots!” He considered matters for a bit, then tapped on the glass pane. 
There was no response. He tapped harder. “Well, even if I have to break the glass, I need to get 
this done.” When he tapped very forcefully indeed, he thought he glimpsed, in the middle of 
the  intense  darkness,  something  like  a  white  shadow  coming  across  the  room.  And  then  he 
was sure of it: there was a shadow, and it was coming very slowly toward him. Suddenly, he 
saw a cheek, leaning against the glass he was peering through. 
He shivered and pulled his head back a little. But so dark was the night that, even at so 
short  a  distance,  he  could  not  tell  if  it  was  Madame  de  Rênal.  He  worried  about  a  sudden, 
alarmed cry: he could hear the dogs circling around the foot of the ladder, growling nervously. 
“It’s me,” he repeated, quite loudly, “a friend.” There was no response. The white phantom had 
disappeared.  “Please  let  me  in,  I  have  to  talk  to  you,  I’m  miserable!”  And  he  rapped  almost 
hard enough to crack the glass. 
He heard a quick, faint sound; the rod was pulled back. He pushed the window open and 
jumped nimbly into the room. 
The white phantom withdrew; he grasped its arms; it was a woman. All his brave ideas 
vanished. “If it’s her, what’s she going to say?” How did he feel when she gave a faint cry and 
he realized it was indeed Madame de Rênal? 
He held her tightly. She trembled, and barely had the strength to push him away. 
“Wretch! What are you doing?” 
Her  choked  voice  could  scarcely  shape  the  words.  Julien  could  hear  her  very  real 
indignation. 
“After fourteen months of bitter separation, I’ve come to see you.” 
“Go away, leave me immediately! Ah, Father Chélan, why did you stop me from writing to 
him? I could have prevented this horror.” She pushed him again, with extraordinary force. “I 
repent my sin, heaven has graciously shed its light on me,” she repeated, her voice breaking. 
“Leave! Go away!” 
“I don’t intend to leave without speaking to you, not after fourteen months of misery. I 
want to know everything you’ve done. Ah, surely I’ve loved you deeply enough to deserve that 
much trust...I want to know everything.” 
In spite of herself, his firm voice still ruled her heart. 
Julien had been clasping her tightly, not letting her push him away, but now loosened his 
arms. This somewhat reassured her. 
wakened by the noise, come to inspect.” 
“I’ll  pull  up  the  ladder,”  he  said,  “so  you  won’t  be  compromised,  should  some  servant, 
“Ah, go away, go away instead,” she told him, truly angry. “What do other people matter? 
It’s God who sees the ghastly scene you’re inflicting on me, and it’s He who will punish me. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
You’re taking cowardly advantage of feelings I once had for you, but which I have no longer. 
Do you hear me, Monsieur Julien?” 
He pulled up the ladder, slowly and carefully, making no noise. 
“Is  your  husband  in  town?”  he  asked,  using  the  intimate  form  of  the  word  you,  not 
intending to annoy her but falling into old habits. 
“Don’t talk to me like that, for mercy’s sake, or I’ll summon my husband. I’m already more 
than guilty, not having chased you away, no matter what. I pity you,” she told him, trying to 
wound the pride she knew was so prickly. 
These rejections, this sharp way of snapping so tender a tie, one he still counted on, drove 
Julien almost to the height of passionate delirium. 
“Ah! You really don’t love me anymore? Is that possible?” he said amorously, the sort of 
talk it was difficult to hear dispassionately. 
She did not reply, and he, he wept bitter tears. 
Indeed, he no longer had the strength to say anything. 
“And so,” he thought, “I’ve been completely forgotten by the only one who’s ever loved 
me! What’s the point to  living?” All his courage had deserted him, from the moment he no 
longer had to worry about encountering, in this dark room, not a familiar woman but a man. 
There was only one thing left in his heart, and that was love. 
He cried, silently, for a long time. He took her hand; she tried to pull it away, but then, 
after  several  very  nearly  convulsive  movements,  she  left  it  where  it  was.  The  darkness  was 
absolute; they found themselves sitting, side by side, on Madame de Rênal’s bed. 
“How changed from fourteen months ago!” Julien thought, and his tears flowed faster. “So 
this is how absence inevitably destroys all human feelings!” 
“Please: tell me what’s happened to you,” he finally said, embarrassed by his silence, and 
in a voice broken by tears. 
“Surely,” Madame de Rênal replied, her voice brittle and freighted with dry reproach, “at 
the time you left here, the whole town knew my erring ways. You behaved so recklessly! Later, 
when I’d fallen into despair, worthy Father Chélan came to see me. This accomplished nothing 
because, for a long time, he tried to get me to confess. One day, he thought of bringing me to 
the  church  in  Dijon,  where  I’d  made  my  first  communion.  There,  for  the  first  time,  he 
ventured to speak―” Madame de Rênal broke off, weeping. “What a shameful moment! That 
wonderful man didn’t bother to heap his indignation on my head: he grieved with me. Every 
day I wrote you letters, back then, but I didn’t dare send them. I hid them, very carefully, and 
when I was too miserable to endure it, I locked myself in my room and reread my letters. 
“In the end, Father Chélan persuaded me to give them all to him.. .. A few, written more 
sensibly, were sent to you, but you never answered.” 
“I swear to you, I never received any letters from you, when I was in the seminary.” 
“My God, who could have intercepted them?” 
“Imagine my sorrow before that day I saw you in the cathedral. I didn’t know if you were 
still alive.” 
“God  gave  me  the  grace  to  understand  how  deeply  I  sinned  against  Him,  against  my 
children, against my husband,” answered Madame de Rênal. “He has never loved me, not the 
way I used to believe you loved me.” 
Julien  fairly  threw  himself  into  her  arms,  not  thinking  anything,  but  simply  beside 
himself.  Yet  Madame  de  Rênal  once  again  repulsed  him,  and  continued,  with  considerable 
determination: 
“My  worthy  friend,  Father  Chélan,  has  helped  me  to  understand  that,  in  marrying 
Monsieur  de  Rênal,  I  committed  to  him  all  my  affections,  even  those  I  did  not  know  I 
 
 
Chapter Thirty: An Ambitious Man 
possessed, and which, before a fatal liaison, I had never experienced...Since the huge sacrifice 
of those letters, so terribly dear to me, my life has flowed on, perhaps not happily, but at least 
more or less calmly. Don’t disturb it: be my friend...my best friend. 
“Now it’s your turn: tell me what you’ve been doing.” 
Julien could not speak. 
“I want to know what your life in the seminary was like,” she repeated, “and after that, 
you’ll go away.” 
Not  thinking  what  he  was  saying,  Julien  recounted  the  endless  scheming  and  jealousy 
he’d  encountered,  at  the  start,  then  the  quieter  life  he’d  lived  since  having  been  made  an 
assistant master. 
“That was when,” he added, “after a long silence, surely intended to make me understand 
what,  today,  I’m  seeing,  which  is  that  you  no  longer  love  me  and  that  I’ve  become  of  no 
concern  to  you...”  Madame  de  Rênal  clasped  his  hands.  “That  was  when  you  sent  me  five 
hundred francs.” 
“Never,” said Madame de Rênal. 
“It was a letter postmarked in Paris and signed Paul Sorel, to avoid suspicion.” 
A  brief  discussion  arose  on  the  letter’s  possible  origin.  The  moral  positions  shifted. 
Without being aware of it, Madame de Rênal had abandoned her grave approach and returned 
to their former tenderness. They could not see each other, in the complete blackness. But the 
sound of their voices said everything. Julien put his arm around his beloved’s waist, clearly a 
risky  thing.  She  tried  to  remove  his  arm,  but  he  skillfully  began  to  recount  a  particularly 
interesting episode, and she was distracted. His arm was totally forgotten and stayed where it 
was. 
After  many  attempts  to  guess  at  the  letter’s  origin,  Julien  had  resumed  his  account.  In 
speaking of the life he’d been leading, he became more master of himself, for it interested him 
remarkably little, compared to what was happening at the moment. His sole concern was how 
this visit was going to end.  “You’ll go away,” she kept saying, from time to time, and rather 
curtly. 
“How I’ll be shamed, if I’m sent packing! Such a failure would poison my entire life,” he 
told himself. “She’ll never write to me. God only knows when I’ll come back to this part of the 
country!”  Then  and  there,  whatever  admixture  of  the  celestial  there  had  been  in  Julien’s 
attitude,  and  in  his  heart,  rapidly  disappeared.  Sitting  next  to  a  woman  he  adored,  virtually 
holding her in his arms, in this very room where, once, he had been so happy, wrapped in total 
darkness, very much aware that a brief moment ago she had begun weeping, sensing her sobs 
from her heaving breast, he became, alas! a cold schemer, almost as calculating and cold as 
when, in the seminary courtyard, he’d found himself the target of some nasty joke, played by a 
classmate much stronger than he was. Julien dragged out his story, and spoke of the miserable 
existence he’d led since leaving Verrières. “So,” said Madame de Rênal to herself, “after a year 
away,  almost  completely  deprived  of  any  sign  that  he  was  remembered,  and  while  I  was 
forgetting him, all he thought about were the happy days he experienced at Vergy.” Her sobs 
grew stronger. Julien saw how successful his story had been. He understood that, now, he had 
to deploy his final resource: he turned, swiftly, to the letter he’d just received from Paris. 
“I’ve said my farewell to the bishop.” 
“What? You’re not going back to Besan04on? You’re leaving us for good?” 
“Yes,” Julien answered, his voice firm. “I’m abandoning a place where I’ve been forgotten 
even by the one, in all my life, that I’ve loved the best, and I leave with no intention of ever 
coming back. I’m going to Paris....” 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
“You’re  going  to  Paris!”  she  exclaimed,  rather  loudly.  Her  voice  was  almost  choked  by 
tears, and clearly showed how deeply she was affected. Julien needed this encouragement. He 
was about to take a step that might decide everything against him. Before this stifled cry, and 
being unable to see her, he’d had absolutely no idea what effect he’d produced. He hesitated 
no longer. Fear of failure gave him supreme control over himself. He rose, and spoke coldly: 
“Yes, madame, I’m leaving you forever. Be happy. Farewell.” 
He  took  several  steps  toward  the  window;  he  had  it  open.  Madame  de  Rênal  rushed 
toward him and threw herself into his arms. 
Thus,  after  talking  for  three  hours,  Julien  obtained  what,  with  so  much  passion,  he’d 
desired for the first two of those hours. Had it happened a bit sooner, this reversion to tender 
emotions, this casting off of Madame de Rênal’s remorse, would have been divine happiness. 
Attained as it was, by artful skill, it was merely a pleasure. 
Julien was determined, despite his beloved’s protests, to turn on the night-light. 
“Do you want me,” he said to her, “to have no memory of having seen you? Love, surely 
delightful  to  you,  will  be  forever  lost  to  me.  For  me,  the  whiteness  of  this  pretty  hand  will 
remain invisible? Remember, I’m leaving you for a very long time!” 
There was no way Madame de Rênal could resist these ideas, which made her dissolve in 
tears.  But  dawn  began  to  clearly  outline  the  pine  trees  on  the  mountain,  east  of  Verrières. 
Instead of leaving,  Julien, drunk with sensual delight, asked Madame de Rênal to spend the 
whole  day  with  her,  shut  in  her  room,  which  she  would  not  leave  until  darkness  fell  once 
more. 
“And why not?” she answered. “This fatal relapse completely destroys my self-respect and 
makes me forever miserable.” She pressed herself against his breast. “My husband has never 
been the same, he’s suspicious; he thinks I’ve been lying to him through this whole business, 
and he’s clearly angry at me. If he hears the slightest noise, I’m lost: he’ll throw me out like the 
wretch I am.” 
“Ah, you learned those words from Father Chélan,” said Julien. “You’d never have spoken 
to me like that before I was so cruelly sent off to the seminary. You loved me, then.” 
Julien  was  rewarded  for  the  cool  calm  with  which  he’d  said  these  things.  He  saw  his 
beloved  swiftly  forget  the  risks  inherent  in  her  husband’s  presence,  becoming  aware  of  the 
even greater risk that Julien doubted her love. The sun rose rapidly and lit up the room. Julien 
recovered  all  the  delights  of  pride,  seeing in  his  arms,  and  almost  at  his  feet,  this  charming 
woman, the only one he’d ever loved and who, just a few hours earlier, had been completely 
overcome by fear of a terrible God, and by love of her duty to Him. Resolutions strengthened 
by an entire year of constancy had been unable to withstand his courage. 
Soon,  there  were  noises  heard  in  the  house.  One  thing  which  she  had  not  thought  of 
began to worry Madame de Rênal. 
“That wicked Elisa will come in here. What can we do with this enormous ladder?” she 
asked her lover. “Where can I hide it? I’ll put it up in the attic!” she suddenly cried, with a kind 
of playfulness. 
“But you’ll have to go through the valet’s bedroom,” said Julien, astonished. 
“I’ll  leave  the  ladder  in  the  corridor,  then  I’ll  call  him  in  here  and  send  him  to  do 
something somewhere else.” 
“Think of what you can tell him, in case he notices the ladder as he goes by,” he told her. 
“Yes, my angel,” said Madame de Rênal, giving him a kiss. “And you, you think of quickly 
hiding under the bed, in case Elisa comes in while I’m away.” 
 
 
Chapter Thirty: An Ambitious Man 
He  was  surprised  at  this  sudden  gaiety.  “So,”  he  thought,  “the  possibility  of  serious 
danger,  rather  than  upsetting  her,  makes  her  gay,  because  she’s  forgotten  all  that  remorse! 
What a supreme woman! Ah, ruling a heart like that is truly glorious.” Julien was in ecstasies. 
Madame de Rênal approached the ladder; it was clearly too heavy for her. Julien went to 
help  her.  He  was  admiring  her  elegant  waist,  which  did  not  indicate  any  serious  strength, 
when  suddenly,  unaided,  she  picked  up  the  ladder  and  carried  it  as  she  might  have  lifted  a 
mere chair. She took it quickly down the corridor and laid it along the wall. Then she called for 
the  valet,  and  in  order  to  give  him  time  to  get  dressed,  went  up  to  the  pigeon  house.  Five 
minutes later, when she came back along the corridor, the ladder was gone. What had become 
of it? If Julien had been out of the house, this would hardly have mattered. But, just then, if her 
husband  saw  that  ladder!  That  could  be  disastrous.  She  ran  all  over  the  house.  Finally  she 
found the ladder up under the roof, where the valet had carried and even hidden it. This was 
strange, and at any other time it would have been alarming. 
“What  difference  does  it  make  to  me,”  she  thought,  “what  happens  twenty-four  hours 
from now, when Julien will be gone? For me, won’t everything be horror and remorse?” 
The vague notion came to her: Should she leave this mortal life? But what did it matter? 
After a separation she had thought would be eternal, he’d been restored to her; she’d seen him 
again, and what he’d done to reach her demonstrated such love! 
As she told Julien about the ladder, she asked him: 
“What  shall  I  say  to  my  husband,  if  the  valet  tells  him  he  found  the  ladder?”  She 
considered for a moment. “They’ll need twenty-four hours to find the peasant who sold it to 
you.” And throwing herself into Julien’s arms, hugging him exceedingly tightly: “Oh, to die, to 
die like this!” she exclaimed, covering him with kisses. Then she laughed: “But there’s no need 
for you to die of hunger,” she said. 
“Come. First I’ll hide you in Madame Derville’s room, which stays locked all the time.” She 
stood guard at the end of the corridor, and Julien went running down. “Be careful: if anyone 
knocks,  don’t  open  the  door,”  she  told  him,  turning  the  key.  “Anyway,  it  would  just  be  the 
children, playing their games.” 
“Take them into the garden, under the window,” said Julien, “so I can have the pleasure of 
seeing them. Get them to talk.” 
“Yes, yes,” cried Madame de Rênal, hurrying off. 
She soon returned with oranges, and biscuits, and a bottle of Malaga wine. It had been 
impossible for her to steal any bread. 
“What’s your husband doing?” asked Julien. 
“He’s writing up marketing plans with some peasants.” 
But now it was eight o’clock, and the house was very noisy. If they had not seen Madame 
de Rênal, they’d have been looking everywhere for her; she had no choice but to leave him. 
Soon she returned, defying all prudence, bringing him a cup of coffee: she shuddered that he 
might be dying of hunger. After lunch, she managed to lead the children under the window of 
Madame Derville’s room. He saw how big they were, but had they become too much like all 
the rest? Or had his own ideas changed? 
Madame de Rênal talked to them about Julien. The oldest responded warmly, and with 
regrets, but Julien saw that the younger one had very nearly forgotten him. 
Monsieur de Rênal did not go out that morning. He was constantly going up and down 
the  house,  doing  business  with  peasants  to  whom  he  was  selling  his  potato  crop.  Until 
lunchtime, Madame de Rênal did not have a moment to give her prisoner. Lunch having been 
announced, and served, she conceived the notion of stealing a bowl of hot soup for him. As she 
walked noiselessly toward the door of the room he was occupying, carefully carrying a bowl, 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
she found herself face-to-face with the valet who, that morning, had hidden the ladder. Just 
then he too was going quietly along the corridor, and as if listening. Julien had probably been 
walking around, incautiously. The valet went away, a bit embarrassed. Madame de Rênal went 
boldly in to Julien; hearing what had just taken place, he shuddered. 
“You’re  afraid,”  she  told  him.  “But  me,  I’d  risk  all  the  dangers  in  the  world,  and  never 
blink. There’s only one thing I’m afraid of, and that’s the moment when I’ll be alone, and you’ll 
have gone away.” She ran off and left him. 
“Ah,” said Julien, swept away. “The only danger this sublime soul fears is remorse.” 
Evening finally came. Monsieur de Rênal went to the casino. 
His wife had announced herself ill with a frightful migraine. She retired to her room, she 
hurriedly sent Elisa away, and then she quickly rose to release Julien. 
He realized that, in truth, he was dying of hunger. Madame de Rênal went down to the 
pantry, in search of bread. Julien heard a loud scream. Madame de Rênal returned, and told 
him that, going into the dark pantry and approaching a sideboard where the bread was kept, 
she put out her hand and touched a woman’s arm. It was Elisa whose scream Julien had heard. 
“What was she doing there?” 
“Stealing some sweets. Or maybe she was spying on us,” Madame de Rênal replied with 
utter indifference. “But luckily I found a meat pie and a loaf of bread.” 
“And what’s in there?” said Julien, pointing to her apron pockets. 
She’d forgotten that, since lunchtime, they’d been stuffed with bread. 
Julien took her in his arms with the liveliest passion: she had never seemed so beautiful. 
“Even in Paris,” he told himself, more than a little bewildered, “I’ll never find anyone with such 
a noble heart.” She had all the awkwardness of a woman not accustomed to waiting on others, 
and at the same time the true courage of someone who feared only perils of a very different 
sort, and very much more terrible. 
While  Julien  ate,  with  a  keen  appetite,  and  his  beloved  was  teasing  him  about  the 
sparseness of his meal―for she had a horror of speaking seriously―suddenly the locked door 
was shaken back and forth, with great force. It was Monsieur de Rênal. 
“Why have you locked yourself in?” he shouted at her. 
Julien barely had time to slip under the sofa. 
“Hah! You’re all dressed,” said Monsieur de Rênal as he came in. “You’re eating, but you’ve 
locked the door!” 
Such  a  question,  delivered  with  the  abruptness  of  married  conversation,  would  on  any 
ordinary day have bothered Madame de Rênal. But she knew that all her husband had to do 
was lower his glance, and he would see Julien, for Monsieur de Rênal had thrown himself into 
the chair that Julien had left only a moment before, and this chair faced the sofa. 
She used her headache to explain everything. As her husband recounted, at some length, 
exactly how he had won the billiards prize at the casino―”worth nineteen francs, by God!” he 
added―she  saw,  on  a  chair  three  feet  away,  Julien’s  hat.  Her  cool  calm  soared,  she  started 
taking  off  her  clothes,  and  in  a  moment,  as  she  walked  quickly  behind  her  husband,  she 
dropped her dress across the revelatory chair. 
Finally,  Monsieur  de  Rênal  left.  She  begged  Julien  to  resume  his  account  of  life  at  the 
seminary. “I didn’t really hear you, yesterday; I kept thinking, while you were talking, how I 
could make myself send you away.” 
She  was  rashness  itself.  Their  voices  were  quite  loud,  and  at  about  two  o’clock  that 
morning they were interrupted by a violent knock at the door. Once more, it was Monsieur de 
Rênal. 
 
 
Chapter Thirty: An Ambitious Man 
“Open the door right away, there are burglars in the house!” he called. “Saint-Jean found 
their ladder this morning.” 
“It’s  the  end  of  everything!”  cried  Madame  de  Rênal,  throwing  her  arms  around  him. 
“He’ll kill us both, he doesn’t believe it’s burglars. I’ll die in your arms, happier when I die than 
I’ve  ever  been  in  my  life.”  She  gave  her  husband  no  answer  at  all;  he  grew  angry.  She  held 
Julien in a passionate embrace. 
“Save Stanislas’s mother,” he told her, his glance authoritative. “I’m going to jump to the 
courtyard, through your dressing room window, and I’ll run into the garden. The dogs know 
me. Roll up my clothes as fast as you can and throw them into the garden. Let him break down 
the door, in the meantime. Above all, admit absolutely nothing―I forbid it. Better for him to 
have suspicions than certainties.” 
“You’ll kill yourself, jumping!” It was the only thing she said, her only concern. 
She went to the window with him; she carefully hid his clothing. And at last she opened 
the door for her husband, who was boiling mad. He searched the bedroom, and her dressing 
room, without a word, and disappeared. She threw down Julien’s clothes, he took the bundle 
and ran quickly toward the lower part of the garden, beside the Doubs. 
As he ran, he heard a bullet whistle by, and immediately after the sound of a gunshot. 
“That’s not Monsieur de Rênal,” he thought. “He’s too poor a shot for that.” The dogs ran 
beside him, silently. A second shot apparently hit one of them in the paw; he began to howl 
piteously.  Julien  jumped  over  a  terrace  wall,  stayed  under  cover  for  another  fifty  feet,  then 
turned  and  ran  in  a  different  direction.  He  heard  voices  calling  back  and  forth,  and  he 
distinctly saw the valet, his enemy, firing a gun. A farmer fired, too, from the other side of the 
garden. But Julien had already gotten to the bank of the Doubs, where he put on his clothes. 
An  hour  later,  he  was  three  miles  from  Verrières,  on  the  road  to  Geneva.  “If  they’re 
looking anywhere,” he thought, “they’ll be hunting for me on the road to Paris.” 
 
The Red and the Black 
 
Part Two 
She’s not pretty, she’s not wearing rouge. 
―Sainte-Beuve1 
Chapter One: Country Pleasures 
Oh country scenes, when shall my eyes behold you! 
―Virgil [In Fact, By Horace]2 
“The gentleman is surely waiting on the coach for Paris?” said the proprietor of an inn, 
where he’d stopped for lunch. 
“Today’s coach or tomorrow’s, it doesn’t matter to me,” said Julien. 
As he was pretending indifference, the coach arrived. There were two available seats. 
“What! It’s you, my poor Falcoz,” said the traveler who’d arrived from Geneva, speaking to 
the passenger who got on when Julien did. 
“I’d thought,” said Falcoz, “you’d settled in the Lyons area, in a delightful little valley near 
the Rh00ne?” 
“Very happily settled. I’m running away.” 
“Really! You’re running away? You, Saint-Giraud, you who seem so reasonable, so wise―
have you committed a crime?” said Falcoz, laughing. 
“By God, pretty much the same thing. I’m running away from the ghastly life one leads in 
the provinces. I love the freshness of the woods and the peacefulness of the fields, exactly as 
you  say.  You’ve  often  accused  me  of  being  a  romantic.  For  the  whole  rest  of  my  life  I  don’t 
want to hear anything about politics, and yet it’s politics that’s chasing me away.” 
“But what party do you belong to?” 
“None,  and  that’s  been  my  ruination.  Here’s  my  politics:  I  love  music,  painting;  a  good 
book is  sensational, for me;  I’m going on forty-four.  How much longer do I have? Fifteen―
twenty―thirty years at the most. So! It strikes me that, in thirty years, government ministers 
will be a little smarter, but just as decent fellows as the ones we have now. English history, I 
think, is a mirror for looking into our future. There’ll always be a king trying to increase his 
power,  and  people  trying  to  get  into  Parliament―and  Mirabeau’s  reputation,3  plus  the 
hundreds of thousands of francs he made, will go on keeping rich provincials from sleeping at 
night. They’ll label themselves liberals, and claim they’re on the people’s side. There’ll always 
be right-wingers desperately trying to become noblemen, or gentlemen of the king’s chambers. 
                                                             
1  Charles-Augustin  Sainte-Beuve  (1804C69)  had  already  begun  his  long  career  as  a  writer  and  critic  when 
Stendhal wrote The Red and the Black. The two writers knew each other. This quote is not to be found in Sainte-
Beuve’s writings. 
2 Although Virgil wrote the  Georgica, odes to the country life, this  quote is in fact from Horace’s  Satires, in 
which an avaricious usurer hypocritically sings the praises of the simple country life. 
3 Honoré-Gabriel Riqueti, Comte de Mirabeau (1749C91), was already a scandalous figure when he deserted 
his class and got himself elected as a deputy for the Third Estate in 1789. Through his gift for oratory and the 
force  of  his  personality,  he  quickly  became  one  of  the  most  powerful  members  of  the  National  Assembly. 
Always corrupt and deeply in debt, Mirabeau was receptive when the court opened secret negotiations with 
him; he also sincerely feared the Revolution was getting out of control. He was supposed to calm the more 
radical tendencies of the Assembly, but his sudden death put an end to this possibility. Mirabeau was the first 
national hero to be entombed in the Pantheon, the disaffected church near the Sorbonne that was turned into a 
patriotic  shrine  by  the  revolutionary  government.  One  year  later,  his  correspondence  with  the  court  was 
discovered and his remains were disinterred and thrown into a common grave. 
 
 
Chapter One: Country Pleasures 
When it comes to the Ship of State, everyone wants to steer, because the job pays so well. But 
will there ever be some little spot that’s open to an ordinary passenger?” 
“Yes, yes―and by the way, that should all really please someone as peace loving as you. Is 
it these most recent elections driving you out of the provinces?” 
“My problem goes back a lot further. Four years ago, I was forty, and I had five hundred 
thousand  francs.  I’m  four  years  older,  today,  and  probably  worth  fifty  thousand  francs  less. 
That’s what I’m going to lose, when I sell my ch09teau, Montfleury, near the Rh00ne―a superb 
location. 
“I  got  tired  of  the  perpetual  comedy  we’re  forced  to  play,  in  Paris,  by  what  you  call 
nineteenth-century civilization. I was thirsty for goodwill and simplicity. I bought a place in 
the mountains, near the Rh00ne, lovelier than anything under the sun. 
“For  six  months,  the  village  priest  and  the  local  squires  kept  courting  me.  I  gave  them 
dinners. ‘I’ve left Paris,’ I told them, ‘so I’d never hear another word about politics the whole 
rest  of  my  life.  As  you’ve  noticed,  I  don’t  take  a  newspaper.  The  fewer  letters  the  postman 
brings me, the happier I am.’ 
“That wasn’t what the priest had in mind. Pretty soon I was being harassed by a thousand 
prying questions and nuisances, etc. I wanted to give two or three hundred francs a year to the 
poor; they wanted my money for pious organizations―for Saint Joseph, the Virgin Mary, etc. I 
wouldn’t do it. So then they insulted me in a hundred different ways. I was stupid enough to 
get annoyed. I could no longer go out in the morning, relishing the beauty of our mountains, 
without some vexation pulling me out of my reveries, bringing me back to thoughts of men 
and their wickedness. In the processions, for example, just before Ascension Day―and I like 
the  chant,  it’s  probably  a  Greek  melody―they  stopped  blessing  my  fields,  because,  said  the 
priest, they belong to a blasphemer. An old peasant lady, very devout, lost her cow, and she 
said it died from drinking out of my pond―me, a blasphemer from Paris. And a week later I 
found  all  my  fish  belly  up,  poisoned  by  lime.  I  was  surrounded  by  vexations,  in  every  form 
imaginable. The justice of the peace, a decent man but worried about losing his post, always 
ruled  against  me.  For  me,  the  peace  of  the  countryside  was  a  hell.  Once  they  saw  that  the 
priest had turned away from me―he was head of the local Congregation of the Holy Virgin―
and that the head of the local liberals, a retired army captain, wouldn’t back me up, they all 
descended  on  me,  even  the  mason  I  helped  support,  for  an  entire  year,  even  down  to  a 
wheelwright  who  kept  cheating  me  royally,  in  the  most  barefaced  fashion,  every  time  he 
repaired my plows. 
“To get some support, and to prevail in at least some of my lawsuits, I took up with the 
liberals―but, just as you said, those devilish elections came along, and they wanted my vote.” 
“For some unknown fellow?” 
“Oh no, no, for a man I knew only too well. So I refused: what terrible rashness! From 
then on, with the liberals as well on my hands, my position became intolerable. I believe, so 
help me, that if the priest had taken it into his head to accuse me of murdering my servant, 
there  would  have  been  twenty  witnesses,  from  both  political  parties,  swearing  they  saw  me 
committing the crime.” 
“You’d  like  to  live  in  the  country  without  indulging  your  neighbors’  passions,  without 
even listening to their jabbering? Oh, how offensive...” 
“I’ve finally taken care of that. My ch09teau is for sale, I’ll lose fifty thousand francs, if I 
have  to,  but  I’ll  be  overjoyed:  I’m  getting  out  of  that  inferno  of  hypocrisy  and  petty 
troublemaking.  I  propose  to  look  for  the  peace  and  solitude  of  the  countryside  in  the  only 
place  in  France  where  those  things  can  be  found,  a  fourth-floor  apartment  overlooking  the 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Champs-Elysées. But I’m still wondering if, perhaps, I won’t begin my political career in Paris, 
selling consecrated bread to a neighborhood parish.” 
“All  that  wouldn’t  have  happened,  under  Bonaparte,”  said  Falcoz,  his  eyes  shining  with 
sorrow and anger. 
“That  may  be  true,  but  why  couldn’t  he  keep  himself  in  power,  your  Bonaparte? 
Everything I endure today stems from what he did.” 
At this point, Julien began listening even more closely. He had understood from the very 
first  word  that  Falcoz,  the  Bonapartist,  was  Monsieur  de  Rênal’s  old  childhood  friend, 
repudiated  by  him  in  1816,  just  as  the  philosophical  Saint-Giraud  had  to  be  brother  to  that 
department head, in the ――― district, who knew how to get city properties knocked down 
to him for a song. 
“It’s all your Bonaparte’s work,” Saint-Giraud went on. “A decent man, as harmless as they 
make them, who’s forty years old and has five hundred thousand francs, can’t settle down in 
the provinces and find peace there. The priests and the country aristocracy chase him off.” 
“No,  don’t  say  such  awful  things  about  him,”  Falcoz  exclaimed.  “France  never  stood  so 
tall, in the eyes of the world, as it did in the thirteen years of his reign. Back then, there was 
something grand about everything we did.” 
“Your emperor, may the devil take him,” replied the forty-four-year-old man, “was only 
grand on the field of battle and when he put our finances on a sound footing, in 1802. What 
did  it  all  mean,  after  that?  With  his  fancy  chamberlains,  his  pompous  displays,  and  his 
receptions  at  the  Tuileries,  he  gave  us  a  new  edition  of  all  that  kingly  twaddle.  It  was  a 
corrected edition; it might have lasted a century or two. The aristocracy and the priests, they 
wanted to bring back the old one, but they didn’t have the iron hand they needed to sell it to 
the people.” 
“Now there’s an old printer talking!” 
“Who  was  it  who  drove  me  off  my  property?”  the  angry  printer  went  on.  “The  priests, 
brought  back  by  Napoleon  and  his  concordat,4  instead  of  dealing  with  them  the  way 
government deals with doctors, lawyers, astronomers, viewing them simply as citizens, rather 
than  harassing  the  trade  by  which  they  try  to  earn  their  bread.  Would  there  be  arrogant 
noblemen, today, if your Bonaparte hadn’t created barons and counts?5 No, that was already 
out of fashion. Next to the priests, it was the petty provincial aristocrats who gave me the most 
trouble and made me turn myself into a liberal.” 
The  conversation  went  on  and  on:  it  was  a  text  that  France  would  be  busy  with  for 
another half century. When Saint-Giraud said, once again, how impossible it was to live in the 
provinces, Julien shyly offered the example of Monsieur de Rênal. 
“By God, young man, that’s an example indeed!” exclaimed Falcoz. “He’s turned himself 
into a hammer, so he won’t become an anvil―and a really terrible hammer. But I suspect he’ll 
be pushed aside by Valenod. Do you know that scoundrel? He’s the real thing. What’s your 
Monsieur de Rênal going to say, early some morning, when he finds himself thrown out and 
Valenod taking his place?” 
“He’ll be left looking at all the crimes he’s committed,” said Saint-Giraud. “So you know 
what’s  going  on  in  Verrières,  young  man?  Well!  It’s  Bonaparte―may  heaven  close  its  doors 
against him and his monarchist rubbish―who put the Rênals and Chélans in power, and it’s 
them who gave us the Valenods and the Maslons.” 
                                                             
4 The 1801 agreement between the Pope and First Consul Bonaparte that reestablished the Catholic Church in 
France. 
5 In 1807, Napoleon decided to create a new Imperial nobility in order to create loyalty and to aggrandize his 
Empire. 
 
 
Chapter One: Country Pleasures 
This dark political dialogue astonished Julien, disrupting his voluptuous daydreams. 
He paid little attention to the first view of Paris, seen in the distance. Constructing castles 
in the air had been warring against lingering, still palpable memories of the twenty-four hours 
just spent in Verrières. He silently swore never to abandon his beloved’s children; he’d leave 
everything  in  order  to  protect  them,  should  priestly  arrogance  ever  bring  on  a  republic  and 
persecution of the aristocracy. 
What  would  have  happened,  the  night  he  came  to  Verrières,  had  he  leaned  his  ladder 
against the casement of Madame de Rênal’s bedroom window, and found the room occupied 
by a stranger―or by Monsieur de Rênal? 
But then, those delightful first two hours, when his beloved honestly wanted to send him 
away, and he’d argued for his cause, sitting next to her in the darkness! 
A soul like Julien’s remains wrapped in such memories: they last a lifetime. All the rest of 
the  encounter  had  already  been  blended  into  thoughts  of  this  love’s  early  stages,  fourteen 
months before. 
Julien was awakened from these deep daydreams: the carriage had stopped. They had just 
entered the mail-coach yard, on J.J. Rousseau Street. 
“I’d like to go to Malmaison,”6 he told a cabdriver who approached him. 
“At this hour, sir? Why?” 
“None of your business! Go.” 
Real passion always thinks of nothing but itself. This is why, it seems to me, passions are 
so ridiculous in Paris, where your neighbor acts as if you’re always deeply attentive to him. I’ll 
spare you a description of Julien’s ecstasies at Malmaison, where Napoleon had held court. He 
wept.  (What!  In  spite  of  the  ugly  white  walls,  just  recently  put  up,  chopping  the  whole 
property into tiny morsels? Yes, my dear reader: for Julien, as for posterity, the Battle of Arcola 
and Saint Helena7 and Malmaison were as good as one and the same.) 
That evening, Julien hesitated a long time before allowing himself to go to the theater: he 
had strange notions about these hellish places. 
Deep mistrust kept him from admiring Paris as he now saw it; the monuments left by his 
heroes were all that moved him. 
patrons exercise their power.” 
“Here I am, in the very center of scheming and hypocrisy! This is where Father de Frilair’s 
The third evening, curiosity obliged him to give up his plan of seeing everything before 
presenting himself to Father Pirard. The priest explained, his manner distant, what sort of life 
he should expect to lead, employed by Monsieur de La Mole. 
“After  a  few  months,  if  you’ve  not  proven  useful,  you’ll  go  back  to  the  seminary,  but 
through the front door. You’ll be living at the marquis’s house: he is one of France’s greatest 
noblemen.  You  will  wear  black,  but  as  a  man  does  when  he’s  in  mourning,  not  like  an 
ecclesiastic. I will require you, three times a week, to continue your theological studies, at a 
seminary to which I will present you. Every day, at noon, you will be in the marquis’s library, 
where your employer intends to have you write whatever letters are necessary for his lawsuits 
and his other business. The marquis will make a brief notation, on each letter he receives, as to 
the sort of response required. I have assured him that, after three months, you will be prepared 
                                                             
6 A small ch09teau just west of Paris, bought by Joséphine Bonaparte soon after her marriage to Napoleon. It 
was their home until he took power in 1799 and appropriated for himself the royal residences in Paris and the 
countryside. Joséphine retired there after the 1809 divorce, and died there in 1814, after Napoleon’s first exile 
to Elba. 
7 Arcola was the site of one of General Bonaparte’s Italian triumphs, in 1796. Saint-Helena is the Atlantic island 
where the deposed emperor spent the last six years of his life in exile. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
to write these replies in such a fashion that, of any twelve you present to the marquis for his 
signature, he will be able to sign eight or nine. Every evening at eight, you will put his desk in 
order. And at ten you will be free. 
“It may be,” continued Father Pirard, “that some ancient lady, or some man with a gentle 
voice, will draw to your attention certain immense advantages, or flagrantly offer you money 
to show him letters received by the marquis―” 
“Ah! Sir!” exclaimed Julien, blushing. 
“How strange,” said the priest with a bitter smile, “that poor as you are, and after a year in 
the seminary, you still feel such virtuous indignation. You really must have been quite blind! 
“Could this be caused by heredity?” Father Pirard murmured under his breath, and as if 
talking to himself. 
“Now, it is odd, but the marquis seems to know you...I have no idea how. To begin with, 
he will pay you four hundred francs a month. This is a man who regularly indulges his whims: 
this is his flaw. He will compete with you, in the matter of childish pranks. If he is pleased, 
your salary may rise, in time, to eight thousand francs. 
“But as you know perfectly well,” the priest resumed sourly, “he’s not going to pay you all 
that money on account of your beautiful eyes. It all depends on being useful. Were I in your 
place, I would speak very little―and above all, I would never talk about things I knew nothing 
about. 
“Oh yes,” the priest said. “I have looked into things for you. I was forgetting Monsieur de 
La Mole’s family. He has two children, a daughter, and a nineteen-year-old son, extraordinarily 
stylish and a kind of fool, never certain at noon what he’s likely to be doing at two o’clock. He’s 
spirited,  he’s brave;  he  fought  in  the war with  Spain.8  The  marquis  hopes,  I  have  no  notion 
why, that you might become the young Count Norbert’s friend. I’ve told him you were a fine 
Latinist, so perhaps he expects you’ll teach his son some ready-made phrases from Cicero and 
Virgil. 
“In  your  place,  I  should  never  allow  this  fine  young  man  to  trifle  with  me.  And  before 
yielding to his advances, no matter how perfectly polite (though marred by a bit of irony), I 
would make him ask more than once. 
“I will not hide from you that, at first, young Count de La Mole is surely going to  look 
down at you, since you’re only a petty bourgeois. One of his ancestors was a courtier, and had 
the honor of being beheaded in the Place de Grève,9 on the twenty-sixth of April, 1574, for his 
participation in a political intrigue. You, you’re the son of a Verrières carpenter who, what’s 
even worse, began by working for his father. Consider these differences carefully, and read this 
family’s history, in Moreri’s biographical dictionary10―a book to which all the sycophants who 
dine there will, from time to time, make what they call discerning references. 
“Be careful how you respond to jests made by Count Norbert de La Mole, who is a major 
in  a  cavalry  regiment  and  a  future  peer  of  France,  and  don’t  come  complaining  to  me, 
afterward.” 
“It would seem to me,” said Julien, turning very red, “that I need not reply at all to a man 
who shows himself contemptuous of me.” 
                                                             
8 In 1820, a liberal revolution arose against the reactionary Spanish Bourbons, seeking a stable, constitutional 
monarchy.  The  French  Bourbons,  in  the  person  of  the  Duke  d’Angoulême,  intervened  in  the  name  of 
legitimacy, and secured the throne for Ferdinand VII in 1823. 
9 On the right bank of the Seine, the site of public tortures and executions in Paris until the guillotine was set 
up in the Place Louis XV, which was then renamed Place de la Revolution, today’s Place de la Concorde. 
10 The work of Louis Moreri (1643C80). 
 
 
Chapter One: Country Pleasures 
“You have no experience of this sort of contempt; it manifests itself only in exaggerated 
compliments. If you were a fool, you could take it at face value. If you’re eager to make your 
fortune, you ought to let it take you in.” 
“When I can’t tolerate that sort of thing anymore,” said Julien, “will I look like an ingrate 
if I go back to my little cell, number one oh three?” 
“Of  course,”  said  Father  Pirard.  “All  the  fawners  and  flatterers  who  fill  the  house  will 
slander  you,  but  me,  I  will  be  there.  Adsum  qui  feci,  I’m  the  one  who  did  it.  I’ll  say  it  was 
entirely my decision.” 
Julien had been hurt by the  bitter, almost  nasty voice in which Father Pirard had been 
speaking. This virtually ruined, for him, the priest’s last response. 
The truth is that Father Pirard felt qualms of conscience about his affection for Julien, and 
he experienced a kind of religious terror, interfering so directly in another person’s fate. 
“You will also be seeing,” he added, with the same unpleasantness, as if fulfilling a painful 
duty,  “you’ll  also  be  seeing  the  Marquise  de  La  Mole.  She’s  a  tall,  blonde  woman,  pious, 
haughty,  perfectly  polite,  and  still  more  completely  insignificant.  She’s  the  old  Duke  of 
Chaulnes’s11 daughter, a man celebrated for his aristocratic prejudices. This great lady is more 
or less a three-dimensional epitome of what, at bottom, the women of her rank truly are. She 
makes  no  attempt  to  conceal,  indeed,  that  having  had  ancestors  who  journeyed  out  on  the 
Crusades is the only form of honor she values. Money didn’t come until much later: Does that 
surprise you? We’re no longer in the provinces, my friend. 
“You will find, in her drawing room, a number of great lords who speak of our present 
royalty with a curious kind of indulgence. Madame de La Mole herself lowers her voice, most 
respectfully, whenever she speaks of a prince and especially of a princess. I would not advise 
you  to  say,  in  her  presence,  that  Philip  II  or  Henry  VIII12  were  monsters.  They  were  kings, 
which  gives  them  imperishable  right  to  everyone’s  respect,  and  above  all  to  the  respect  of 
those who do not have high birth, like you and me. However,” Father Pirard added, “we are 
priests―for  she  will  take  you  to  be  one.  Given  this  title,  she  considers  us  a  form  of  house 
servant necessary to her salvation.” 
“It seems to me, sir,” said Julien, “that I won’t be in Paris for long.” 
“Fine.  But  note  that,  for  anyone  wearing  our  sort  of  clothing,  no  fortune  is  available 
except through these great lords.  With that indefinable something―indefinable, at  least, by 
me―which I find in your nature, if you do not make your fortune, you will be persecuted. For 
you, there is no middle way. Don’t deceive yourself. People see you’re not pleased when they 
speak to you. In a country as social as ours, you dedicate yourself to misfortune if you do not 
earn respect. 
“What  would  you  have  become,  in  Besan04on,  absent  this  caprice  of  the  Marquis  de  La 
Mole?  Someday  you’ll  understand  just  how  odd  it  is,  what  he  is  doing  for  you,  and  unless 
you’re  a  monster  you’ll  be  eternally  grateful  to  him  and  his  family.  How  many  poor  priests, 
more learned than you, have lived in Paris for years, on fifteen pence a day for the masses they 
say and ten pence a day for the classes they give at the Sorbonne! ... Remember what I told 
you,  last  winter,  about  the  early  years  of  that  rascal,  Cardinal  Dubois.  Does  your  pride 
persuade you, by any chance, that you’re more talented than him? 
                                                             
11  A  name  Stendhal  borrowed  from  French  history;  the  ducal  Chaulnes  family  was  prominent  in  the  last 
centuries of the ancien régime and died out in the eighteenth century. 
12 The Spanish king who aggressively interfered in French politics and attempted (unsuccessfully) to suppress 
a rebellion in the Spanish Netherlands with brutal force. Henry VIII: English King who is called a monster, no 
doubt as much for his abandonment of the Catholic faith as for his beheaded wives. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
“Take me, for example, a quiet, mediocre man: I counted on dying in my seminary. I had 
the childishness to grow attached to it. Well! I’d have been poverty-stricken when I handed in 
my  resignation.  Do  you  know  the  extent  of  my  fortune?  I  had  a  total  of  five  hundred  and 
twenty  francs,  neither  more  nor  less,  not  a  friend  in  the  world,  barely  two  or  three 
acquaintances. Monsieur de La Mole, whom I’d never met, pulled me out of so tight a corner. 
All he had to say was a single word, and I was given a parish in which everyone is rich, set far 
above the worst vices, with a salary that embarrasses me, so out of proportion is it to the labor 
involved. I’ve said this much only to get a bit of ballast into your head. 
“But one word more. I have the misfortune of being short-tempered. It could happen that 
you and I break off all communication. If the marquise’s haughtiness, or her son’s unpleasant 
jests, make this house impossible for you, I advise you to finish your studies at some seminary 
a  hundred  miles  from  Paris,  and  rather  to  the  north  than  to  the  south.  There  is  more 
civilization to the north, and less injustice. And,” he added, lowering his voice, “I have to admit 
it: being in the neighborhood of Paris newspapers strikes fear into petty tyrants. 
“If we continue to have the pleasure of seeing each other, and the marquis’s house does 
not suit you, I offer you a post as the assistant priest in my parish, and I will divide the salary I 
receive with you, half to us each. I owe you that, and more,” he added, interrupting Julien’s 
thanks, “for the unusual offer you made me, in Besan04on. If instead of five hundred and twenty 
francs I had had none, you would have saved me.” 
Father  Pirard’s  voice  had  lost  its  harshness.  To  his  great  shame,  Julien  felt  tears  in  his 
eyes.  He  felt  an  incredible  urge  to  throw  himself  into  his  friend’s  arms.  He  could  not  keep 
himself from saying, in as masculine a voice as he could manage: 
“From the time I was in my cradle, I’ve hated my father. It has been one of my greatest 
misfortunes. But I can complain of my luck no longer: sir, I have found a father in you.” 
“Good!  That’s  good,”  said  the  priest,  embarrassed.  Then,  happening  on  a  phrase 
appropriate for the director of a seminary: “Never say ‘luck,’ my child. Always say ‘providence.’” 
The cab stopped. The coachman raised the bronze knocker on a huge door: it was THE 
DE LA MOLE RESIDENCE13 ―and so that passersby could not be in any doubt, the words 
were legible, in black marble, above the door. 
This  affectation  displeased  Julien.  “How  afraid  of  the  Jacobins  they  are!  They  see  a 
Robespierre with his guillotine-bound tumbrel behind every hedgerow. It makes you want to 
die  of  laughter.  And  they  post  their  names  in  front  of  their  houses  so  the  rabble  will  know 
where to find them, in case they come rioting and pillaging.” He offered this thought to Father 
Pirard. 
“Ah! Poor child: you’ll soon be my assistant priest. What a dreadful thought that is!” 
“It seems to me utterly straightforward,” said Julien. 
The  porter’s  solemnity,  and  above  all  the  cleanliness  of  the  courtyard,  drew  his 
admiration. It was a lovely sunny day. 
“What magnificent architecture!” he said to his friend. 
He  was  talking  about  one  of  those  great  Faubourg  Saint-Germain14  houses  with  even-
faced  fa04ades,  built  at  about  the  time  of  Voltaire’s  death.  Never  have  fashion  and  beauty 
existed at such opposite poles. 
                                                             
13 The great h00tels particuliers, the town houses of the French aristocracy, were a sign of wealth and status. 
14 Roughly corresponding to today’s seventh arrondissement on the Left Bank, the Faubourg Saint-Germain 
was the most aristocratic neighborhood in Paris. The neighborhood became a metaphor for aristocratic society 
and ultra politics. 
 
 
Chapter Two: Entering Society138F 
Chapter Two: Entering Society1 
A  ridiculous,  moving  memory:  the  first  drawing  room  in  which,  at  eighteen,  one  appeared,  alone  and 
without any support! A woman’s glance was enough to intimidate me. The more I wanted to please, the 
more awkward I became. I argued for all the silliest ideas: either I jabbered senselessly, or I felt that every 
man who looked at me seriously was my enemy. But just the same, buried by my shyness in frightful misery, 
how fine a fine day could be! 
―Kant2 
Julien stopped, dumbfounded, in the middle of the courtyard. 
“Try to at least look sensible,” said Father Pirard. “Horrible ideas come to you and then 
you’re  simply  a  child!  What  happened  to  Horace’s  nil  mirari,  never  show  your  enthusiasm? 
Think how this horde of servants, seeing you pitch your tent right there, will work at making 
fun of you. They’ll see you as one of their equals, mistakenly set above them. Pretending to be 
kind, to be giving you good advice, from a desire to help and guide you, they’ll get you to fall 
into the most grotesque stupidities.” 
“Just let them try,” said Julien, biting at his lips; he drew deep on his sense of mistrust. 
The rooms through which these gentlemen walked, on the ground floor, before arriving at 
the marquis’s private office, would have seemed to you, oh my reader, quite as melancholy as 
they were magnificent. If they were offered to you, exactly as they are, you’d refuse to live in 
them:  this  is  the  land  of  yawning  and  dreary  formalisms.  Julien’s  enchantment  grew  still 
stronger. “How can anyone be unhappy,” he thought, “when they live in such splendor!” 
The  gentlemen  finally  came  to  the  ugliest  of  all  the  rooms  in  this  magnificent  place: 
daylight scarcely reached it. And there they found a small, lean man, with sparkling eyes and a 
blond wig. Father Pirard turned to Julien and presented him. It was the marquis. He was so 
courteous that Julien was hard put to recognize him. He was no longer the high and mighty 
lord of Upper Bray, who carried himself so haughtily. Julien thought there was too much hair 
in his wig, and this impression helped him lose his shyness. At first, this descendant of Henry 
III’s3 friend seemed to him distinctly shabby. He was really very lean and rather excitable. But 
he soon noticed that the marquis spoke to people so politely that, indeed, it was pleasanter 
than even the Bishop of Besan04on himself. The interview took no more than three minutes. As 
they left, Father Pirard said to Julien: 
“You were staring at the marquis as one stares at a picture. I am not particularly adept at 
what people here call good manners, and you will soon know more than I do, but nevertheless 
your bold staring seemed to me not really polite.” 
They  got  back  into  the  cab;  the  coachman  pulled  up  near  the  boulevard;  the  priest 
brought Julien to a suite of large sitting rooms. Julien observed that there was no furniture. He 
was looking at a huge gilt clock, adorned in what seemed to him gross indecency, when a most 
elegant man came cheerfully over to him. Julien made him a faint bow. 
                                                             
1 In French, the monde, the exclusive and almost purely aristocratic high society of Paris. 
2  As  those  familiar  with  Kant’s  philosophy  will  immediately  deduce,  this  citation  is  nowhere  to  be  found 
among his writings. 
3 (born 1551) reigned briefly during the turbulent second half of the sixteenth century. He was the third son of 
Henri II and Catherine de Médici to take the throne of France, becoming king after the death of his brother, 
Charles IX. Some of the worst battles of the Wars of Religion took place under his reign. He was assassinated 
by  the  fanatical  Catholic  monk  Jacques  Clément.  His  friends,  known  as  mignons,  were  his  companions  in 
debauchery. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
The  man  laughed  and  put  his  hand  on  the  young  man’s  shoulder.  Julien  winced  and 
jumped back. He was red with anger. Father Pirard, for all his sobriety, laughed until he cried. 
The man was a tailor. 
“You are now free for two days,” Father Pirard said as they were leaving. “Only then can 
you be presented to Madame de La Mole. Someone else might watch over you as if you were a 
young girl, in these initial moments of your stay in this new Babylon. Ruin yourself right away, 
if you need to ruin yourself, and then I’ll be released from this weakness of thinking about you. 
The day after tomorrow, in the morning, this tailor will deliver two suits of clothing; give five 
francs to the young fellow who’ll see how they fit you. For the rest, don’t let these Parisians 
hear the sound of your voice. Say one word, and they’ll know exactly how to make fun of you. 
It’s their special gift. Come to me at noon, that day...Go, ruin yourself...I’ve been forgetting: go 
order some boots, and shirts, and a hat, at these addresses.” 
Julien looked at the handwriting. 
“The marquis wrote these,” the priest said. “He’s an active man who thinks of everything, 
who likes to do things rather than order that they be done by others. He’s hiring you to spare 
him all that trouble. Will you be intelligent enough to properly do all the things this lively man 
will tell you to do, in only a very few words? Only time will tell. Be careful!” 
Julien  went  to  the  craftsmen  at  the  addresses  he’d  been  given,  not  saying  a  word.  He 
noted how respectfully they received him, and how the bootmaker, recording his name in an 
account book, wrote “Monsieur Julien de Sorel.”4 
At the Père Lachaise Cemetery,5 a most obliging man, and even more assertively a liberal, 
offered  to  show  Julien  the  tomb  of  Marshall  Ney,6  Napoleon’s  general,  to  whom  wise 
politicians have denied an epitaph. But after leaving this liberal gentleman, who embraced him 
tightly, tears in his eyes, Julien no longer had his watch. Two days later, at noon, enriched by 
these experiences, he presented himself to Father Pirard, who carefully looked him over. 
“You’re well on the way to becoming a fop,” the priest told him, severely. Julien looked 
like a very young man in deep mourning. He seemed quite presentable, but the good priest 
was himself too much of a provincial to be aware that Julien still hunched his shoulders, which 
in the provinces is considered a sign of both elegance and importance. When the marquis saw 
the young man, he evaluated Julien’s gracefulness very differently. He said to Father Pirard: 
“Would you mind if Monsieur Sorel took dance lessons?” 
The priest stood dumbfounded. 
“No,” he said at last. “Julien’s not a priest.” 
Going up two steps at a time, the marquis ascended a small, secret staircase, in order to 
personally show our hero a pretty attic room that looked out on the building’s huge garden. 
Then he asked Julien how many shirts he’d bought at the linen shop. 
“Two,” Julien answered, self-conscious at seeing so great a lord descend to such details. 
                                                             
4  The  marquis  has  awarded  Julien  an  aristocratic  de,  the  particule  (sometimes  des,  de  la,  or  du)  that  was 
indicative of noble birth. 
5 On the east side of Paris, where many cultural and political notables have been buried since 1803. 
6 Michel Ney (1769C1815), whom Napoleon called le brave des braves, made his name with the revolutionary 
armies; he was named Duke d’Elchingen in 1808 and then Prince de la Moskova after the Russian campaign. 
He pledged his loyalty to the Bourbons and was sent by Louis XVIII to arrest Bonaparte when he returned 
from Elba in 1815. Ney famously promised to bring his former emperor back to Paris “in an iron cage.” His 
resolution  could  not  withstand  the  sight  of  his  former  general,  and  he  defected  to  the  imperial  cause  at 
Ch09lons-sur-Marne. Arrested after Waterloo―where many believe he deliberately sought death once defeat 
became inevitable―he was tried and convicted of treason by the Chamber of Peers, and shot by firing squad 
in 1815. 
 
 
Chapter Two: Entering Society138F 
“Very good,” the marquis went on, seriously and in a distinctly commanding, curt voice 
that  left  Julien  thinking.  “Very  good!  Get  another  twenty-two.  Here’s  your  first  quarter’s 
salary.” 
When  they  went  down  the  staircase,  the  marquis  summoned  an  old  man:  “Arsène,”  he 
said, “you will wait on Monsieur Sorel.” A few minutes later, Julien found himself alone in a 
magnificent library; it was a delightful moment. So no one would come on him, excited as he 
was, he hid himself in a dark corner. From there, he looked out at the books’ glittering spines. 
“I could read every one of them,” he told himself. “How could I be unhappy here? Monsieur de 
Rênal would think himself dishonored, had he done for me a hundredth part of what Marquis 
de La Mole has just done. 
“But first, let’s see what I’m supposed to copy.” That finished, Julien ventured over to the 
books.  He  was  wildly  happy,  finding  an  edition  of  Voltaire.  He  ran  and  opened  the  library 
door, so no one could come on him by surprise. Then he gave himself the pleasure of opening 
each of the eighty volumes. They were superbly bound: this set of Voltaire was the masterpiece 
of  the  best  binder  in  London.  Nothing  else  was  needed  to  carry  Julien  to  the  heights  of 
wonder. 
An  hour  later,  the  marquis  came  in,  looked  over  the  copies,  and  noticed,  with 
astonishment, that Julien had misspelled a very simple word, dropping the “t” from the end of 
“that.”  “Everything  Father  Pirard  told  me  about  his  learning  is  simply  a  fairy  tale.”  Deeply 
discouraged, the marquis said to him, gently: 
“You’re not sure of your spelling?” 
“That’s true,” said Julien, not thinking in the slightest of how much harm he was doing 
himself. He was stirred by the marquis’s benevolence, which made him think of Monsieur de 
Rênal’s arrogant tone. 
“My experiment with this little Franche-Comté priest is all a waste of time,” thought the 
marquis. “But I so badly need a man who knows what he’s doing!” 
“There is a ‘t’ at the end of ‘that,’ “ he said. “When you’ve finished your copies, use the 
dictionary and look up the words you’re not sure of.” 
At  six  o’clock,  the  marquis  had  him  called.  He  looked  with  obvious  distress  at  Julien’s 
boots. “It’s my fault,” he said. “I didn’t tell you that, every day at five-thirty, you need to be 
dressed.” 
Julien looked at him, not understanding. 
“I mean, you need to put on stockings and shoes. Arsène will remind you: for today, I will 
apologize on your behalf.” 
Having said this, Monsieur de La Mole showed Julien into a drawing room, resplendent in 
its gilded decor. On similar occasions, Monsieur de Rênal had never failed to walk very fast, so 
he could go through the door first. His former employer’s petty vanity now caused Julien to 
step on the marquis’s feet, and give him a good deal of pain, on account of his gout. “Ah, to top 
it all off, he’s a clumsy oaf,” he said to himself. Julien was presented to a tall lady of imposing 
appearance.  This  was  the  marquise.  Julien  thought  her  insolent,  rather  like  Madame  de 
Maugiron, wife of the deputy governor of the Verrières district, when she’d attended the Saint 
Charles feast day dinner. A bit bothered by the drawing room’s excessive splendor, Julien did 
not listen to what Monsieur de La Mole was saying. The marquise scarcely troubled herself to 
look  at  him.  There  were  a  few  men  in  attendance,  among  whom  Julien  recognized,  with 
inexpressible  pleasure,  the  young  Bishop  of  Agde,  who  had  been  good  enough  to  say  a  few 
words to him before the ceremony at Upper Bray. The young bishop was surely startled by the 
soft, shy glances fixed on him by Julien, and had no interest in recognizing this provincial. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
All  the  men  assembled  in  the  drawing  room  struck  Julien  as  rather  somber  and 
constrained. “People speak softly, in Paris, and they don’t make much of unimportant things.” 
A handsome young man, wearing a mustache, very pale and slender, came in at about six-
thirty. He had an extremely small head. 
“You always make us wait for you,” said the marquise, whose hand he kissed. 
Julien  understood  that  this  was  Count  de  La  Mole.  From  the  start,  Julien  thought  him 
charming. 
“Is  it  really  possible,”  he  asked  himself,  “that  this  is  the  man  whose  offensive  jokes  are 
supposed to chase me out of the house!” 
As  he  considered  Count  Norbert,  Julien  noticed  that  he  was  wearing  boots  and  spurs. 
“And I have to be in shoes, since I’m an inferior.” 
They  sat  down  to  dinner.  Julien  heard  the  marquise  say  something  harsh,  raising  her 
voice a bit. At almost exactly the same time, he saw a young woman, very blonde and with a 
fine  figure,  who  seated  herself  directly  across  from  him.  She  did  not  attract  him.  However, 
when he looked at her more carefully, he thought he’d never seen such beautiful eyes, though 
they  spoke  of  an  enormously  cold  heart.  Afterward,  he  decided  they  simply  expressed  her 
boredom  at  everyone  there,  though  they  obviously  never  forgot  how  imposing  they  were 
supposed to appear. “However, Madame de Rênal had quite beautiful eyes,” he said to himself. 
“Everyone  compliments  her.  But  they’re  absolutely  different  from  these.”  Julien  lacked  the 
experience  to  realize  that  what  he  saw,  from  time  to  time,  gleaming  in  Mademoiselle 
Mathilde’s7 eyes (he had heard her thus addressed) was a passionate wit. When Madame de 
Rênal’s eyes grew bright, it was with emotion, or with compassionate indignation, hearing an 
account of some malicious act. Toward the end of dinner, Julien found words for the kind of 
beauty he saw in Mademoiselle Mathilde’s eyes. “They’re sparkling,” he said to himself. But, for 
the  rest,  she  unfortunately  resembled  her  mother,  who  increasingly  displeased  him;  he 
stopped looking at her. On the other hand, Count Norbert seemed to him entirely admirable. 
Julien was so captivated that it never occurred to him to be jealous and dislike the count, even 
though he was infinitely richer and nobler. 
To Julien’s eyes, the marquis seemed bored. 
As they came to the second course, he said to his son: 
“Norbert, let me ask for your kindness toward Monsieur Julien Sorel, who has just joined 
my staff, and of whom I intend to make a man―if that is possible. 
“He’s  my  secretary,”  said  the  marquis  to  the  person  seated  next  to  him,  “and  he  writes 
‘that’ without the final ‘t.’” 
people were pleased at his appearance. 
Everyone  looked  at  Julien,  who  bowed  a  bit  extravagantly  to  Norbert.  But  in  general, 
The marquis had probably been talking about how Julien had been educated, because one 
of the guests challenged him on the subject of Horace. “It was precisely discussing Horace with 
the Bishop of Besan04on,” Julien said to himself, “which made me successful with that prelate. 
These  people  don’t  seem  to  know  any  other  authors.”  From  then  on,  he  had  himself  under 
complete  control.  It  had  become  even  easier  because  he’d  just  decided  that,  for  him, 
Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole  could  never  seem  a  woman.  After  having  been  in  the  seminary, 
people could simply do their worst: he would not let anyone intimidate him. He might have 
been still calmer had the dining room been less magnificently furnished. Indeed, there were 
two mirrors, each eight feet high, in which from time to time he observed the man questioning 
                                                             
7 Stendhal almost certainly took this name from Mathilde Dembowska, the beautiful Italian wife of a Polish 
officer with whom he had fallen passionately in love in Milan. 
 
 
Chapter Two: Entering Society138F 
him about Horace. He still found these mirrors rather commanding. But he did not frame his 
replies, for a provincial, in sentences of excessive length. He had beautiful eyes, which shone 
even more brilliantly, either with shyness or, when he had answered particularly well, with joy. 
He was found acceptable. This kind of testing added a little interest to their somber dinner. 
The marquis gave his questioner a sign to push him even harder. “Might it be possible,” he was 
thinking, “that he actually knows something?” 
Julien answered, improvising ideas as he went along, and losing enough of his shyness so 
that he demonstrated―not exactly wit, an impossibility for anyone not in command of Paris’s 
way of speaking―but an originality, not to be sure set out gracefully, or properly ordered, but 
proving that he had a perfect grasp of Latin. 
His adversary, a member of the Paleographic Academy, who by chance knew Latin, seeing 
that Julien was a first-rate humanist, no longer worried about embarrassing him; he began a 
really serious interrogation. In the heat of combat, Julien was finally able to forget about the 
dining room’s decorations, and to bring forth ideas about the Roman poets that his questioner 
had never seen so much as mentioned in print. As an honest man, he was obliged to respect 
the young secretary. Luckily, they got into a discussion of whether Horace had been poor or 
rich.  Had  he  been  a  friendly  fellow,  voluptuous  and  carefree,  throwing  off  poems  to  amuse 
himself,  like  Chapelle,  friend  of  Molière  and  La  Fontaine,8  or  was  he  a  poor  devil  of  a  poet 
laureate,  connected  to  court  and  turning  out  odes  for  the  ruler’s  birthday,  like  Southey,9 
Byron’s attacker? They spoke of the state of society under Augustus and George IV, in both of 
which  epochs  the  aristocracy  had  been  all-powerful,  though  Maecenas,10  in  Rome―not  the 
simple knight he’d seemed―had stripped away that power, while in England the aristocracy 
had reduced George IV almost to the level of the Doge of Venice.11 This discussion appeared to 
draw the marquis out of the torpid state into which, when dinner had started, boredom had 
plunged him. 
Julien knew nothing whatever about these moderns―Southey, Lord Byron, George IV―
whose very names he was hearing for the first time. But no one could doubt that, whenever 
events  in  Rome  were  at  issue,  knowledge  of  which  could  be  gathered  from  the  works  of 
Horace,  Martial,  Tacitus,  etc.,  he  was  unquestionably  the  superior.  Julien  unceremoniously 
drew on ideas he’d acquired from the Bishop of Besan04on, in the jolly discussion he’d had with 
that prelate. Nor were these the least appreciated. 
When they were weary of talking about poets, the marquise, who made it a rule to admire 
whatever  amused  her  husband,  condescended  to  give  Julien  a  passing  glance.  “The  truly 
gauche  manners  of  this  young  priest,”  remarked  the  academician  to  her,  he  being  seated 
beside  her,  “may  well  conceal  a  genuinely  learned  man.”  Julien  overheard  part  of  this.  The 
mistress of the house was fond of ready-made phrases, and she adopted this one, about Julien, 
very pleased at having invited an academician to dine with them. 
“He amuses Monsieur de La Mole,” she thought. 
                                                             
8 Chapelle was a wealthy bourgeois who composed light satirical verse for the amusement of friends like the 
playwright Molière (see note for p. 79, l. 2) and the fabulist La Fontaine (see note for p. 134, ll. 6C7). 
9  Robert  Southey  (1774C1843),  minor  English  poet  and  biographer,  friend  of  Coleridge.  He  and  Byron, 
differing in literary and political opinion, engaged in a public feud. 
10 George IV, King of England (1820C30); Maecenas is best remembered as the great patron of the arts under 
the golden age of Augustus’s reign. 
11 The Doges were the elected leaders of the aristocratic oligarchy of the Venetian Republic. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Chapter Three: The First Steps 
This immense valley, filled with glittering lights and so many thousands of men, dazzles my eyes. Not one 
of them knows me, but they’re all my superiors. My head whirls. 
―Poems of Reina, The Lawyer1 
Next  day,  very  early,  Julien  was  in  the  library,  copying  letters,  when  Mademoiselle 
Mathilde came in, using a small, secret door, extremely well hidden by books. As Julien was 
admiring this device, Mademoiselle Mathilde seemed both surprised and distinctly annoyed at 
meeting him there. She had stiff curling paper in her hair; he found her haughty and almost 
masculine. Mademoiselle de La Mole was in the habit of taking books from her father’s library, 
without anyone’s knowledge. Julien’s  presence, on this  particular morning, made her errand 
impossible,  which  was  all  the  more  annoying  since  she  had  come  to  seek  out  the  second 
volume of Voltaire’s Princess of Babylon,2 an indelicate book eminently suited to someone who 
had  been  educated  in  a  deeply  monarchist  and  religious  institution―an  educational 
masterpiece produced by the Sacred Heart of Jesus! At nineteen, this poor girl’s imagination 
already needed spicing, for her to find a novel interesting. 
Count Norbert appeared in the library toward three o’clock. He had come to scrutinize a 
newspaper,  so  he’d  be  able  to  talk  politics  that  night,  and  was  quite  pleased  to  find  Julien, 
whose existence he had forgotten. He behaved admirably toward him; he offered to take him 
riding. 
“My father will let us out until dinner.” 
Julien appreciated his “us,” and found him charming. 
“My God,” said Julien. “Were it a question of cutting down a fifty-foot tree, squaring it off, 
and sawing it into planks, I dare say I might manage very well. But I’ve been on horseback half 
a dozen times in my life.” 
“Fine,” said Norbert. “This will be the seventh.” 
In fact, Julien was recalling the King of ――― and his entry into Verrières, and thought 
himself an accomplished horseman. But in returning from the Bois de Boulogne he fell, right 
in  the  middle  of  Du  Bac  Street,3  while  trying  to  suddenly  avoid  a  carriage,  and  got  himself 
covered  with  mud.  It  was  fortunate  that  he’d  bought  two  suits.  At  dinner,  trying  to  make 
conversation, the marquis asked how his excursion had gone. Norbert hastily replied in very 
general terms. 
“The  count  exhibits  great  goodwill  toward  me,”  said  Julien.  “I  thank  him,  and  deeply 
appreciate his kindness. He was good enough to give me the gentlest, prettiest horse, but after 
all he could not tie me on and, failing that precaution, I fell right in the middle of that long 
street, near the bridge.” 
Mademoiselle  Mathilde  tried,  unsuccessfully,  to  hide  her  fit  of  laughter,  and  then 
indiscreetly requested a more detailed account. Julien behaved with great straightforwardness; 
he was gracious without knowing it. 
“I  expect  good  things  of  this  little  priest,”  said  the  marquis  to  the  academician.  “A 
provincial, and straightforward about such an event! This is something never seen before, and 
which  will  never  be  seen  again.  And  to  tell  about  his  misfortune  even  in  the  presence  of 
ladies!” 
                                                             
1 Francesco Reina (1772C1826), a lawyer and amateur poet whom Stendhal met in Milan. 
2 Considered scandalous by conservatives. 
3 Or Rue du Bac, one of the main roads in the Faubourg Saint-Germain. 
 
 
Chapter Three: The First Steps 
Julien made those who heard him feel so comfortable about his mishap that, when dinner 
was over, and the general conversation had taken a different direction, Mademoiselle Mathilde 
put more questions to her brother about the unlucky occasion. Her questions were elaborate, 
and took a very long time to deal with. Julien several times made eye contact with her and did 
not hesitate, though he had not been directly queried, to give her plain replies, and all three of 
them, in the end, were laughing, just like three young villagers in the woods. 
The next day, Julien attended two theology classes, and returned, in order to transcribe 
twenty  letters.  He  found  seated  very  near  him,  in  the  library,  a  young  man  carefully  but 
shabbily dressed, and a face stamped with envy. 
The marquis came in. 
“What are you doing here, Monsieur Tanbeau?” he said to the newcomer, his voice harsh. 
“I was thinking...” began the young man, smiling unpleasantly. 
“No, sir, you were not thinking. This is clearly a test of some sort, but a very unfortunate 
one.” 
Young Tanbeau got up, furious, and disappeared. He was the academician’s nephew, the 
man  who  was  Madame  de  La  Mole’s  friend,  and  planned  to  take  up  literary  work.  The 
academician had arranged for the marquis to hire him as a secretary. He’d been working in an 
isolated room and, having learned of the favors granted to Julien, wanted to share them. That 
morning he had come and set up his writing desk in the library. 
At four o’clock, after some hesitation, Julien ventured to go to Count Norbert. The latter, 
already mounted, was embarrassed but perfectly polite. 
“I imagine,” he said to Julien, “you’ll soon be going to riding school and, after a few weeks, 
I’ll be delighted to go riding with you.” 
“I wanted to thank you, most gratefully, for all the kindness you’ve shown me. Believe me, 
sir,” added Julien most seriously, “I am deeply aware of how much I owe you. If your horse was 
not injured by my clumsiness yesterday, and is available, I should like to ride him today.” 
“My dear Sorel, of course, but at your risk. Let’s pretend I’ve given you all the necessary 
reasons against it, as prudence requires. The fact is, it’s already four o’clock and we have no 
time to lose.” 
Once they were mounted: 
“What do I need to do, to keep from falling?” Julien asked the young count. 
“A great deal,” replied Norbert, roaring with laughter. “Among other things, hold yourself 
farther back.” 
Julien went at a brisk trot. They were in Louis XVI Square. 
“Ah,  you  foolhardy  youngster,”  said  Norbert.  “There  are  too  many  vehicles,  and  they’re 
driven by such reckless fellows! Once you fall to the ground, they’ll ride right over you. They 
have no interest in pulling up short and damaging their horses’ mouths.” 
Twenty times, Norbert saw Julien almost fall, but they returned without an accident. As 
they came in, the young count said to his sister: 
“Let me introduce you to a bold daredevil.” 
At  dinner,  speaking  to  his  father,  at  one  end  of  the  table,  he  did  full  justice  to  Julien’s 
bravery.  That  was  all  one  could  praise  about  his  horsemanship.  The  young  count  had 
overheard, that morning, stable hands grooming horses in the courtyard and having great fun 
over Julien’s fall, mocking him outrageously. 
For all their great kindness, Julien soon felt totally isolated in the middle of this family. All 
their customs struck him as peculiar, and he was deficient in virtually everything. His blunders 
were the joy and delight of all the valets. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Father Pirard had gone to take up his parish duties. “If Julien is a slender reed, let him 
perish. If he has the courage, let him figure this business out, all by himself,” he thought. 
Chapter Four: The De La Mole Mansion 
What’s he doing here? Is he happy here? Does he think they’ll ever like him? 
―Ronsard4 
If everything seemed peculiar to Julien, in the de La Moles’ splendid drawing rooms, this 
pale,  black-robed  young  man  seemed,  in  turn,  extremely  peculiar  to  those  who  bothered 
noticing  him.  Madame  de  La  Mole  suggested  to  her  husband  that,  on  days  when  they  had 
important people to dinner, Julien should be sent away on errands. 
“I  wish  to  carry  the  experiment  to  its  completion,”  replied  the  marquis.  “Father  Pirard 
assures me that we’re wrong to crush the self-respect of those we allow into our household. 
You can only push against something that pushes back, etc. The young man is unseemly only 
because his is not a face with which we are familiar. For the rest, he’s deaf and dumb.” 
“In order to properly locate myself, here,” Julien thought, “I need to keep a written record 
of the names and the natures of the people I find in these drawing rooms.” 
He set on the first line five or six friends of the house, people who, just in case, had been 
paying him court, thinking he was the marquis’s latest whim. They were poor wretches, more 
or less servile and colorless. But it must be said, in praise of this class of people (to be found, 
these days, in all aristocratic drawing rooms), that they were not deferential to everyone. Some 
of  them  would  allow  the  marquis  to  browbeat  them,  but  would  rebel  against  a  single  harsh 
word if addressed to them by Madame de la Mole. 
The  masters  of  the  house  suffered,  at  bottom,  from  too  much  pride  and  too  much 
boredom;  they  were  too  accustomed  to  insulting  others,  in  order  to  relieve  their  own 
boredom,  to  expect  their  visitors  to  be  genuine  friends.  Still,  except  on  rainy  days,  and  at 
moments of truly fierce boredom, which did not occur very often, they were always perfectly 
polite. 
If these five or six flatterers, who showed Julien such paternal friendship, were to desert 
the  de  La  Mole  house,  the  marquise  would  have  been  left  vulnerable  to  long  periods  of 
solitude, and, to women of her social rank, solitude is ghastly. It is, indeed, the very symbol of 
disgrace. 
The  marquis  was  exactly  right  for  his  wife;  he  made  sure  her  drawing  room  was 
sufficiently  garrisoned.  Not  however  with  people  of  their  own  rank:  he  viewed  his  new 
associates  as  insufficiently  noble  to  be  received  as  friends,  nor  sufficiently  amusing  to  be 
admitted to his home as inferiors. 
Julien did not decipher these puzzles until a good deal later. The government’s political 
decisions, much discussed among wealthy bourgeois families, were never broached by those in 
the marquis’s social class, except in serious emergencies. 
And still, despite this century’s reigning boredom, the need for amusement is such that, 
even on days when the de La Moles invited people for dinner, the marquis had barely left the 
room when everyone hurried away. In the marquis’s dining room, provided that you did not 
makes jokes about God, or priests, or the king, or those holding government posts, or artists 
patronized by the court, or all established ideas and institutions―provided that you did not 
                                                             
4 Pierre de Ronsard (1524C85), one of the greatest of French poets and a leading figure in the Pléiade school. 
 
 
Chapter Four: The De La Mole Mansion 
praise the satirist Béranger,5 or the opposition newspapers, or Voltaire, or Rousseau, or anyone 
who  indulged  himself,  even  a  very  little  bit,  in  freedom of  speech―and  provided,  above  all, 
that you never discussed politics―in the marquis’s dining room, you were free to talk about 
anything you liked. 
No income of a quarter of a million francs, nor the possession of the noblest decoration 
awarded by the state, had the power to oppose the de La Moles’ house rules. Any idea with a 
scrap of vitality seemed gross coarseness. Despite polished manners, complete courtesy, and a 
desire to please, boredom could be seen on every face. Young people who came because it was 
their duty, terrified at the prospect of saying something that might dimly resemble an idea, or 
that  might  disclose  their  knowledge  of  a  banned  book,  said  a  few  elegant  words  about 
Rossini,6 or about the weather, and then said nothing at all. 
Julien observed that conversation was usually kept alive by two viscounts and five barons, 
all of whom Monsieur de La Mole had known during their exile, during the Revolution. These 
gentlemen  had  incomes  ranging  from  six  to  eight  hundred  thousand  francs;  four  of  them 
favored Today’s News,7 and three preferred The French Gazette. One told a story, every day, 
about the sixteenth-century court of Charles IX, in which the word wonderful was freely used. 
Julien noted that this man wore five decorations; in general, the others limited themselves to 
three. 
On the other hand, there were regularly ten uniformed servants in attendance, and every 
quarter of an hour the diners were offered tea and ices. Just before midnight, they were served 
a sort of supper, with champagne. 
This was why, sometimes, Julien stayed to the very end; mostly, he could not quite fathom 
how anyone could listen, seriously, to the conversation regularly heard in this magnificently 
gilded dining room. Occasionally, he would watch the people who were talking, to see whether 
they  were  making  fun  of  what  they  themselves  were  saying.  “My  de  Maistre,”  he  thought, 
“whose book I know by heart, is a thousand times better, and still he’s quite boring.” 
Julien wasn’t the only one aware of the moral asphyxiation. Some took comfort in eating a 
great many ices, others in saying, the whole rest of the night, “I’ve just left the de La Moles, 
where I understood that Russia,” etc., etc. 
One of the hangers-on told Julien that, just six months ago, after twenty years of regular 
attendance  at  her  dinners,  Madame  de  La  Mole  had  repaid  poor  Baron  Le  Bourguignon,  an 
assistant governor since the Revolution, by having him promoted to a governorship. 
This noble event had strengthened the zeal of all these gentlemen: if they’d been irritated, 
before, by almost anything, now they were irritated by nothing. Lack of respect for them was 
seldom  blunt,  but  Julien  had  already  been  startled,  two  or  three  times,  by  brief  exchanges 
between  the  marquis  and  his  wife,  which  were  hard  on  those  seated  around  them.  These 
aristocrats never disguised their honest scorn for everyone not descended from those who rode 
in the king’s carriage.8 Julien could see that the word Crusade was the only one at which their 
                                                             
5  Pierre-Jean  de  Béranger  (1780C1857),  immensely  popular  songwriter  whose  satirical  songs  reflected,  and 
some said encouraged, the political discontent that led to the July Revolution of 1830. 
6  The  operas  of  Gioacchino  Antonio  Rossini  (1792C1868)  gained  popularity  in  Paris  throughout  the 
Restoration.  Stendhal,  although  he  preferred  Mozart  and  Cimarosa,  wrote  a  pamphlet  defending  Rossini’s 
work. 
7 For the conservative La Quotidienne, see note for p. 65, l. 20. The Gazette de France, the official organ of the court, 
was equally conservative. 
 
8 This was one of the cherished privileges accorded to the highest nobility of the ancien régime. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
faces took on an expression of deep seriousness, blended with respect. Usually, their respect 
carried with it a flavor of condescension. 
In  the  midst  of  such  magnificence,  and  such  boredom,  Julien  concerned  himself  with 
nothing but Monsieur de La Mole. He was pleased, one day, to hear the marquis protest that 
he was in no way involved in poor Le Bourguignon’s promotion. This was out of consideration 
for the marquise: Julien had heard the truth from Father Pirard. 
One  morning,  the  priest  was  working  with  Julien  in  the  marquis’s  library,  on  the 
interminable lawsuit against Father de Frilair: 
“Sir,” Julien asked suddenly. “Is dining every day with madame and the marquis one of my 
duties, or is it their kindness toward me?” 
“It’s  an  extraordinary  honor!”  replied  Father  Pirard,  shocked.  “Monsieur  N―――,  the 
academician,  who has paid  faithful court  for fifteen years, has never succeeded in obtaining 
such an honor for his nephew, Monsieur Tanbeau.” 
“I find it, sir, the most painful part of my job. The seminary didn’t bore me so completely. 
Sometimes, I’ve even seen Mademoiselle de La Mole yawning, though she ought to be used to 
the attentions of the regular guests. I worry about falling asleep. Can you please arrange it so I 
eat a forty-pence dinner in some out-of-the-way inn?” 
Father Pirard, a true social climber, was deeply aware of the honor of dining with a great 
lord. While he was struggling to understand Julien’s feelings, a slight noise made them both 
turn  their  heads.  Julien  saw  that  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole  had  been  listening.  His  face 
reddened. She had come looking for a book and had heard everything. It gave her some reason 
to think well of Julien. “That one isn’t down on his knees,” she thought, “like the old priest. 
God, but the priest’s ugly!” 
At dinner, Julien did not dare look at Mademoiselle de La Mole, but she kindly spoke to 
him.  That  day  they  were  expecting  many  fashionable  people,  and  she  urged  him  to  remain. 
Young Parisian girls have no great liking for people of a certain age, especially when they’re 
not well dressed. Julien did not need much cleverness to realize that Baron Le Bourguignon’s 
colleagues,  who  remained  in  the  dining  room,  had  the  honor  of  being  the  butt  of 
Mademoiselle de La Mole’s jests. That day, whether she was putting on a show or not, she was 
savage about bores in general. 
Mademoiselle de La Mole was at the center of a small group, which came together almost 
every  night  behind  the  marquise’s  immense  easy  chair.  Among  them  were  the  Marquis  de 
Croisenois, Count de Caylus, Vicomte de Luz, and two or three other young officers, friends 
either of Norbert or of his sister. These gentlemen seated themselves on a great blue sofa. At 
one end of the sofa, facing gay Mathilde, Julien sat silently on a small, rather low straw chair. 
His modest position was the envy of all the flatterers. Norbert came to the aid of his father’s 
young  secretary,  making  remarks  to  him  and,  once  or  twice  in  the  course  of  the  evening, 
mentioning  his  name.  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole  asked  Julien,  that  night,  how  high  the 
mountain  might  be,  on  which  stood  the  Besan04on  fort.  Julien  did  not  know  whether  it  was 
higher or lower than Montmartre. He often laughed cheerfully at what those around him, in 
this little group, were saying, but he felt quite unable to say anything of the sort himself. It was 
like a foreign language that he could understand, but which he could not speak. 
That day, Mathilde’s friends were having great fun, continually mocking those arriving in 
the huge room. Their preferred targets, initially, were the friends of the house, since they were 
better known. You can imagine whether Julien was paying close attention: it all interested him, 
both what they were talking about and their way of poking fun. 
 
 
Chapter Four: The De La Mole Mansion 
“Ah!” said Mathilde. “Here comes Monsieur Descoulis. He’s not wearing a wig anymore. 
Does he think he can get to be a governor by genius alone? He’s showing off that bald head, 
which according to him is stuffed with lofty thoughts.” 
“He’s  a  man  who  knows  everyone,”  said  the  Marquis  de  Croisenois.  “My  uncle,  the 
cardinal, sees him at his table all the time. He’s good at keeping lies about his friends alive for 
years, and he has two or three hundred friends. He understands how to nourish friendship: it’s 
his  special  talent.  You’ll  see  him  just  like  that,  in  the  wintertime,  starting  at  seven  in  the 
morning, in front of a friend’s door, splattered with mud just the way he is now. 
“He gets into quarrels, from time to time, and writes seven or eight angry letters. Then he 
makes it up, and writes seven or eight letters about the delights of friendship. But he shines to 
best advantage when he’s spewing out stuff about how frank and sincere he is, just an honest 
man who has no secrets hidden away in his heart. When he’s playing that game, you know he 
has a favor to ask. One of my uncle’s vicar-generals is wonderfully good at telling Monsieur 
Descoulis’s life, since the Restoration. I’ll bring him here.” 
“Bah!” said Count de Caylus. “I don’t trust a word of these tales. It’s professional jealousy 
between unimportant people.” 
“Monsieur Descoulis will have a place in history,” replied de Croisenois. “It was he who 
brought  about  the  Restoration,  along  with  Talleyrand  and  Pozzo  di  Borgo,  not  to  mention 
Father de Pradt.”9 
“Millions  have  passed  through  that  man’s  hands,”  said  Norbert,  “and  I’ve  never 
understood why he comes here and lets my father insult him―sometimes very nastily. ‘How 
many times have you betrayed your friends, my dear Descoulis?’ he called out to him the other 
day, from one end of the table to the other.” 
“But  has  he  really  betrayed  anybody?”  asked  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole.  “Anyway,  who 
hasn’t?” 
“Ho-ho,”  said  Count  de  Caylus  to  Norbert.  “That  famous  liberal,  Monsieur  Sainclair,  is 
here, and why the devil has he come? I’ve got to go over and talk to him, make him talk to me. 
They say he’s really got a brain.” 
“But how would your mother like that?” said Monsieur de Croisenois. “His ideas are so 
extravagant, so bountiful, so independent....” 
“Look,” said Mademoiselle de La Mole, “just see that independent man bowing almost to 
the ground as he greets Monsieur Descoulis. Look, he’s clasping his hand. I almost thought he 
was going to kiss it.” 
“So  Descoulis  gets  on  with  the  government,  and  better  than  we’d  thought,”  replied 
Monsieur de Croisenois. 
                                                             
9 Prince Charles-Maurice de Talleyrand Périgord (1754C1838) was the renegade bishop and legendarily agile 
politician  and  diplomat  who  served  virtually  every  government  from  the  Revolution  through  the  July 
Monarchy. After having been Napoleon’s principal adviser and foreign minister in the early years of his reign, 
Talleyrand turned on the emperor and became an active agent for the Bourbons in the closing months of the 
Empire, in 1814. As Louis XVIII’s foreign minister, he represented France at the Congress of Vienna. Pozzo di 
Borgo  (1764C1842)  was  a  Corsican  and  royalist  who  fled  France  during  the  Revolution  and  subsequently 
joined the government of the Russian Czar, Alexander I. Pozzo’s family had been political adversaries of the 
Bonapartes  in  Corsica,  and  he  carried  the  feud  to  the  much  larger  stage  of  European  politics.  As  one  of 
Alexander’s principal advisers at Vienna, in 1815, and then as Russia’s ambassador to France (1814C34), Pozzo 
worked  to  support  the  doctrine  of  legitimacy  and  maintain  the  Bourbons  on  the  throne  after  the  Hundred 
Days.  The  inclusion  of  Father  de  Pradt  (1759C1837),  who  was  mostly  an  agent  of  Talleyrand’s,  is  rather 
surprising and possibly ironic. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
“Sainclair’s come here to lobby himself into the academy,” said Norbert. “Croisenois, just 
see how he’s greeting Baron L―――.” 
“It would be less vulgar if he went down on his knees,” said Monsieur de Luz. 
“My dear Sorel,” said Norbert, “you’ve got such a good head on your shoulders, but since 
you’ve just come from the mountains, make sure you never bow to anyone the way our great 
poet just has, even if it’s God Himself.” 
“Ah,”  said  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole,  vaguely  imitating  how  the  servant  announced 
newcomers, “here comes the Great Brain Himself, Baron B09ton.” 
“I think even your servants make fun of him,” said Monsieur Caylus. “Baron B09ton! What 
a name.” 
“‘Names don’t mean a thing!’ he was telling us the other day,” said Mathilde. “Just imagine 
‘Le Duc de Bouillon,’10 the Duke of Hot Beef Broth, announced for the first time. I think people 
only need to get used to it...” 
Julien  walked  away.  Still  not  very  receptive  to  clever  irony,  charmingly  delicate,  he 
assumed that, before you could laugh at such a jest, it had to make some sense. He could not 
see the chatter of these young people as anything but universal insult, and he was shocked. His 
provincial  (or  English?)  prudery  even  thought  they  were  denigrating  people  out  of  jealousy, 
but there he was certainly mistaken. 
“Count Norbert,” he told himself, “whom I have seen write three drafts for a twenty-line 
letter to his colonel, would certainly be very pleased to have written, in his whole life, a single 
page as good as Monsieur Sainclair’s work.” 
His  departure  unnoticed,  he  being  of  no  importance,  Julien  first  went  over  to  another 
group, and then another still. He tracked Baron B09ton from a distance, and wished he could 
hear him. A most intelligent man, Baron B09ton seemed restless, only recovering a bit, Julien 
saw,  when  he’d  managed  three  or  four  sharp  remarks.  “That  kind  of  mind,”  Julien  thought, 
“needed a good deal of room.” 
The  baron  could  not  simply  speak  words:  to  be  brilliant,  he  had  to  have  at  least  four 
sentences, each of six lines. 
“That man doesn’t talk,  he expatiates,”  said  someone  behind  Julien.  Turning  around,  he 
blushed  with  pleasure  as  he  heard  Count  Chalvet’s  name.  His  was  the  best  mind  of  the 
century. Julien had often come across his name, both in Memories of Napoleon on Saint-Helena 
and  in  the  historical  fragments  dictated  by  Napoleon.  Count  Chalvet  clearly  did  not  waste 
words: his observations were clear, balanced, lively, profound. If he spoke of something, then 
and there the discussion progressed. He brought in facts; he was a delight to hear. But beyond 
that, in matters political he was a brazen cynic. 
“I’m  a  freethinker,  I  really  am,”  he  was  saying  to  a  man  wearing  three  decorations;  he 
appeared to be mocking his listener. “Why should anyone expect me, today, to hold the same 
opinions I had six weeks ago? If I did, my opinions would be tyrannical.” 
Four serious young men, standing around him, frowned: these gentlemen did not care for 
witty  remarks.  The  count  saw  he’d  gone  too  far.  Luckily,  he  noticed  decent  Monsieur 
Balland―an absolute hypocrite of decency. The count walked over and began talking to him; 
people drifted over, knowing poor Balland was going to be roasted alive. Wielding moralisms 
and  morality,  after  having  begun  his  break  into  society  in  ways  difficult  to  discuss  in  print, 
Balland had managed to marry an exceedingly rich wife (though he was horribly ugly), who 
died. He then married a second rich woman, who never appeared in society. He enjoyed, most 
humbly, an income of sixty thousand francs, and had flatterers of his own. Showing him no 
                                                             
10 One of the oldest names in France, Bouillon is also a homonym for bouillon, broth. 
 
 
Chapter Four: The De La Mole Mansion 
mercy,  Count  Chalvet  rehearsed  all  these  matters.  Soon,  there  was  a  circle  of  thirty  people 
around  them.  They  were  all  smiling,  even  the  serious  young  men―the  great  hope  of  the 
century. 
“Why does he come here?” thought Julien. “At Monsieur de La Mole’s, he’s everybody’s 
target.” He went over to Father Pirard, to ask him. 
Monsieur Balland slunk away. 
“Good!”  said  Norbert.  “There’s  one  of  my  father’s  spies  gone.  The  only  one  left  is  little 
lame Napier.” 
“Is that the answer to the riddle?” wondered Julien. “But if it is, why does Monsieur de La 
Mole have Monsieur Balland in the house?” 
Harsh  Father  Pirard  was  in  a  corner  of  the  room,  listening  to  new  arrivals  being 
announced, and frowning. 
“It’s a regular smugglers’ den,” he said, sounding like Basilio11 in Rossini’s Barber of Seville. 
“Everyone I see coming here is a degenerate.” 
Stern-faced Father Pirard knew nothing about high society. But he’d acquired, from his 
Jansenist  friends,  very  accurate  notions  about  men  who  got  into  aristocratic  drawing  rooms 
only because they maneuvered so very deftly, in the service of any political party whatever, or 
because  their  fortunes  were  of  scandalous  origin.  For  several  minutes,  that  night,  he  spoke 
from  the  heart,  answering  questions  Julien  put  to  him,  and  then  suddenly  broke  off,  deeply 
contrite  for  having  spoken  ill  of  so  many  people.  He  felt  himself  guilty  of  having  sinned. 
Fretful,  Jansenist,  and  convinced  of  the  duty  of  Christian  charity,  his  life  in  society  was  a 
perpetual struggle. 
“What a face on that Father Pirard!” said Mademoiselle de La Mole as Julien returned to 
her little group. 
Julien  was  annoyed,  but  she  was  right.  Certainly,  no  one  could  deny  that  Father  Pirard 
was the most respectable man in the entire room, but his blotchy complexion, racked by his 
pangs  of  conscience,  at  that  moment  did  make  him  hideous.  “Better  believe  what  faces  tell 
you!” thought Julien. “It’s precisely when Father Pirard’s scrupulousness scolds him for some 
little sin that he looks atrocious, while on Napier’s face―that universally recognized spy―all 
you see is pure, calm happiness.” But Father Pirard had made some large concessions to his 
new role: he had hired a manservant, and he dressed very well. 
Julien noticed something odd: every eye was turned toward the door, and the great room 
was almost silent. The servant was announcing famous Baron de Tully, on whom the elections 
had just focused universal attention. Julien stepped forward and saw him very well. The baron 
had been in charge of one of the electoral districts, and had had the bright idea of spiriting off 
the little slips of paper bearing every vote belonging to one of the parties. In compensation, 
however, he had replaced them, in proper proportion, with other little scraps of paper, bearing 
a name that better suited him. This peremptory maneuver had been noticed by a number of 
voters, who promptly congratulated Baron de Tully. The good man was still pallid from this 
great affair. A few wicked tongues had talked about jail cells. 
Monsieur  de  La  Mole  welcomed  him  with  an  intense  coldness.  The  poor  baron  left  in 
rather a hurry. 
“If he’s leaving us so quickly, he must be going to see that magician, Monsieur Comte,”12 
said Count Chalvet, and everyone laughed. 
                                                             
11 A bitter, jealous hypocrite in The Barber of Seville, in both Beaumarchias’s play of 1775 and Rossini’s opera of 
1816. 
12 An allusion to Monsieur de Tolly’s own magic act, making ballots disappear. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Poised  right  in  the  middle  of  some  great  lords  (standing  silent,  yet  schemers  all,  and 
among  the  most  corrupt  of  the  lot,  though  men  of  high  intelligence)  who,  that  night,  had 
followed one another into Monsieur de La Mole’s drawing room―there being talk of making 
him a government minister―little Tanbeau drew his social fencing sword for the first time. If 
he did not wield it particularly deftly, he made up for that, as you’ll see, by the forcefulness of 
his words. 
“Why  hasn’t  that  man  been  sent  to  prison  for  ten  years?”  he  was  saying,  just  as  Julien 
approached his group. “Reptiles like that ought to be thrown into the deepest dungeons. Let 
them die down in the darkness: otherwise their venom gets puffed up and becomes even more 
dangerous. What’s the point to fining him a few thousand francs? Maybe he’s poor―all right, 
so much the better. But his party will pay the fine. He should have been fined five hundred 
francs and sent to the dungeons for ten years.” 
“My  God!”  thought  Julien.  “Who  is  the  monster  they’re  talking  about?”  He  admired  his 
colleague’s  vehement  tone  and  wild  gestures.  Just  then,  the  lean,  drawn  face  of  the 
academician’s favorite nephew was ghastly to look on. Julien discovered, soon enough, that he 
was talking about the greatest poet of their time, Béranger. 
“Oh,  you  monster!”  Julien  murmured,  great  tears  rolling  down  his  cheeks.  “You  little 
beggar! I’ll get you for that.” 
“But just see,” he thought, “these last hopes of Monsieur de La Mole’s party, a party he 
helps lead! And that famous poet who Tanbeau is slandering―what medals, what sinecures he 
couldn’t  have  had,  if  he’d  sold  himself―not  to  Prime  Minister  de  Nerval’s13  completely 
colorless government, but to one of the others, more or less respectable, that have since taken 
power!” 
Father  Pirard,  from  far  off,  beckoned  to  Julien;  Monsieur  de  La  Mole  had  just  said 
something to him. But by the time Julien was free to make his way over, finally able to slip 
away from a bishop’s moaning and groaning, to which he’d been listening with lowered eyes, 
he  found  him  cornered  by  that  vile  little  Tanbeau.  The  little  monster,  who  detested  Father 
Pirard as the source of Julien’s special favor, had now come to pay court to him. 
“When will death free us from that withered old rottenness?” With biblical energy, this is 
how the little man of letters spoke of worthy, but Whiggish, Lord Holland.14 His special skill 
was  to  have  accumulated  biographies  of  everyone  alive;  he  had  just  been  making  a  rapid 
review of everyone who might aspire to any influence, in the reign of William IV,15 the new 
King of England. 
Father Pirard went into the next room; Julien followed him. 
“I must warn you: the marquis does not care for scribblers. It’s his only aversion. If you’re 
versed in Latin; in Greek, if you can; if you know Egyptian history, and Persian, etc., he’ll honor 
and protect you as a scholar. But go and write a single page of French, especially on matters 
which are serious and above your social position, he’ll label you a scribbler and you’ll be out of 
                                                             
13  A  possible  allusion  to  Comte  Joseph  de  Villèle  (1773C1854),  who  rose  to  power  as  an  ultra  in  1821,  but 
proved insufficiently reactionary and was forced out in 1828. He was replaced by the fanatical and politically 
incompetent Jules de Polignac (1780C1847), whose extremism provoked the July Revolution. 
14 Charles James Fox (1749C1806), rival of William Pitt (see note for p. 361, l. 31) and leader of the opposition 
Whig party in the House of Commons and then the House of Lords. He supported both the American and―
early  on―French  revolutions  and  sought  a  rapprochement  with  Bonaparte  until  1804,  when  he  became 
persuaded of the new emperor’s dangerous ambitions. 
15 Took the throne on the death of his brother, George IV, in 1830. 
 
 
Chapter Four: The De La Mole Mansion 
luck. Living as you do in a great lord’s house, remember what the Duke de Castries16 said of 
d’Alembert17 and Rousseau: ’They argue about everything, and don’t have any income worth 
talking about.’” 
“They  find  out  everything,”  Julien  thought,  “here,  too,  just  as  in  the  seminary.”  He  had 
written eight or ten rather rhetorical pages, a kind of eulogy of the old surgeon-major who, he 
always  said,  had  made  a  man  of  him.  “And  that  little  notebook,”  he  reminded  himself,  “has 
always been locked away!” He went up to his room, burned the manuscript, and returned to 
the drawing room. The radiant rogues were all gone; only the men with medals were left. 
Around the table, just brought in by the servants, with everything set out and ready, there 
were  seven  or  eight  distinguished  women  of  thirty  or  thirty-five,  deeply  devout,  very 
conceited. Madame de Fervaques, a gay and shining marshall’s widow, came in, busily making 
excuses for her late arrival. It was after midnight; she went to sit next to the marquise. Her 
appearance moved Julien: she had Madame de Rênal’s eyes, and her look. 
Mademoiselle de La Mole’s group was still well populated. She and her friends had been 
making  fun  of  the  unlucky  Count  de  Thaler.18  This  was  the  only  son  of  the  famous  Jew, 
celebrated for the wealth he’d acquired, lending money to kings so they could oppress their 
own people. The old Jew had just died, leaving his son an income of three hundred thousand 
francs a month and a name, alas, only too well known! This peculiar position would require a 
mind of great simplicity, or one with a powerful will. 
Unfortunately, the count was only a nice man, totally wrapped in pretensions created by 
his flatterers. 
Monsieur  de  Caylus  declared  they  had  puffed  him  up  with  a  determination  to  seek 
Mademoiselle de La Mole’s hand (to whom the Marquis de Croisenois, who would be a duke, 
but with an income of only fifteen thousand francs, was paying court). 
“Ah, don’t accuse him of being determined,” said Norbert, woefully. 
What was most lacking in poor Count de Thaler, in all likelihood, was indeed willpower. 
Looking at this aspect of the young man, he would have made a worthy king. Endlessly taking 
advice from all sides, he did not have the tenacity to follow any suggested course to its end. 
His  face,  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole  declared,  was  in  itself  sufficient  to  inspire  her  with 
eternal joy. It was an odd blend of nervousness and disappointment, though from time to time 
it clearly displayed flushes of self-importance and of the sharp voice to be expected from the 
richest man in France, who after all was rather good-looking and not yet thirty-six. “He’s shyly 
insolent,”  said  Monsieur  de  Croisenois.  Count  de  Caylus,  Norbert,  and  two  or  three  other 
young men with mustaches joked as they liked about him, bantering back and forth, without 
his knowing  what they were up to. And then, as one o’clock sounded, they sent him on his 
way: 
“Are your famous Arab horses waiting at the gate, and in this weather?” Norbert asked 
him. 
“No, these are new, and cost a lot less,” replied Monsieur de Thaler. “The left-hand horse 
cost  me  five  thousand  francs,  and  that  on  the  right  was  only  three  thousand.  But  do  please 
understand  that  I  use  the  latter  only  at  night,  because  his  trot  perfectly  matches  the  other 
one’s.” 
                                                             
16  A  powerful  aristocrat  and  accomplished  soldier  under  the  ancien  régime.  This  phrase  appears  to  be 
Stendhal’s, though it does typify the attitude of many nobles (as well as bourgeois) toward poets and artists. 
17 Jean Le Rond d’Alembert (1717C83), philosophe, collaborator of Diderot’s in the Encyclopédie project. 
18 Probably modeled on the Baron de Rothschild. Thaler was an old German currency, the origin of the word 
dollar. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Norbert’s question had made the count think it was proper for a man like him to really 
care about his horses, and not leave them out to get soaked. He left, and the other men soon 
went as well, still making fun of him. 
“So,” reflected Julien, hearing their laughter as they went down the stairs, “they’ve let me 
see the other extreme of my situation! I don’t have an income of four hundred francs, and here 
I am, side by side with a man who has an income of four hundred francs an hour―and they’re 
making fun of him.. .. Seeing such things can cure you of jealousy.” 
 
 
Chapter Five: Sensitivity and a Devout Aristocratic Lady 
Chapter Five: Sensitivity and a Devout Aristocratic Lady 
There, an idea with any life in it seems gross, they’re so used to flat, dull language. Watch out, if you let 
them hear you talk well! 
―Faublas1 
After  several  months  of  being  on  trial,  here  is  where  Julien  had  gotten  to,  the  day  the 
house  steward  handed  him  his  third-quarter  salary.  Monsieur  de  La  Mole  had  given  him 
responsibility for his properties in Brittany and Normandy; Julien had to make frequent trips. 
He was also put in charge of correspondence dealing with the celebrated case against Father 
de Frilair. Father Pirard gave him the help he needed. 
Using  short  marginal  notes  scribbled  by  the  marquis,  Julien  dealt  with  documents  of 
every sort; of the letters he composed, virtually all were signed and sent. 
His  professors  at  the  theological  school  complained  he  did  not  work  hard  enough,  but 
still  viewed  him  as  their  best  student.  All  these  labors,  performed  with  the  ardor  of  stifled 
ambition, had quickly sapped the fresh complexion he’d brought from the provinces. In the 
eyes  of  the  young  seminarians  who  were  his  classmates,  Julien’s  pallor  was  a  sign  of 
worthiness;  he  found  them  a  good  deal  less  wretched,  and  much  less  worshipful  of  money, 
than those in Besan04on; and they thought him a consumptive. The marquis had given him a 
horse. Worried that his classmates might see him out on horseback, Julien told them this was 
exercise, and had been prescribed by his doctors. 
Father  Pirard  had  taken  him  to  several  Jansenist  communities.  Julien  was  astonished: 
religion was inextricably tied, in his mind, to hypocrisy and the hope of acquiring riches. He 
admired  these  pious,  stern  men  who  did  not  concern  themselves  with  making  ends  meet. 
Several Jansenists had become friendly, and given him advice. It was a new world opening in 
front of him. At one Jansenist community he met Count Altamira,2 nearly six feet tall, devout 
and a liberal, who had been condemned to death in his native country. He was struck by the 
strange contrast between piety and love of liberty. 
Julien’s relationship with Count Norbert was somewhat strained. Norbert had seen Julien 
overreacting  to  some  of  his  friends’  jests.  His  manners  having  once  or  twice  been  proven 
inadequate, Julien never allowed himself to speak to Mademoiselle de La Mole. Everyone was 
perfectly  polite  to  him,  but  he  felt  himself  less  well  regarded.  His  provincial  good  sense 
explained what had happened by the vulgar proverb: New meat, new appetite. 
Perhaps  he  had  learned  a  bit,  since  those  early  days,  or  more  likely  his  initial 
enchantment with Parisian urbanity had worn off. 
He had no sooner put down his pen than he fell into the grip of deadly boredom. It was 
the  withering  effect  of  a  politeness  that  was  wonderful,  but  never  unguarded,  perfectly 
calibrated to social status: this was the mark of high society. But no feeling heart could ignore 
its artificiality. 
Of  course,  provincial  society  is  rather  common,  and  impolite.  But  provincials  let 
themselves  go  a  bit  when  they  answer  you.  In  the  de  La  Mole  house,  no  one  ever  violated 
Julien’s  self-respect,  but  quite  often,  at  the  end  of  the  day,  he  wanted  to  weep.  In  the 
provinces,  a  café  waiter  takes  a  genuine  interest  if  you  hurt  yourself  coming  in,  but  if  the 
nature of your accident in some way shames you, he will repeat ten times over the words you 
                                                             
1 A character in the novel Les Amours du chevalier de Faublas, by Louvret de Couvray, published in 1787. The 
chevalier’s comic adventures in love lead to a tragic ending. 
2  Many  scholars  believe  Altamira  to  be  based  on  the  Neapolitan  Count  di  Fiore,  who  was  a  friend  of 
Stendhal’s. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
cannot bear to hear. In Paris, people are careful to hide their laughter, but you remain forever 
a stranger. 
Let  us  pass  over  in  silence  the  many  petty  events  that  might  have  made  Julien  look 
ridiculous, had he not been, after a fashion, beneath ridicule. His insane sensitivity made him 
commit  thousands  of  blunders.  His  amusements  were  entirely  precautionary:  he  practiced 
with his pistol, every day, and was one of the best pupils of the very best fencing master. The 
moment  he  had  a  bit  of  free  time,  instead  of  spending  it  with  a  book,  as  he  used  to  do,  he 
hurried  to  the  riding  school,  requesting  that  he  be  given  the  most  vicious  horses  they  had. 
When he rode with the director of the school, he was regularly thrown by his horse. 
The marquis found him handy, because he worked so doggedly, he was silent, and he had 
a  good  mind;  gradually,  everything  difficult  to  untangle  was  entrusted  to  him.  The  marquis 
himself,  when  his  high  ambitions  did  not  claim  his  attention,  was  an  excellent  man  of 
business: positioned as he was to know what would be happening, he played the market well. 
He bought houses, he bought woodland, but he had a quick temper. He gave away thousands 
of  francs,  and  fought  lawsuits  over  hundreds.  Passionate  rich  men  go  into  business  for 
amusement, not for results. What the marquis needed was a head steward who would clarify 
his finances and put them in order, ready to hand. 
Madame  de  La  Mole,  though  by  nature  restrained,  sometimes  made  fun  of  Julien. 
Anything  unexpected,  spawned  by  sensitivity,  is  every  great  lady’s  nightmare,  since  it  is  the 
direct  opposite  of  propriety.  Two  or  three  times,  the  marquis  defended  him:  “He  may  seem 
silly in your drawing room, but at his desk he’s heroic.” For his part, Julien fancied he knew the 
marquise’s secret. She took the trouble to find everything of interest the moment Baron de La 
Joumate was announced. She was cold, her face totally inexpressive. He was small, slim, ugly, 
very well dressed, lived his life at court and, for the most part, said nothing about anything. 
That was how his mind worked. Madame de La Mole would have been passionately happy, for 
the first time in her life, had she been able to make him her daughter’s husband. 
 
 
Chapter Six: Pronunciation 
Chapter Six: Pronunciation 
Their lofty mission is to calmly judge the petty events of which nations’ daily lives are composed. Their 
wisdom  is  expected  to  keep  great  anger  from  coming  out  of  petty  issues,  or  out  of  events  which  rumor 
transforms, in carrying them abroad. 
―Gratius 1 
For someone who had in a sense just landed, whose pride kept him from ever asking a 
question,  Julien  did  not  make  many  truly  serious  mistakes.  One  day,  thrust  into  a  café  on 
Saint-Honoré Street, when a sudden shower struck, a tall man in a heavy frock coat, made of 
wool interwoven with beaver hair, was so startled by Julien’s somber stare that he stared right 
back, exactly as Mademoiselle Amanda’s lover had done, one day in Besan04on. 
Julien had too often blamed himself for allowing that insult to go by to tolerate this stare. 
He  demanded  an  explanation.  The  frock-coated  man  replied  with  the  filthiest  insults. 
Everyone in the café gathered around them; passersby stopped in the doorway. As a cautious 
provincial, Julien never went out without his pistols; his hand closed convulsively on them, in 
his pocket. But he was sensible, and limited himself to repeating, regularly, “Sir, your address? 
You are despicable.” 
At last, his firmness in employing only these six words made an impression on the crowd. 
“Damn! That man who’s talking all the time has got to give him his address.” 
The frock-coated man, hearing other people say the same thing, threw five or six calling 
cards at Julien. Luckily, none of them hit our hero, and he had vowed not to use his pistols 
unless he was touched. The frock coat left, though not without coming back, over and over, 
shaking his fist and hurling insults. 
Julien  was  soaked  in  perspiration.  “So  scum  like  him  can  do  this  to  me!”  he  said  to 
himself, furious. “How can I smother this humiliating sensitivity?” 
Where would he find a second? He had no friends. He had had a few acquaintances, but 
after six weeks they had all dropped him. “I am unsocial, and I’m being harshly punished for 
it,” he thought. At last he remembered a man named Liéven, who had been a lieutenant in the 
Ninety-sixth, a poor devil with whom he had often fenced. He was honest with this man. 
“I’ll be glad to be your second,” Liéven said, “but on one condition. If you don’t wound 
your man, you’ll fight with me, on the spot.” 
“Agreed,” said Julien, delighted, and they went to find Monsieur C. de Beauvoisis, at the 
address shown on his cards, in the heart of Faubourg Saint-Germain. 
It was seven in the morning. Not until he was being announced at the man’s house did 
Julien reflect that this might well be Madame de Rênal’s young relative, formerly of the French 
Embassy  at  Rome,  or  Naples,  who  had  given  the  singer,  Géronimo,  a 
letter  of 
recommendation. 
Julien had handed the tall servant one of the cards thrown at him the night before, and 
one of his own. 
They  were  kept  waiting,  he  and  his  second,  for  a  full  three-quarters  of  an  hour;  finally 
they  were  ushered  into  a  wonderfully  elegant  room.  There  they  found  a  tall  young  man, 
dressed up like a tailor’s dummy; his face displayed both the beauty and the insignificance of 
the  Greek  ideal.  His  remarkably  narrow  head  bore  a  pyramid  of  intensely  blond  hair, 
elaborately curled, not a hair out of place. “This damned fop,” thought the lieutenant of the 
Ninety-sixth,  “made  us  wait  so  he  could  get  himself  all  curled.”  The  man’s  striped  dressing 
gown, his morning trousers, everything right down to his embroidered slippers, was absolutely 
                                                             
1 This quote cannot be identified with any known Latin author named Gratius. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
in  fashion  and  wonderfully  trim.  His  face,  noble  and  empty,  indicated  that  his  ideas  were 
proper, and very rare: he was the absolute model of the amiable good fellow, horrified by the 
unexpected and by all witty remarks; he was steeped in sobriety. 
The lieutenant of the Ninety-sixth having explained that keeping a man waiting so long, 
especially after having thrown your card in his face, was yet another insult, Julien stalked into 
Monsieur de Beauvoisis’s rooms. He meant to be insolent, though at the same time he wished 
to preserve good form. 
He  was  so  startled  by  Monsieur  de  Beauvoisis’s  gentle  good  manners,  his  demeanor  at 
once  formal,  weighty,  and  pleased  with  himself,  and  by  the  admirable  elegance  which 
surrounded him, that in the twinkling of an eye he dropped all thought of insolence. This was 
not  the  man  he’d  encountered  the  night  before.  He  was  so  stunned  to  find  someone  thus 
distinguished, instead of the coarse fellow he’d met in the café, that he was unable to say a 
thing. He handed over one of the cards that had been thrown at him. 
“It is my name,” said the stylish man, in whom Julien’s black garments and the wickedly 
early hour of seven in the morning inspired very little respect. “But I don’t understand, on my 
honor....” 
The way he pronounced these last words partially restored Julien’s annoyance. 
“I’m here to fight with you, monsieur.” And he quickly explained the whole thing. 
Monsieur Charles de Beauvoisis, after more mature reflection, was satisfied by the cut of 
Julien’s black clothing. “That’s from Staub,2 I see it quite clearly,” he said to himself while he 
listened.  “That  vest  is  in  good  taste;  his  boots  are  fine.  But  on  the  other  hand,  those  black 
clothes at this hour of the morning! ... They’ll give him a better chance of dodging the bullet,” 
said the Chevalier de Beauvoisis to himself. 
Having determined these matters, he resumed his perfect politeness, and treated Julien 
almost as if they were equals. It was rather a long conversation, and a delicate business, but in 
the end Julien could not deny the evidence. The very well-born young man he was facing did 
not in any way resemble the coarse person who, the night before, had so insulted him. 
Julien found it very hard to leave; he felt obliged to prolong the discussion. He noted the 
Chevalier  de  Beauvoisis’s  self-sufficiency―and  he  had  carefully  described  himself  as 
“chevalier,” in speaking to Julien, shocked at having been addressed simply as “monsieur.” 
Our hero admired the sobriety, mixed with a certain modest conceit, that de Beauvoisis 
never discarded for an instant. Julien was startled to see the odd way his tongue moved, as he 
pronounced his words...But in the end, no matter what, there was not the slightest reason to 
quarrel with him. 
With  immense  courtesy,  the  young  diplomat  offered  nevertheless  to  do  battle,  but  the 
former lieutenant of the Ninety-sixth, having sat there for an hour, his legs parted, his hands 
on  his  legs,  his  elbows  akimbo,  had  decided  that  his  friend  Monsieur  Sorel  had  no  interest 
whatever in picking a German-style quarrel with a man, because someone else had stolen that 
man’s calling cards. 
Julien  left  in  a  bad  mood.  The  Chevalier  de  Beauvoisis’s  carriage  was  waiting  in  the 
courtyard, in front of the steps. By chance, Julien looked up and recognized the coachman as 
his man from the night before. 
Seeing  him,  grasping  at  his  heavy  coat,  throwing  him  down  from  the  driver’s  seat,  and 
covering him with blows from his own whip, was a moment’s work. Two servants decided to 
defend their comrade; they hit at Julien and, at the same time, Julien drew one of his pistols 
and fired at them; they ran off. All this, too, took only a moment. 
                                                             
2 A fashionable tailor in the rue de Richelieu. 
 
 
Chapter Six: Pronunciation 
The Chevalier de Beauvoisis came down the steps with amusing somberness, repeating in 
his lordly accent, “What’s this? What’s this?” He was clearly anxious to know, but diplomatic 
aloofness did not permit him to show any greater interest. Once he knew what had been going 
on, hereditary arrogance was still visibly mixed with the cool, casual good humor that ought 
never to leave a diplomat’s face. 
The lieutenant of the Ninety-sixth understood that Monsieur de Beauvoisis now wanted 
to fight, and  he tried, diplomatically, to  preserve for his friend the advantages of taking the 
initiative. 
“This time,” he exclaimed, “there’s cause for a duel!” 
“More than enough, I should think,” replied the diplomat. 
“This rascal is dismissed,” he told his servants. “Let someone else climb up.” The carriage 
door  was  opened;  the  chevalier  absolutely  insisted  that  Julien  and  his  second  precede  him. 
They hunted up one of Monsieur de Beauvoisis’s friends, who directed them to a quiet spot. 
There was a most pleasant conversation, on the way. The only odd aspect was the diplomat’s 
dressing gown. 
“These gentlemen,” thought Julien, “although they’re noblemen, are not anything like so 
boring  as  those  who  dine  with  Monsieur  de  La  Mole.  And  I  see  why,”  he  added,  a  moment 
later. “They allow themselves indecorous talk.” Some dancers were mentioned, who had been 
honored by the audience, at a ballet given the previous evening. The gentlemen told certain 
spicy  stories  that  neither  Julien  nor  his  second,  the  lieutenant  of  the  Ninety-sixth,  had  ever 
heard.  Julien  was  not  so  stupid  that  he  pretended  to  know  them;  he  openly  admitted  his 
ignorance.  His  candor  pleased  the  chevalier’s  friend;  he  had  told  these  stories  in  very 
substantial detail, and told them extremely well. 
One thing infinitely astonished Julien. A temporary altar, being erected in the middle of 
the  street,  for  the  Corpus  Christi  procession,  forced  the  carriage  to  stop  for  a  moment.  The 
gentlemen permitted themselves several witticisms: the parish priest, as they told it, was an 
archbishop’s  son.  Nothing  of  the  sort  could  possibly  have  been  said  under  the  roof  of  the 
Marquis de La Mole, who wanted to become a duke. 
The  duel  lasted  only  a  moment.  Julien  had  been  shot  in  the  arm;  they  tied  it  up  with 
handkerchiefs;  they  moistened  it  with  brandy;  and  the  Chevalier  de  Beauvoisis  very  politely 
requested  that  he  be  allowed  to  bring  Julien  home,  in  the  same  carriage  that  had  brought 
them. When Julien gave his address as the de La Mole residence, he saw the young diplomat 
and his friend exchange glances. Julien’s cab was still where he had left it, but he found these 
gentlemen’s  conversation  infinitely  more  amusing  than  that  of  the  good  lieutenant  of  the 
Ninety-sixth. 
“My  God!”  thought  Julien.  “A  duel―that’s  all  there  is  to  it!  How  glad  I  am  to  have 
recognized  that  coachman!  How  miserable  I’d  have  been  to  endure  yet  another  insult  in  a 
café!”  The  amusing  conversation  went  on  almost  without  interruption.  Julien  realized  that 
diplomatic affectation had some purpose. 
“So boredom,” he told himself, “isn’t built into conversation among people of high birth! 
These two joke about the Corpus Christi procession; they let themselves tell rather scabrous 
stories,  with  lots  of  vivid  details.  Really,  they  fall  short  only  when  it  comes  to  rationality  in 
political matters, and they more than compensate with their gracious speech and the perfect 
rightness of what they say.” Julien felt a strong liking for them. “How happy I’d be, seeing them 
often!” 
They had barely driven away when the Chevalier de Beauvoisis went hurriedly in search of 
information. There was not much to learn. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
The chevalier was most anxious to know with whom he had fought a duel. Might it be 
proper to pay him a call? What little he had learned was not encouraging. 
“This  is  perfectly  awful!”  he  said  to  his  second.  “How  could  I  possibly  admit  to  having 
fought a duel with Monsieur de La Mole’s secretary, and all because my coachman stole those 
calling cards.” 
“Certainly, this would offer an opportunity for ridicule.” 
That same evening, the Chevalier de Beauvoisis and his friend began to say, everywhere 
they  went,  that  Monsieur  Sorel,  in  addition  to  being  an  irreproachable  young  man,  was  the 
natural son of one of the Marquis de La Mole’s close friends. There was no difficulty having the 
tale  accepted.  Once  it  was  properly  in  place,  the  young  diplomat  and  his  friend  could 
condescend to pay visits to Julien, during the two weeks he spent in his room. Julien admitted 
to them that he’d never in his life been to the opera. 
“That’s awful,” he was told. “There’s nowhere else to go. The first time you’re allowed out, 
you must come to Rossini’s Count Ory.”3 
who was then having a great success. 
At  the  opera,  Chevalier  de  Beauvoisis  introduced  him  to  the  famous  singer,  Géronimo, 
Julien virtually courted the chevalier. He was enchanted by the young man’s self-respect, 
blended with a mysterious weightiness and foppishness. For example: the chevalier stammered 
a bit, having often been honored by the company of a very great lord who suffered from this 
defect.  Julien  had  never  known,  united  in  one  person,  such  entertaining  ridiculousness  and 
such perfect manners, of the sort a poor provincial could only try to imitate. 
Julien  was  seen  at  the  opera  with  the  Chevalier  de  Beauvoisis;  the  relationship  made 
people talk about him. 
“Well!” Monsieur de La Mole said to him, one day. “So now you’re the natural son of a 
wealthy man from Franche-Comté, who happens to be my close friend?” 
The marquis cut off Julien’s reply; our hero wanted to protest that he had not in any way 
contributed to, or sanctioned, this rumor. 
“Monsieur  de  Beauvoisis  was  not  anxious  to  be  known  for  fighting  duels  with  a 
carpenter’s son.” 
“I  realize  that,  I  quite  realize  that,”  said  Monsieur  de  La  Mole.  “Now  it’s  up  to  me  to 
regularize this tale, which I find useful. But I have a favor to ask of you, and it won’t cost you 
more than a slender half hour of your time. Every day there is to be an opera, go and watch as 
high society makes its exit. I still see in you some provincial mannerisms, which you need to be 
rid of. Besides, it’s not a bad thing to know, even by sight, some of the important people to 
whom, some day, I might send you on an errand. Go by the box office so they’ll know who you 
are. They’ll admit you without any difficulty.” 
                                                             
3 A success for Rossini, it debuted in 1828. 
 
 
Chapter Seven: An Attack of Gout 
Chapter Seven: An Attack of Gout 
And so I was promoted, not because I deserved it, but because my master had the gout. 
―Bertolotti1 
The reader may well be startled by this free and almost friendly tone, but we’ve forgotten 
to  mention  that,  for  six  weeks,  the  marquis  had  been  confined  to  his  home  by  an  attack  of 
gout. 
Mademoiselle de La Mole and her mother were at Hyères, visiting the marquise’s mother. 
Count Norbert saw his father only at intervals: they were on excellent terms, but had nothing 
to say, one to the other. Monsieur de La Mole, thus reduced to Julien, was amazed to find that 
his  secretary  really  had  ideas.  He  had  Julien  read  the  newspapers;  the  young  secretary  was 
soon  able  to  pick  out  the  interesting  passages.  There  was  a  new  paper,  which  the  marquis 
loathed; he had sworn never to read it, but talked about it every day. Julien laughed. Annoyed 
at  the  contemporary  world,  the  marquis  had  him  read  Livy;  Julien’s  improvised  translation 
from the Latin pleased him. 
One  day  the  marquis  said,  his  voice  taking  on  the  overpoliteness  that  often  simply 
irritated Julien: 
“My dear Sorel, allow me to present you with a blue suit. When you’ve had a chance to 
fetch  it,  come  back  here.  You’ll  have  become,  in  my  eyes,  the  younger  brother  of  Count  de 
Chaulnes―that is, the son of my old friend, the duke.” 
Julien  did  not  particularly  understand  what  this  was  all  about,  but  that  same  night  he 
paid  a  visit,  wearing  the  blue  suit.  The  marquis  treated  him  like  an  equal.  Julien  was  quite 
sensitive enough to appreciate true politeness, but he did not understand its subtler aspects. 
He  would  have  sworn,  before  this  new  whim,  that  the  marquis  could  not  possibly  have 
received him with greater respect. “What a gifted man!” Julien said to himself. When he rose to 
leave, the marquis apologized, since his gout prevented him from showing Julien to the door. 
The whole strange business was troubling. “Is he making fun of me?” Julien wondered. He 
sought Father Pirard’s advice; less polite than the marquis, the good priest responded only by 
whistling and changing the subject. Next morning, Julien wore his black suit when he went to 
the marquis, carrying a letter case full of letters to be signed. He was received just as, before 
this new development, he had always been received. That evening, wearing the blue suit, the 
marquis once again behaved differently, exactly as polite as he’d been the first time Julien wore 
blue. 
“Seeing that you’re not too profoundly bored, making these kind visits to a poor old man,” 
the  marquis  told  him,  “why  don’t  you  tell  him  all  the  trifling  episodes  of  your  life,  but 
straightforwardly and without thinking about anything except telling them clearly and in such 
a  fashion  that  they’ll  be  entertaining?  Entertainment  is  essential,”  the  marquis  continued. 
“That’s life’s only reality. A man can hardly save my life each and every day, or be perpetually 
giving me gifts of a million francs. But if I had old Rivarol2 here, every day, right here next to 
my couch, he’d take away an hour of boredom and pain. I knew him well, in Hamburg, when 
we were in exile.” 
And the marquis told Julien tales of Antoine Rivarol among the locals of Hamburg: it took 
four of them to understand one witty remark. 
                                                             
1 A politically active Italian poet (1784C1860). 
2 Count Antoine de Rivarol (1743C1801), a writer and aristocrat famous for his wit and conversation. A fierce 
opponent of the Revolution, he had to flee in 1792 because of his published attacks. Hamburg was one of the 
many German cities where émigrés (see note for p. 195, l. 26) awaited the fall of their enemies. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Reduced  to  the  company  of  his  little  ecclesiastic,  Monsieur  de  La  Mole  sought  to  liven 
him up. He pushed at Julien’s pride. Since he’d been asked to tell the truth, Julien made up his 
mind to tell everything. But he was silent about two matters: his fanatical adoration of a man 
whose very name would put the marquis in a foul mood, and his own utter lack of faith, which 
did not fit well with a priestly future. The episode with the Chevalier de Beauvoisis fitted very 
well indeed. The marquis laughed until he cried, hearing the scene at the café in Saint-Honoré 
Street, when the coachman had covered our hero with filthy insults. It was a time of perfect, 
frank openness between protector and protected. 
Monsieur  de  La  Mole  grew  more  interested  in  this  strange  person.  To  start  with,  he 
indulged Julien’s absurdities, in order to be entertained by them, but soon found it even more 
interesting to gently correct the young man’s faulty sense of the world. “Other provincials who 
come to Paris,” the marquis thought, “admire everything. This one hates everything. They’re 
dreadfully affected; he’s not affected enough, so the fools take him for a fool.” 
Winter’s cold chills prolonged his attack of gout; it lasted some months. 
“One  grows  attached  to  a  fine  spaniel,”  the  marquis  said  to  himself,  “so  why  do  I  feel 
ashamed of growing attached to this little ecclesiastic? He’s odd, but fresh. I treat him like a 
son. All right: What harm does that do? This whim, if it lasts, will cost me a two-thousand-
franc diamond, in my will.” 
Having  once  understood  Julien’s  steadiness,  the  marquis  gave  him  new  responsibilities 
every day. 
instructions on the same subject. 
Julien was frightened to discover that this great lord sometimes gave him contradictory 
This  could  seriously  compromise  him.  Accordingly,  Julien  regularly  brought  along  an 
account book, in which he wrote down his orders, and the marquis initialed them. Julien hired 
a clerk, who copied every directive, in each and every instance, into  a private notebook. All 
letters were copied into the same book. 
It seemed, at first, the most ridiculous, boring procedure in the world. But in less than 
two  months  the  marquis  became  aware  of  its  advantages.  Julien  suggested  that  they  hire 
another  clerk,  with  banking  experience,  who  would  maintain  double-entry  accounts  for  all 
receipts, and all expenses, in connection with Julien’s property administration. 
These procedures so enlightened the marquis about the actual state of his affairs that he 
could, with great pleasure, undertake two or three new speculations without the assistance of 
his usual intermediary, who had been swindling him. 
“Take yourself three thousand francs,” the marquis told his young assistant one day. 
“That could be misunderstood, sir.” 
“So how would you prefer it?” asked the marquis, annoyed. 
“I’d  like  you  to  write  an  order  and  set  it  down,  signed,  in  the  account  book.  The  order 
ought to give me three thousand francs. In any case, it was Father Pirard who thought up all 
this  accounting.”  With  an  expression  every  bit  as  bored  as  that  of  the  actor  who  plays  the 
Marquis de Moncade, while he listens to his steward, Monsieur Poisson,3 giving his report, the 
marquis wrote the order. 
That  evening,  when  Julien  appeared  in  his  blue  suit,  no  business  matters  were  even 
mentioned. The marquis’s benevolence was so flattering to our hero’s perpetually painful self-
respect that, in spite of himself, he soon felt a degree of affection for the pleasant old man. Not 
that, in Parisian terms, Julien possessed any sensibility, but simply that he was not a monster, 
and that no one, since the old surgeon-major’s death, had spoken to him so kindly. And he was 
                                                             
3 Characters from a 1728 play, L’école des bourgeois. 
 
 
Chapter Seven: An Attack of Gout 
startled to realize that the marquis was more deftly discreet, in dealing with our hero’s sense of 
self-worth,  than  the  old  surgeon-major  had  been.  It  came  to  him,  at  last,  that  the  surgeon-
major was prouder of his small medal4 than the marquis was, wearing the noblest award5 in all 
France. The marquis’s father had been a very great lord. 
One day, when they had finished their morning business, Julien being dressed in business 
black,  he  stayed  on  for  two  hours,  so  entertaining  the  marquis  that  he  insisted  Julien 
absolutely  had  to  accept  a  sheaf  of  banknotes,  just  brought  from  the  Stock  Exchange  by 
Monsieur de La Mole’s intermediary. 
“I trust, Monsieur Marquis, I will not seem deficient in that deep respect which I owe you, 
if I request you to permit me a few words.” 
“Speak, my friend.” 
“I should prefer that Monsieur Marquis graciously allow me to decline this gift. It is not 
meant for the man in black, and it would entirely destroy the behavior so kindly permitted to 
the man in blue.” He bowed with great respect, and left without a glance. 
This was very entertaining to the marquis. He told it to Father Pirard that night. 
“I  must  finally  admit  to  something,  my  dear  Father.  I  am  aware  of  Julien’s  birth,  and  I 
authorize you not to keep any of this secret.” 
“He behaved nobly, this morning,” the marquis thought, “so I hereby ennoble him.” 
Not long afterward, the marquis was able to go out once more. 
“Go  spend  some  months  in  London,”  he  told  Julien.  “Special  couriers,  and  others,  will 
bring you what letters I receive, bearing my notations. You will compose the replies and send 
them back to me, along with the original letters. I calculate that the delay will be no more than 
five days.” 
Riding  toward  Calais,  in  the  post  carriage,  Julien  was  shocked  by  the  trivial,  so-called 
business on which he had been dispatched. 
We  will  say  nothing  of  the  intense  hate,  virtually  horror,  that  he  felt,  setting  foot  on 
English soil. You are well aware of his insane passion for Bonaparte. In every officer he saw Sir 
Hudson  Lowe,6  commander  at  Saint-Helena;  in  every  great  lord  he  saw  Lord  Bathurst,  war 
secretary, giving orders for the infamies Napoleon experienced in this island prison, and for 
that being rewarded by ten years in the government. 
At  London,  he  finally  understood  high  foppishness.  He  became  friendly  with  young 
Russian noblemen, who initiated him. 
“My dear Sorel, you’re absolutely born to it,” they told him. “Nature has given you that 
cold  bearing,  a  thousand  leagues  from  feeling  anything,  which  we  have  to  work  so  hard  to 
attain.” 
“You’ve not understood your own time,” Prince Korasoff told him. “Always do the opposite 
of  what  people  expect  from  you.  That,  upon  my  honor,  is  our  time’s  only  religion.  Avoid 
foolishness, and affectation, which would cause people to expect foolery and affectation from 
you, and you’d no longer be observing the rules.” 
Julien  covered  himself  with  glory,  one  day,  in  the  Duke  de  Fitz-Folke’s  drawing  room, 
where he and Prince Korasoff had been invited to dine. They waited for an entire hour. There 
                                                             
4 The first is the Cross of the Legion of Honor (see note for p. 8, ll. 5C6), which was preserved by the Bourbons 
but which became depreciated by its proliferation. The second is the cordon bleu, the decoration that denoted 
membership in the Ordre du Saint-Esprit (Order of the Holy Spirit), founded by Henri III in 1578. 
5 The cordon bleu (see note for p. 264, ll. 14C15). 
6 Napoleon engaged in a series of constant and petty squabbles with Lowe, whose rules and conditions the 
former emperor found insulting. Lowe and Bathurst are the villains of Le Mémorial de Sainte-Hélène (see note for 
p. 17, ll. 9C10). 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
were  twenty  people,  all  waiting:  Julien’s  demeanor,  in  this  small,  suspended  throng,  is  still 
referred to by young diplomats in London. 
Despite  his  foppish  friends,  he  longed  to  meet  the  celebrated  Philip  Vane,7  the  only 
philosopher England has had, after Locke. He found him finishing his seventh year in prison. 
“You don’t fool with the aristocracy, in this country,” thought Julien. Moreover, Vane had been 
dishonored, vilified, etc. 
Julien saw that he was a merry fellow; aristocratic anger amused him. “Now there,” said 
Julien  to  himself,  as  he  left  the  prison,  “there  is  the  only  cheerful  man  I’ve  yet  to  see  in 
England.” 
“A tyrant’s most useful idea is God,” Vane had said to him... 
We suppress the remainder of his philosophy as pure cynicism. 
When  he  returned  to  France:  “What  entertaining  notions  have  you  brought  me,  out  of 
England?” the marquis asked him...Julien was silent. 
“What ideas have you brought, entertaining or not?” the marquis said again, briskly. 
“First of all,” said Julien, “the wisest man in England is insane for an hour every day. He’s 
troubled by the demon of suicide, which is the country’s deity. 
“Second,  intelligence,  and  even  genius,  are  depreciated  by  twenty-five  percent,  at  the 
moment of landing in England. 
“Third, nothing in the world is as beautiful, as fine, as moving as the English countryside.” 
“Now it’s my turn,” said the marquis: 
“First, what made you say, at the Russian ambassador’s ball, that France boasts of three 
hundred thousand young men, twenty-five years old, who passionately long for war? Does that 
seem to you properly respectful of royalty?” 
“How can we chat with important diplomats?” said Julien. “They have a mania for serious 
debate.  If  you  stick  to  the  usual  newspaper  formulae,  they  think  you’re  a  fool.  If  you  allow 
yourself to say something true, and new, they’re astonished. They don’t know how to answer, 
and the next day, at seven in the morning, they have the embassy’s first secretary announce 
that you’ve been objectionable.” 
“Not bad, not at all bad,” said the marquis, laughing. “But in any case, I’ll wager, Monsieur 
Profundity, that you haven’t figured out what you were sent to England to do.” 
“Excuse me,” replied Julien. “I had dinner every week at our ambassador’s home, and he is 
the most polite of men.” 
“You went to look for this medal,” the marquis said, handing it to him. “I don’t want you 
to leave off wearing black, but I’m also used to the more entertaining tone I employ with the 
man  in  blue.  Until  further  orders,  here’s  what  you’re  to  do:  pay  attention.  When  I  see  you 
wearing this medal, you’ll be the younger son of my friend, the Duke of Chaulnes, who plainly 
has for the last six months been functioning as a diplomat. Please note,” added the marquis, 
speaking very seriously and cutting off any expression of gratitude, “that I do not wish to raise 
you  above  your  proper  station.  That  is  always  a  mistake,  and  just  as  unfortunate  for  the 
protector as for the protected. When my lawsuits begin to bore you, or when you’re no longer 
acceptable to me, I’ll find you a good parish, like that of our friend Father Pirard, and that’s all, 
“ added the marquis, rather curtly. 
The  medal  comforted  Julien’s  pride;  he  spoke  more  readily  and  more  often.  He  took 
offense less often, and no longer thought himself butt of the sort of remarks, susceptible to 
less polite interpretation, that occur in animated conversations and are sometimes spoken by 
us all. 
                                                             
7 An invention of Stendhal’s; Stendhal had studied several English philosophers, probably including Locke. 
 
 
Chapter Seven: An Attack of Gout 
The medal earned him an extremely odd visit, that of the Baron de Valenod,8 who had 
come to Paris to thank the minister for making him a baron and for consenting to meet with 
him. He was going to become mayor of Verrières, replacing Monsieur de Rênal. 
Julien roared with laughter, though only inwardly, when Monsieur de Valenod informed 
him that they’d just discovered Monsieur de Rênal to be a Jacobin. The truth was that a new 
election was to be held, and the freshly minted baron was the government’s candidate, as he 
was  of  the  district’s  electoral  college,  as  strongly  right-wing  as  anything  could  be,  and 
Monsieur de Rênal was supported by the liberals. 
Julien tried in vain to learn anything about Madame de Rênal; the baron appeared to well 
remember their former rivalry, and was impenetrable. Indeed, in the end he asked Julien to 
seek his father’s vote. Julien promised to write him. 
“Really, Monsieur Chevalier, you ought to introduce me to the Marquis de La Mole.” 
“Indeed, I ought to!” Julien thought. “But he’s such a rascal! ...” 
“In point of fact,” he answered, “I’m much too unimportant, in the de La Mole household, 
to take it on myself to introduce anyone.” 
He told all this to the marquis. 
That evening, he told him of Valenod’s ambitions, as well as what he’d been doing, and 
how, ever since 1814. 
“Not only,” replied Monsieur de La Mole, most seriously, “will you present the new baron 
to me tomorrow, but afterward I will invite him to dinner. His will be one of our new districts.” 
“In that case,” said Julien coolly, “I should like my father to have the post of director of the 
Pauper’s Bureau.” 
morality lesson. You’re shaping up.” 
“Good, good!” said the marquis, becoming cheerful once more. “Agreed. I was expecting a 
Baron de Valenod informed Julien that the lottery licensee in Verrières had just died. It 
seemed to our hero a good joke to give the job to Monsieur de Cholin, that old imbecile whose 
illiterate  petition  he  had  found,  once,  in  cleaning  the  room  occupied  by  the  Marquis  de  La 
Mole.  The  marquis  laughed  heartily,  as  Julien  recited  that  petition  to  him,  while  he  was 
signing a letter seeking this post from the minister of finance. 
Monsieur de Cholin had just been nominated when Julien learned that the post had been 
sought  by  the  district  delegation,  on  behalf  of  Monsieur  Gros,  the  eminent  mathematician. 
This noble, generous man had an income of only fourteen hundred francs, and every year lent 
six hundred to the license holder who’d just died, to help him raise his family. 
Julien  was  stunned  by  what  he’d  done.  “It’s  nothing,”  he  told  himself.  “I’ll  have  to  be 
unjust many times over, if I want to get to the top, and somehow cover them up with pretty, 
sentimental  phrases.  Poor  Monsieur  Gros!  He  deserves  this  medal,  and  I  have  it,  and  I’m 
bound to follow the lead of the government which gave it to me.” 
                                                             
8 It appears that Valenod has aquired an aristocratic particle (de) along with his title. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Chapter Eight: Which Medals Are Honorable? 
“Your water does not refresh me,” said the thirsty demon. “Yet it’s the coolest well in all of Turkestan.” 
―Pellico1 
Julien came back, one day, from the charming estate of Villequier, bordering on the Seine, 
to which Monsieur de La Mole was especially attracted, for of all his properties it was the only 
one  that  had  been  owned,  once  upon  a  time,  by  his  famous  ancestor,  Boniface  de  La  Mole. 
Julien found the marquise and her daughter, newly returned from Hyères.2 
Julien  had  become  a  dandy,  and  understood  the  art  of  life  in  Paris.  His  cool  demeanor 
toward  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole  was  perfection  itself.  He  appeared  to  have  no  memory 
whatever of her asking, so gaily, for the details of his tumble from a horse. 
She found him taller and paler. Neither his figure nor his clothing retained anything of 
the provincial. But this was not true of his conversation, in which there remained, still, entirely 
too much of the serious, of the assertive. In spite of such intellectual traits, he showed no signs 
of inferior status, thanks largely to his pride: one simply felt that, still, he viewed too much as 
important. Yet he was clearly a man who would back up what he said. 
“His  touch  needs  an  improving  lightness,  but  not  his  mind,”  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole 
told her father, teasing him about the medal he’d given Julien. “For the last year and a half, my 
brother’s been asking you for one―and he’s a de La Mole!...” 
“Yes. But Julien can surprise you, which is not something one can say of the de La Mole in 
question.” 
The Duke de Retz3 was announced. 
An  irresistible  fit  of  yawning  descended  on  Mathilde;  she  was  aware  of  the  old,  gilt-
covered objects in her father’s drawing room, and the old visitors who came there. She had a 
vivid  sense  of  the  life  she  was  resuming,  here  in  Paris,  in  all  its  perfect  boredom.  Yet  when 
she’d been in Hyères, she had missed Paris. 
“And I’m still only nineteen!” she thought. “This is the time for happiness, according to all 
these gilt-edged morons!” She was looking at eight or ten brand-new books of poetry that had 
accumulated  on  the  long,  narrow  table,  fixed  to  the  drawing  room  wall  during  her  days  in 
Provence.  Unfortunately,  she  was  smarter  than  Messieurs  de  Croisenois,  de  Caylus,  de  Luz, 
and her other friends. She could just imagine what they’d be telling her about the lovely skies 
of Provence, and poetry, and the South, etc., etc. 
Her  beautiful  eyes,  full  of  the  most  intense  boredom―and,  worse  still,  despair  of  ever 
being happy―lingered on Julien. At least he was not exactly like all the others. 
“Monsieur  Sorel,”  she  said,  speaking  briskly,  curt,  and  in  no  way  feminine  (as  all  high 
society’s young women were expected to speak), “Monsieur Sorel, will you come to the Duke 
de Retz’s ball, tonight?” 
“Mademoiselle, I’ve never had the honor of being introduced to the duke.” (It might be 
said that these words, and especially the ducal title, ripped the skin off this proud provincial’s 
mouth.) 
“He has asked my brother to bring you and, if you do come, you might tell me all about 
Villequier. There’s some talk of going there, this spring. I’d like to know if the house is livable, 
                                                             
1  Silvio  Pellico  (1789C1854),  Italian  patriot  and  poet,  whose  liberal  political  activities  against  the  Austrian 
government of northern Italy earned him both a long jail term and a death sentence during the 1820s. He titled 
his 1832 memoir My Prisons. 
2 A fashionable spa on the Mediterranean, between Toulon and St. Tropez. 
3 Stendhal has again borrowed a name from French history for his duke (see note for pg. 101, l. 11). 
 
 
Chapter Eight: Which Medals Are Honorable? 
and  whether  the  neighborhood  is  as  pretty  as  they  say.  So  many  reputations  are  so  totally 
undeserved!” 
Julien did not reply. 
“Come to the ball with my brother,” she added, very dryly. 
Julien  bowed  respectfully.  “And  this,”  he  thought,  “even  at  a  ball,  is  what  I  owe  every 
member of this family. I’m paid to handle the family’s business, am I not? God only knows if 
what I’ll say to the daughter might not conflict with the father’s plans, or the brother’s, or the 
mother’s! This is exactly like a ruling prince’s court. You need to be an absolute nothing, and 
yet no one should have any reason to complain about you. 
“How I dislike this towering little girl!” he thought, watching mademoiselle walk over to 
where her mother had summoned her, so she could be presented to the wives of some of their 
friends.  “Whatever  fashion  she  assumes,  she  overdoes  it;  her  dress  is  falling  off  her 
shoulders...She’s even paler than before she went on that trip...Her hair is absolutely colorless, 
it’s so blonde! You could say the daylight goes right through it! ... And what arrogance, when 
she greets people, when she just looks at them! She holds herself, she moves, like a queen!” 
Mademoiselle de La Mole had just called to her brother, precisely when he was leaving 
the drawing room. 
Count Norbert came over to Julien. 
“My dear Sorel,” he said, “where would you like me to fetch you from, at midnight, when I 
come to escort you to Monsieur de Retz’s ball? He himself asked me, in very plain terms, to 
bring you.” 
“I’m well aware to whom I owe so many kindnesses,” replied Julien, bowing very deeply. 
His mood was so foul that, there being nothing to take offense at, in Norbert’s polite, even 
concerned, manner of speech, he directed his annoyance toward his own response. It seemed 
to him clouded by a vulgar servility. 
That  evening,  arriving  at  the  ball,  he  was  struck  by  the  magnificence  of  the  de  Retz 
mansion.  The  entranceway  courtyard  was  roofed  over  by  a  huge,  crimson-colored  canvas 
awning,  dotted  with  golden  stars.  Nothing  could  have  been  more  elegant.  Underneath  the 
awning,  the  courtyard  had  been  transformed  into  an  orange-tree  grove,  with  flowering 
oleanders in bloom. All the containers had been carefully set very deep, so orange trees and 
oleanders seemed to be growing right out of the ground. The pathway on which the carriages 
drove had been sanded. 
The  whole  thing  seemed,  to  our  provincial  hero,  utterly  extraordinary.  This  kind  of 
splendor  was  new  to  him:  in  a  flash  his  mood  changed  from  foul  to  fair.  Norbert  had  been 
happy,  as  they  traveled  to  the  ball,  but  Julien  had  seen  nothing  but  darkness.  The  moment 
they drove into the courtyard, they switched places. 
Norbert paid attention only to those few details, in the midst of such magnificence, which 
no one had been able to take care of. He calculated the cost of everything, and the higher the 
total went, the more jealous he seemed to grow―and, as Julien noticed, the worse his mood 
became. 
Our hero, already enchanted, admiring, and almost shy from so great a flood of emotion, 
reached  the  first  drawing  room,  where  people  were  dancing.  The press  of  the  crowd  was  so 
great, on the way to the second drawing room, that he had to stay where he was. (This second 
room was decorated to look like Grenada’s Alhambra.) 
“She’s the queen of the ball, you can’t deny it,” a young, mustached man was saying; his 
shoulder was pressed against Julien’s chest. 
“Mademoiselle Fourmont, who’s been the reigning beauty all winter,” said the man next 
to him, “knows she has to settle for second place. Just see what a face she’s making.” 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
“Really,  Fourmont’s  set  all  her  sails,  determined  to  please.  Look―look  at  that  gracious 
smile, the instant the dance sets her off by herself. On my honor, that’s simply hysterical.” 
“Mademoiselle de La Mole keeps her pleasure extremely well in hand, even though she’s 
fully aware what a triumph she’s having. She seems to be trying not to appear too pleasant, if 
she does speak to anyone.” 
“Now there’s the art of seduction!” 
Julien  tried,  unsuccessfully,  to  catch  a  glimpse  of  this  seductive  woman:  seven  or  eight 
“There’s a good deal of the coquette in that terribly grand modesty,” said the young man 
taller men blocked his view. 
with a mustache. 
“And those big blue eyes, which she lowers so slowly, just when you think they’re about to 
betray her,” said his neighbor. “My Lord, how very cunning.” 
“Notice how, next to her, the lovely Mademoiselle Fourmont seems downright common,” 
said a third man. 
me!’” 
“That modesty is really saying: ’How nice I could be to you, if you were the man worthy of 
“And just who could be worthy of the sublime Mathilde?” said the first man. “Some royal 
prince, handsome, witty, strong, a military hero, and no older than twenty.” 
“The  Emperor  of  Russia’s  natural  son...for  whom,  in  recognition  of  such  a  marriage,  a 
kingdom would be created...or perhaps, in the end, Count de Thaler, who looks like a dressed-
up peasant....” 
The doorway had opened. Julien was able to go in. 
“If she strikes these toy soldiers as so remarkable,” he thought, “she’s worth having a look 
at. I’ll find out what these fellows imagine is true perfection.” 
While  he  was  trying  to  catch  her  eye,  Mathilde  looked  at  him.  “Duty  calls,”  Julien  told 
himself.  But  he  was  not  feeling  wretched,  though  his  enjoyment  could  not  be  told  from  his 
face. His curiosity grew, the nearer he came, and it grew still quicker on account of Mathilde’s 
gown,  extremely  low  on  her  shoulders―a  sensation,  however,  that  did  not  do  much  for  his 
self-esteem. “She’s lovely, yes, but she’s also very young,” he thought. There were still five or 
six young men, among them those he had heard discussing her, between him and Mathilde. 
“You, sir,” she said to Julien, “you’ve been here the entire winter. Isn’t this really the best 
ball of the season?” 
to perfection.” 
He did not reply. 
“I think,” she went on, “this is a fine Coulon they’re dancing, and these ladies are doing it 
The other young men turned around to see who might be the happy man from whom, 
clearly, she wanted to have an answer. It was not an encouraging one. 
“I wouldn’t know how to properly judge, mademoiselle. I spend my life writing: this is the 
first ball of such magnificence I’ve ever seen.” 
The young, mustached men were horrified. 
“How wise you are, Monsieur Sorel,” came her reply, her interest more marked. “You see 
all  these  balls,  all  these  festivities,  like  a  philosopher―like  Jean-Jacques  Rousseau.  Such 
extravagance astonishes, but it does not seduce you.” 
The  mention  of  Rousseau  cooled  his  mind  and  drove  all  illusions  from  his  heart.  His 
mouth framed a look of disdain, perhaps a bit exaggerated. 
“Jean-Jacques  Rousseau,”  he  answered,  “is  simply  a  fool  when  he  tries  to  analyze  high 
society. He knows nothing about it; he displays the soul of an upstart servant.” 
 
 
Chapter Eight: Which Medals Are Honorable? 
“He wrote The Social Contract,4” she said worshipfully. 
“But  even  as  he  argues  for  a  republic,  and  the  overthrow  of  monarchical  ranks  and 
stations,  this  upstart  is  absolutely  drunk  with  joy  if  a  duke  condescends  to  alter  his  after-
dinner walk so he can accompany one of his friends.” 
“Oh, yes: at Montmorency,5 when the Duke de Luxembourg walked toward Paris, with a 
certain Monsieur Coindet...” replied Mademoiselle de La Mole, with the unrestrained delight 
of her very first bookish pedantry. Her knowledge intoxicated her, almost like the scholar who 
proves the existence of King Feretrius.6 Julien’s glance remained piercing, severe. Mathilde had 
experienced  a  rush  of  enthusiasm;  her  coparticipant’s  chilliness  deeply  shocked  her.  Even 
more, she was astonished, because she was accustomed to having exactly this effect on others. 
Just  then,  Marquis  de  Croisenois  pushed  his  way  toward  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole.  He 
paused  for  a  moment,  three  feet  away,  unable  to  get  through  the  crowd.  He  looked  at  her, 
laughing at how he was being hindered. Young Marquise de Rouvray was near him; she was 
Mathilde’s cousin. She held on to her husband’s arm; they had been married only two weeks 
before. Marquis de Rouvray, quite as young as his wife, loved her with all the wild affection 
that  overcomes  a  man  who,  entering  upon  a  marriage  of  convenience,  arranged  from 
beginning to end by lawyers, finds a wonderfully beautiful bride. Monsieur de Rouvray was to 
become a duke, on the death of an exceedingly old uncle. 
As the Marquis de Croisenois, unable to move toward her, looked at Mathilde, laughing, 
she let her big eyes, celestially blue, linger on him and his neighbors. “Could anything be as 
tepid,” she was saying to herself, “as the whole lot of them! There’s Croisenois, who’d like to 
marry me; he’s sweet, polite, his manners are as perfect as de Rouvray’s. Except for how boring 
they are, these are impressive people. He’d go to balls with me, looking exactly this narrow-
minded, this perfectly pleased. A year after the wedding, my carriage, my hair, my clothes, my 
house  sixty  miles  from  Paris―it  would  all  be  as  fine  as it  could  be,  precisely  what  ought  to 
make an upstart, like perhaps the Countess de Roivelle, simply die of envy. And then...?” 
Just  thinking  about  it  bored  her.  Marquis  de  Croisenois  reached  her  and  began  a 
conversation, but she was lost in dreams and did not listen. For her, the sound of his words 
mingled with the droning noise of the ball. Her eyes followed mechanically after Julien, who 
had moved off, respectful but proud and discontented. She noticed, off in a corner, away from 
the circulating crowd, Count Altamira, under a death sentence in his own country; the reader 
has already heard of him. In the reign of Louis XIV, one of his ancestors had married a Prince 
de Conti;7 this connection helped protect him against the Congregation of the Holy Virgin’s 
police. 
“Nothing can so distinguish a man as a death sentence,” thought Mathilde. “It’s the only 
thing one can’t buy. 
“Ah! What I just said to myself was indeed very well said! What a pity it didn’t pop out 
when it could have earned me a reputation!” She had too much taste to toss a prefabricated 
witticism into a conversation, but she also had too much vanity not to be delighted at herself. 
                                                             
4 A strange object of veneration for the very aristocratic Mathilde. Du contrat social is Rousseau’s 1762 essay 
analyzing the development of government in primitive societies. 
5 Lush country region just north of Paris where many nobles owned country houses, including the Duke de 
Luxemboug, who was something of a patron of the philosophes .The incident Julien and Mathilde refer to is 
recounted in Rousseau’s Confessions. 
6 A sly reference to an incident in which an amateur scholar invented an ancient Roman king named Feretrius 
so that he could deliver a lecture on him. 
7 The Conti family were a branch of the Condé family (see note for p. 38, l. 33), Princes of the Blood Royal. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
An expression of pleasure replaced that of boredom. Marquis de Croisenois, who had gone on 
talking to her, felt he was being successful, and his glibness was heightened. 
“What could a spiteful person find to criticize, in this maxim of mine?” Mathilde asked 
herself. “I’d tell this critic: ’A baron’s title, a vicomte’s, these are things that can be bought. A 
medal they simply give you: my brother just got one, and what has he ever done? A promotion 
isn’t hard to get. Ten years in the garrison, or a relative who’s minister of war, and you’re a 
squadron leader, like Norbert. Or an immense fortune! ... That’s the hardest to get, so it’s the 
worthiest.’ How funny! It’s exactly the opposite of everything they tell you, in books...So! If it’s 
wealth you want, you marry Rothschild’s daughter. 
“My witticism really has some depth. A death sentence is still the only thing no one will 
suggest that you look for.” 
“Do you know Count Altamira?” she asked Monsieur de Croisenois. 
She seemed to be coming back from very far away, and this query had so little connection 
with everything the poor marquis had been saying to her, for the past five minutes, that his 
poise was shaken. But he was a man of spirit, and well known on that score. 
“Mathilde’s  rather  odd,”  he  thought.  “That’s  a  nuisance―but  she’ll  bring  her  husband 
such a superb social position! I don’t know how the Marquis de La Mole manages it. He’s got 
ties to the best people in both parties; he’s a man who really couldn’t be pulled down. Anyway, 
Mathilde’s strangeness might well pass for genius. When there’s such noble birth, and so much 
money, genius is not at all ridiculous―and how distinguished she is! Also, when she wants to, 
she can exhibit such intelligence, mixed with character and a fine sense of social timing, that 
her manners, really, are quite perfect....” 
Doing  two  things  at  the  same  time,  and  doing  them  well,  is  difficult,  so  the  marquis 
answered her question with a blank face, as if reciting back a lesson: 
“Who doesn’t know poor Altamira?” And then he told her about his failed conspiracy―a 
ridiculous, absurd affair. 
“Highly absurd,” said Mathilde, as if speaking to herself. “But he has acted. I’d like to see a 
man. Bring him to me,” she said to the deeply shocked marquis. 
Count  Altamira  was  one  of  the  most  open  admirers  of  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole’s 
haughtiness,  which  approached  impertinence.  He  thought  her  one  of  the  most  beautiful 
women in Paris. 
“How lovely she’d look, on a throne!” he said to Monsieur de Croisenois, letting himself 
be brought to her without the slightest opposition. 
There  is  no  shortage,  in  this  world,  of  people  wanting  to  create  a  fixed  rule,  which 
declares that nothing is so unfashionable as a conspiracy: it smells of Jacobinism. And could 
there be anything uglier than a failed Jacobin? 
Mathilde glanced at Monsieur de Croisenois as if amused by Altamira’s liberalism. But she 
listened to him with pleasure. 
“A conspirator at a ball, that’s a nice contrast,” she thought. This one, with his thick black 
mustache, seemed to her like a sleeping lion. But she soon realized that his mind supported 
only a single intellectual position: utility, admiration for whatever is useful. 
Altamira,  who  was  still  a  young  man,  thought  nothing  so  worthy  of  his  attention  as 
something, anything, that could bring bicameral legislative government to his country. So he 
cheerfully left Mathilde, the most seductive woman at the ball, when he saw, coming into the 
room, a Peruvian general. 
 
 
Chapter Eight: Which Medals Are Honorable? 
Despairing  of  Europe,  poor  Altamira  had  been  reduced  to  imagining  that,  when  the 
United States of South America grew large and powerful, they would be able to give Europe 
back the liberty that Mirabeau, and the French Revolution, had given it.8 
A  whirlwind  of  young  men  with  mustaches  was  approaching  Mathilde.  She  was  very 
much aware that Altamira had not been seduced, and was irritated by his departure; she could 
see his black eyes gleaming as he talked to the Peruvian general. She contemplated the crowd 
of young Frenchmen with a profound seriousness none of her rivals could imitate. “Which of 
them,” she thought, “might be capable of having himself sentenced to death, even under the 
most favorable of circumstances?” 
The look on her face flattered the stupid among them, but made the rest uncomfortable. 
They dreaded an explosion of sharply pointed words, extremely hard to respond to. 
“Noble birth gives a man a hundred qualities, the absence of which would offend me. I 
can  see  this  in  Julien,  for  example,”  thought  Mathilde.  “But  good  birth  weakens  those 
characteristics of the soul which can get a man sentenced to death.” 
Just then, someone near her said: “Count Altamira is the Prince of San Nazaro-Pimentel’s 
second son. It was a Pimentel who tried to save Conradin,9 decapitated in 1268. It’s one of the 
noblest families in Naples.” 
“There,”  said  Mathilde  to  herself. “That’s  a  really  lovely  proof  of  my  maxim.  High  birth 
deprives a man of the strength of character without which no one can get himself condemned 
to death! So I’m fated, tonight, to babble nonsense. Since I’m a mere woman, no different from 
the  others,  well!  I’ve  got  to  dance.”  She  yielded  to  the  Marquis  de  Croisenois’s  urging:  he’d 
been asking her for the last hour to dance with him. To keep from thinking about her bad luck 
as  a  philosopher,  Mathilde  wanted  to  be  perfectly  seductive.  Monsieur  de  Croisenois  was 
rapturously happy. 
But neither dancing, nor any desire to please one of the most handsome men at court―
nothing could distract her. No one could have had a greater success. She was the queen of the 
ball, and she knew it, but to her it did not matter. 
“What a washed-out life I’d experience, with someone like Croisenois!” she said to herself 
as,  an  hour  later,  he  led  her  back  to  her  place...”Where  am  I  to  find  pleasure,”  she  added 
sorrowfully, “if, after six months away, I can’t find it right at the center of a ball which every 
woman in Paris would envy me? And yet, I’m surrounded by tokens of high respect from the 
very  best  society  I  can  possibly  imagine.  Only  a  very  few  of  these  noblemen  come  from  the 
bourgeosie,10 and there may be one or two Juliens. And then,” she added, her sadness swelling, 
“what  advantages  Fate  has  given  me―celebrity,  wealth,  youth!  Alas!  I’ve  been  given 
everything, except happiness. 
“The most dubious  of my advantages, still, are exactly those of the people who’ve been 
talking to me all night long. I have a brain, I think, because it’s quite clear I make everyone 
afraid  of  me.  If  they  have  the  nerve  to  broach  a  serious  topic,  five  minutes  later  they’re 
completely  out  of  breath,  as  if  they’ve  discovered  something  truly  momentous,  when  it’s 
something I’ve been saying over and over for an hour. I’m beautiful, that’s an advantage I have, 
                                                             
8 “Cette feuille, composée le 25 juillet 1830, a été imprimée le 4 ao04t. ―Note de l’éditeur.” [This page, written 
on July 25, 1830, was printed on August 4. ―Editor’s note.] 
This is a reference to the July Revolution, which broke out on July 28. By July 30, Charles X had abdicated to 
his son and then his grandson. On August 4, Charles abandoned his quest to maintain the throne and agreed 
to leave France with his family. 
9 Conradin (1252C68), son of Conrad IV, king of Sicily, failed in an attempt to regain his father’s throne and 
was executed. 
10 i.e., recently ennobled commoners. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
for  which  Madame  de  Sta05l11  would  have  abandoned  everything―and  yet,  for  all  that,  I’m 
dying  of  boredom.  Is  there  any  reason  why  I’d  be  less  bored,  if  I  changed  my  name  to  the 
Marquise de Croisenois? 
“But,  God  in  heaven!”  she  added,  very  close  to  tears,  “isn’t  he  a  perfect  man?  He’s  this 
century’s masterpiece of education: you just look at him, and he finds something lovable, even 
spiritual,  to  tell  you.  He’s  brave..  ..  But  Sorel  is  peculiar,”  she  told  herself,  and  her  eyes 
exchanged their sorrowful appearance for an angry one. “I let him know I had something to 
tell him, and he can’t take the trouble to come back!” 
                                                             
11 Germaine Necker, Baroness de Sta05l-Holstein (1766C1817), author of Corinne and Delphine. Immensely rich, a 
successful and influential author, and probably the most famous nonroyal woman in Europe; it is true that 
Madame de Sta05l was not beautiful. Whether she would have traded all her advantages for Mathilde’s beauty 
is highly debatable. 
 
 
Chapter Nine: The Ball 
Chapter Nine: The Ball 
Splendid,  costly  clothes,  bright  candles,  perfume:  so  many  pretty  bare  arms,  lovely  shoulders;  flowers, 
rousing Rossini melodies, Ciceri’s paintings! I’m beside myself! 
Uzeri, Travels1 
“You’re in a terrible mood,” the Marquise de La Mole told her. “I warn you: at a ball, that’s 
most ungracious.” 
“I just have a headache,” answered Mathilde indifferently. “It’s horribly warm in here.” 
Just  then,  as  if  to  justify  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole,  old  Baron  de  Tully  got  sick  and 
collapsed;  they  had  to  carry  him  out.  People  mentioned  apoplexy;  it  was  distinctly 
disagreeable. 
Mathilde did not care. It was her fixed prejudice never to so much as look at old men, or 
anyone else well known for saying sad things. 
because two days later the baron reappeared. 
She  danced  in  order  to  get  away  from  talk  about  apoplexy,  which  this  surely  wasn’t, 
“But  Monsieur  Sorel  has  not,”  she  said  to  herself,  after  her  dancing  was  done.  She  was 
virtually  hunting  him,  with  her  glance,  when  she  saw  him  in  another  drawing  room.  Quite 
extraordinarily, he had apparently shed the impassive coldness that, to him, was so natural. He 
no longer looked like an Englishman. 
“He’s  chatting  with  Count  Altamira,  my  death-sentence man!”  Mathilde  saw. “There’s  a 
dark fire in his eyes; he looks like a prince in disguise; he seems twice as proud.” 
Julien drifted back toward her, constantly  in conversation with Altamira. She looked at 
him, fixedly, studying his face for signs of those high qualities that, in a man of honor, might 
make him worthy of a death sentence. 
As he passed close by her: 
“Yes,” he was saying to Count Altamira, “Danton was a man!” 
“Oh heavens! Might he be a Danton,” she wondered. “But his face is so noble, and that 
Danton  was  so  terribly  ugly―a  butcher,  I  think.”2  Julien  was  still  quite  nearby;  she  had  no 
hesitation  about  calling  him  over.  Her  conscience  and  her  pride  impelled  her  to  ask,  for  a 
young girl, a truly extraordinary question. 
“Wasn’t Danton a butcher?” she said to him. 
“Yes,  as  far  as  certain  people  are  concerned,”  Julien  told  her,  with  a  poorly  masked 
expression  of  contempt,  his  eyes  still  burning  from  his  conversation  with  Altamira.  “But 
unfortunately for the aristocracy, he was in fact a lawyer at Méry on the Seine. In other words, 
mademoiselle,” he added spitefully, “he began just like several of the peers I see here. It is true 
that  Danton  labored,  in  the  eyes  of  beauty,  under  an  enormous  disadvantage:  he  was  very 
ugly.” 
He spoke these last words rapidly, with an air both extraordinary and, without question, 
not very polite. 
Julien waited a moment, bent slightly forward, in humble pride. He seemed to be telling 
her: “I am paid to answer you, and I live on what I am paid.” He did not trouble to raise his 
eyes toward her. And she, her lovely eyes open very wide, and fixed on him, seemed to be his 
slave. Finally, as the silence remained unbroken, he glanced at her, just as a valet glances at his 
                                                             
1  Another  invented  quote,  perhaps  suggested  by  the  Zurich  composer  J.  M.  Usteri’s  Schweizer-Reise  (Swiss 
Travels), a collection of Swiss folk songs. 
2 For Danton, see note for p. 1, Epigraph. Danton was in fact quite ugly, and guilty of complicity in much of the 
violence of the Terror before he himself became its victim. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
master, awaiting further orders. His eyes peered straight into hers, strange, fixed, and steady, 
but then he moved quickly away, with obvious haste. 
“He’s really so handsome,” Mathilde said to herself, emerging from her half-dream state, 
“and he eulogizes ugliness! He’s always looking out, not in! He’s not like Caylus or Croisenois. 
This Sorel looks a good deal like my father when he does such a good imitation of Napoleon, at 
a ball.” She’d completely forgotten Danton. “I’m most definitely bored tonight.” She grasped 
her  brother’s  arm  and,  to  his  great  regret,  forced  him  to  walk  around  the  ballroom.  She 
conceived the notion of listening in on Julien’s conversation with Altamira, the man under a 
death sentence. 
There was a huge crowd. She managed to come up to them just when Altamira was about 
to take an ice from a tray. He was still speaking to Julien, but half turned away. Seeing a man’s 
arm, clothed in an embroidered suit, taking the ice directly next to his, he grew excited. He 
turned  completely  around,  the  better  to  see  the  person  to  whom  this  arm  belonged.  And 
immediately his eyes, so noble and so na07ve, took on an expression of casual disdain. 
“You see that man?” he said to Julien, his voice very low. “That’s the Prince d’Araceli, the 
Ambassador  of  ―――.  This  morning  he  requested  that  your  minister  of  foreign  affairs, 
Monsieur  de  Nerval,3  grant  my  extradition.  Look,  there  the  minister  is,  right  over  there, 
playing whist. Monsieur de Nerval is likely to hand me over, since back in 1816 we gave you 
some  of  your  conspirators.  If  they  do  send  me  back  to  my  king,  I’ll  be  dead  in  twenty-four 
hours. And it will be one of these handsome fellows with mustaches who will arrest me.” 
“Scoundrels!” exclaimed Julien, rather more loudly. 
Mathilde had not lost a syllable of their conversation. Her boredom had vanished. 
“Not such scoundrels,” replied Count Altamira. “I’ve been talking to you about myself, so I 
could conjure up a living picture. Look at Prince d’Araceli. Every five minutes he stares at his 
Golden Fleece medal.4 He’s never recovered from his delight, seeing that geegaw on his chest. 
When you come right down to it, this poor fellow’s an anachronism. A hundred years ago, a 
Golden  Fleece  was  a  genuine  mark  of  distinction,  but  in  those  days  it  would  have  been  far 
above  his  reach.  Today,  among  well-born  people,  you  really  have  to  be  an  Araceli  to  be  so 
immensely pleased. To get it for himself, he’d have killed everybody in an entire city.” 
“And is this the price he paid?” Julien asked nervously. 
“Not  quite,”  said  Altamira  coldly.  “He  probably  tossed  into  the  river  thirty  or  so  of  the 
richest landowners in his country, who passed as liberals.” 
“What a monster!” Julien said once again. 
Mademoiselle  de La Mole, bending her head toward them, fascinated, was so near  him 
that her lovely hair came very close to brushing against his shoulder. 
“You’re  terribly  young!”  Altamira  responded. “I’ve  told  you  that  I  have  a  married  sister, 
living  in  Provence.  She’s  still  pretty,  and  good,  and  sweet;  she’s  an  excellent  mother  to  her 
children, faithful to all her responsibilities, pious but not a fanatic.” 
“Where is he going with this?” wondered Mademoiselle de La Mole. 
                                                             
3 See note for p. 249, l. 23. Nerval in this scene seems to resemble Jules de Polignac, the most reactionary of 
ultras and Charles X’s last prime minister. He was controversial when appointed in 1829, and became only 
more  so  as  he  sought  to  undermine  the  progress  made  by  liberals  since  1789.  He  had  also  become  deeply 
devout, and saw his politics as a holy mission, as Nerval does in this chapter; he also resembles Charles X in 
this regard. 
4 The knightly Order of the Golden Fleece was established by Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, in 1429. 
Charles V of Spain, grandson and heir of Charles the Bold, then carried it on in Spain. 
 
 
Chapter Nine: The Ball 
“She’s happy,” Count Altamira went on. “She was happy in 1815. I was hiding at her house, 
at the time, on her estate near Antibes. Well, as soon as she heard of Marshall Ney’s execution, 
she began to dance.” 
“Is such a thing possible?” asked Julien, thunderstruck. 
“It’s  simply  political,”  Altamira  answered.  “We  no  longer  have  genuine  passions,  in  the 
nineteenth  century.  That’s  why  there’s  so  much  boredom,  here  in  France.  We  do  the  most 
incredibly cruel things, but without cruelty.” 
“So much the worse!” said Julien. “At the very least, crimes ought to be committed with 
pleasure.  That’s  the  only  good  about  them:  How  can  we  even  begin  to  justify  them  for  any 
other reason?”5 
Having completely forgotten her position, herself, and everything else, Mademoiselle de 
La Mole was now standing almost directly between Altamira and Julien. Her brother, whose 
arm she still grasped, was in the habit of doing whatever she wanted: he kept looking around 
the  room  and,  to  make  matters  look  proper,  was  pretending  that  he’d  been  stopped  by  the 
crowd. 
“You’re right,” said Altamira. “We do everything without pleasure, and without bothering 
to remember what we’ve done, even committing crimes. I could probably show you ten men, 
here in this room, who’ll go to hell as assassins. They’ve forgotten all about it, and so has the 
world. 
“They’re often moved when their dog breaks its paw. When flowers are thrown onto these 
people’s  graves―as  you  put  it  so  cheerfully,  in  Paris―we’ll  be  told  they  embodied  all  the 
virtues  of  the  bravest  knights,  and  we’ll  hear  about  the  grand  deeds  of  their  ancestor,  who 
lived under Henri IV.6 If, in spite of the best efforts of Prince d’Araceli, I’m not about to be 
dead, and if I ever make my fortune in Paris, I’ll be pleased to have you to dinner, together 
with eight or ten murderers, all honored men, all without any remorse. 
“You and I, at such a dinner, will be the only ones without blood on our hands, but I’ll be 
scorned  and  virtually  despised,  as  a  sanguinary  monster  and  a  Jacobin,  and  you,  you’ll  be 
scorned just because you’re a man of the people who’s intruded himself into good company.” 
“Nothing could be truer,” said Mademoiselle de La Mole. 
Altamira looked at her, startled; Julien would not grant her a glance. 
“Note that, in the revolution which I found myself leading,” Count Altamira continued, 
“we failed only because I refused to have three heads cut off, and I would not distribute to our 
supporters seven or eight millions, deposited in a box to which I had the key. My king, who 
today is burning to grab me, and who before the revolt had been on first-name terms with me, 
would  have  given  me  the  greatest  medal  in  the  land,  had  I  cut  off  those  three  heads  and 
handed  out  the  money,  because  then  I  would  have  been  at  least  half  successful,  and  my 
country  would  have  had  a  sort  of  constitution...That’s  how  the  world  works,  it’s  all  a  chess 
game.” 
“But then,” responded Julien, his eyes blazing, “you didn’t know how to play. Now...” 
                                                             
5 This is a malcontent speaking. Tartuffe is a Molière masterpiece, concerning the religious hypocrite Tartuffe, 
who uses an ostentatious show of extreme faith to ingratiate himself with a rich and na07ve bourgeois, Orgon. 
There is no record of Molière ever making such a comment about Tartuffe. 
6 The first Bourbon king (born 1553, reigned 1589C1610). He brought an end to the Wars of Religion when he 
converted to Catholicism in order to claim the throne. Legend has him declaring “Paris is well worth a mass!” 
He imposed his authority on fractious nobles, divorced his adulterous wife, Marguerite de Valois (see note for 
p.  289,  ll.  9C10)to  marry  Marie  de  Médici―mother  of  Louis  XIII―and  was  assassinated  by  the  fanatical 
Ravaillac. This political martyrdom―plus his military skills and his rough-hewn ways―helped contribute to 
the legend of a great and popular king, which survived even the Revolution. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
“You mean, now I’d cut off those heads, and I wouldn’t be the Girondin7 you made me out 
to be the other day? ... I’ll answer you,” said Altamira sadly, “after you’ve killed a man in a duel, 
which is at least not so ugly as having him killed by an executioner.” 
“My Lord!” said Julien. “The man who desires a goal, also desires the way of accomplishing 
it. If I had any power, instead of being, as I am, a mere atom, I’d have three men killed if I 
could save the lives of four.” 
His glance glowed with moral fire, and with contempt for men’s senseless decisions. His 
eyes met those of Mademoiselle de La Mole, so extremely close by, and his contempt, far from 
shifting to graciousness and civility, became even stronger. 
She  was  profoundly  shocked,  but  she  was  not  capable,  not  anymore,  of  disregarding 
Julien. She went away, resentfully, dragging her brother behind her. 
“I need a glass of punch, and I have to dance and dance,” she told herself. “I’ll pick the 
best dancer here and, no matter what, I’ll make an impression. Fine: There’s that notoriously 
rude  fellow,  the  Count  de  Fervaques.”  She  accepted  his  invitation;  they  danced. “It’s  still  an 
open question,” she thought, “which of us will be the rudest: if I intend to really show him up, 
I need to make him talk.” All the rest of them, soon, were simply walking through the steps: no 
one  wanted  to  risk  losing  any  of  Mathilde’s  keen-edged  responses.  Monsieur  de  Fervaques 
grew restless. He could not summon up neatly elegant phrases and, instead of ideas, resorted 
to letting himself look as angry as he felt. Mathilde, who was in a foul mood, treated him so 
savagely that she made herself an enemy. She danced until dawn, and finally left, incredibly 
weary. But as her carriage rolled away, whatever strength she had left was busily making her 
sad and miserable. She had been scorned by Julien, and she could not reply in kind. 
Julien was as happy as he could be, in his ignorance thrilled by the music, the flowers, the 
beautiful  women,  the  universal  elegance  and,  above  all  else,  by  his  imagination,  which 
dreamed of all the honors he would receive, and of freedom for everyone. 
“What a gorgeous ball!” he said to the count as the carriage drove away. “There’s nothing 
missing.” 
“Except thought,” responded Altamira. 
And  his  face  showed  his  scorn,  which  was  no  less  barbed  because  it  was  obvious  that 
politeness obliged him to mask it. 
“But you’re here, my dear count. And isn’t any thought as good as a conspiracy?” 
“I’m  here  because  of  the  name  I  bear.  But  in  these  drawing  rooms,  thought  is  utterly 
hateful. They don’t dare rise above the level of a vaudeville song: that’s what pays, here. But a 
thinking man, if his insights are forceful and original, gets labeled a cynic. Isn’t that the way 
one  of  your  judges  spoke  of  the  great  Hellenist,  Courier?8  He  was  sent  to  prison,  just  like 
Béranger. The Congregation of the Holy Virgin sees to it, in France, that everyone whose mind 
is worth anything gets thrown into the criminal courts, and all the really good people applaud. 
“That’s because this withered old society of yours always puts propriety first...France will 
never  lift  itself  any  higher  than  bravery  in  battle.  You’ll  always  have  Murats,  but  never  a 
                                                             
7  Appellation  given  to  the  moderates  in  the  convention.  As  the  principle  opponents  of  the  Jacobins―their 
former allies―many Girondins, after 1792, were executed when the more radical party emerged victorious. 
8 Paul-Louis Courier (1772C1825), a personal friend of Stendhal’s and a vocal Republican as well as a Hellenist 
and political pamphleteer. The judge who called him a cynic knew that Courier would understand its original 
meaning of “dog.” 
 
 
Chapter Nine: The Ball 
Washington.9 All I see in France is vanity. A creative man, talking easily, slips into a brilliant 
impropriety, and the master of the house thinks he’s been insulted.” 
At this point, the count’s carriage, which was bringing Julien home, stopped in front of 
the de La Mole mansion. Julien had become fond of his conspiratorial acquaintance. Altamira 
had  paid  him  a  fine  compliment,  obviously  born  of  deep  conviction:  “You  don’t  have  a 
Frenchman’s trifling mind, and you understand the principle of utility. “It happened that, the 
night before, Julien had seen Casimir Delavigne’s tragedy Marino Faliero.10 
“Isn’t it true that the conspirator, Israel Bertuccio, has more character than all the noble 
Venetians  he’s  plotting  against?”  our  worker  revolutionary  asked  himself.  “Yet  these  are  the 
established nobility, dating back to 700, a century before Charlemagne, while the most noble 
of  those  at  the  Duke  de  Retz’s  ball  tonight  go  back―and  pretty  limply―only  as  far  as  the 
thirteenth century. Well! Among all these Venetian nobles, of such lofty birth, the only one we 
remember is Israel Bertuccio. 
“A  revolution  cancels  all  a  capricious  society’s  titles  and  distinctions.  In  a  revolution,  a 
man assumes whatever rank he earns by his behavior in the face of death. The brain itself gives 
up much of its supremacy... 
“What would Danton be today, in this century of Valenods and Rênals? Not even a deputy 
attorney general... 
“What am I talking about? He’d have sold himself to the Congregation of the Holy Virgin. 
He’d be a government minister, because the great Danton, after all, did his share of stealing. 
Mirabeau sold himself, too. Napoleon stole millions, in Italy, and without that wealth, poverty 
would  have  stopped  him  in  his  tracks,  according  to  General  Pichegru.  Only  Lafayette  never 
stole.11  Is  stealing  required?  Is  selling  yourself  inevitable?”  Julien  wondered.  The  question 
stopped  him  in  his  tracks.  He  spent  the  rest  of  the  night  reading  the  history  of  the  French 
Revolution. 
Next day, as he wrote letters in the library, all he could think of, still, was his conversation 
with Count Altamira. 
                                                             
9  The  revolutionary  and  postrevolutionary  generations  greatly  admired  George  Washington,  chiefly  for  his 
Cincinattus-like abandonment of power on two occasions, after the end of the Revolutionary War and again in 
1796. 
10 An 1829 play, controversial chiefly because it defied the traditional rules of the theater. Marino Faliero told 
the story of Israel Bertuccio, who plotted to assassinate the Venetian aristocracy in order to establish Faliero as 
reigning  prince  of  Venice.  The  Romantics  were  fascinated  by  the  byzantine  politics  of  medieval  and 
Renaissance Italy, which furnished subject matter to many works, especially plays. Stendhal himself drew on 
such sources for his novel La Chartreuse de Parme (The Charterhouse of Parma) and the Chroniques italiennes 
(The Italian Chornicles). 
11 Danton  (see note for p. 1, Epigraph) was arrested and executed on charges of embezzlement that, after his 
death, proved to be true. Mirabeau likewise was proven, after his death, guilty of accepting bribes (see note for 
p.  220,  l.  2).  Napoleon’s  looting  in  Italy  was  standard  for  the  leader  of  a  revolutionary  army,  and  the 
government of the Directory profited more than Napoleon did personally. Jean-Charles Pichegru (1761C1804) 
rose through the ranks to become commander of the Army of the North. He conquered Holland in 1795, but 
was accused―probably truthfully―of accepting bribes from royalist agents and was forced to resign in 1796. 
Elected by the Royalists to the Council of the Five Hundred, under the Directory in 1797, he was soon exiled 
to Guyana after an antiroyalist sweep of the government by Barras. He later escaped to England and soon 
joined in the anti-Bonapartist plots among the émigrés in London. In 1804 he traveled secretly to Paris to take 
part in a British-sponsored plot to kidnap First Consul Bonaparte. Betrayed by a fellow conspirator, Pichegru 
was arrested and emprisoned in the Temple. He was found there, strangled by his own silk scarf; the official 
government report of suicide was never fully accepted. The Marquis de Lafayette’s personal integrity was one 
character trait not even his worst enemies challenged. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
“In  fact,”  he  told  himself,  after  meditating  a  long  time,  “if  these  Spanish  liberals  had 
compromised  the  people’s  cause  by  committing  crimes,  they  would  not  have  been  so  easily 
swept away. These were arrogant children, and mere talkers...like me!” he suddenly exclaimed, 
as if waking with a start. “What difficult things have I ever done, to give myself the right to 
judge these poor devils, who in the end, once in their lifetimes, actually dared, actually started 
to act? I’m like a man who, rising from the table, cries out: ’I won’t eat dinner, tomorrow; it 
would only keep me from being as strong and happy as I am today.’ Who knows how you’ll 
deal with some grand deed, once it’s under way?...” These lofty thoughts were disturbed by the 
arrival of Mademoiselle de La Mole, who came walking into the library. Julien had gotten so 
excited, admiring the great qualities of Danton, and Mirabeau, and Carnot,12 who had known 
how to escape defeat, that his eyes were checked by Mademoiselle de La Mole’s appearance, 
though he was not thinking of her at all, and barely saw her. When his wide-open eyes realized 
she was there, their glow faded away. Mademoiselle de La Mole noticed it, bitterly. 
It was no good, asking him for a volume of de Vély’s History of France, which was sitting 
as high on the shelves as books could go, and which required Julien to go looking for the taller 
of the two library ladders. He went up the ladder, he found the book, he brought it down to 
her,  still  without  being  able  to  think  of  her.  While  putting  the  ladder  back,  he  was  so 
preoccupied  that  his  elbow  crashed  into  one  of  the  glass  shelf  doors;  the  shattered  pieces, 
falling to the floor, finally woke him up. He apologized to Mademoiselle de La Mole, hurriedly; 
he  meant  to  be  polite,  but  that  was  all  he  was.  It  was  obvious  to  Mathilde  that  he  was 
unsettled, and that, rather than talking to her, he would much prefer to keep thinking about 
whatever  had  been  occupying  his  mind  before  she  came.  She  looked  at  him  most  carefully, 
then slowly went away. Julien watched her walk off. He took a good deal of  pleasure in the 
contrast between how she was dressed at the moment, and her elegant magnificence, the night 
before.  The  difference  between  the  face  she  now  wore,  and  the  one  she’d  worn  then,  was 
almost equally striking. This young woman, who had seemed so haughty at the Duke de Retz’s 
ball, right now looked almost like a suppliant. “Really,” Julien said to himself, “this black dress 
makes her beautiful figure even more apparent. She carries herself like a queen. But why is she 
wearing mourning? 
“But if I ask someone this question, I may just be blundering all over again.” Julien had 
now emerged from the depths of his rapture. “I’ll have to reread the letters I’ve written this 
morning: God only knows all the words I’ve misspelled, and the mistakes I’ll find.” As he read 
over  the  letters,  concentrating  hard,  he  heard  just  behind  him  the  rustle  of  a  silk  dress.  He 
turned  around  rapidly.  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole  was  no  more  than  two  feet  away,  and  she 
laughed. This second interruption annoyed him. 
Mathilde had just become vividly aware that, to this young man, she did not matter a bit. 
She’d laughed in order to hide her embarrassment, and in that she succeeded. 
“You’re  obviously  thinking  the  most  interesting  thoughts,  Monsieur  Sorel.  Might  it  be 
some  strange  tale  of  the  conspiracy  that  sent  Count  Altamira  to  us,  here  in  Paris?  Tell  me, 
please, if that’s what it is; I’m most anxious to know; I’ll be discreet, I promise you!” Hearing 
                                                             
12 Lazare Carnot (1753C1823), revolutionary politician with remarkable survival skills. De facto war minister 
during the Convention and the Directory, he managed to survive his enemies in both governments as well as 
their  downfalls.  Named  minister  of  war  by  Bonaparte  in  1800,  he  was  too  independent  to  serve  as  a  mere 
figurehead and soon resigned. An imperial senator who frequently opposed Napoleon, he devoted himself to 
scientific study after the Senate was suppressed in 1807. He returned to Napoleon’s service in the last days of 
the  Empire  and  again  during  the  Hundred  Days,  when  he  was  named  minister  of  interior.  Exiled  by  the 
Bourbons after Waterloo, he died in Prussia. His son and grandson were prominent in French politics, and 
another son was a prominent physicist. 
 
 
Chapter Nine: The Ball 
herself  saying  these  words,  she  was  stunned.  What  was  happening,  that  she  found  herself 
begging favors of an underling! Her embarrassment mounting, she added, lightly: 
“What could have made you, usually so reserved, an inspired creature, a kind of Michael 
Angelo sort of prophet?” 
This sharp, indiscreet query deeply wounded Julien, and his craziness came back. 
“Was  Danton  right  to  steal?”  he  told  her  rudely,  and  in  a  manner  that  quickly  became 
more and more savage. “Should the revolutionaries of Piedmont, of Spain,13 have committed 
crimes that compromised the people? Should they have given even totally unworthy people all 
the commissions in the army, and all the medals? Wouldn’t the people wearing these medals 
have worried that the king might retake his throne? Should they have let the hordes loose, on 
the  treasures  of  Turin?  In  short,  mademoiselle,”  he  said,  coming  over  to  her,  his  face 
frightening to behold, “must the man who wants to eliminate ignorance and crime from the 
earth―must he sweep across the earth like a hurricane and do evil however it happens to take 
place?” 
Mathilde  was  afraid,  unable  to  endure  the  way  he  was  looking  at  her;  she  stepped  two 
paces back. She glanced at him for just a moment, and then, ashamed of her fear, she left the 
library, walking with light unconcern. 
                                                             
13 Refers to the failed liberal uprisings in both countries in the early 1820s. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Chapter Ten: Queen Marguerite 
Love! What madness won’t you descend to, in order to bring us pleasure? 
―Letters of a Portuguese Nun 1 
Julien  reread his  letters.  When  the  dinner  bell  was  heard: “How  ridiculous  I  must  have 
seemed, to this Parisian doll,” he said to himself. “What idiocy to tell her what I was actually 
thinking! Speaking the truth, here, was truly worthy of me. 
“But why come and ask me such private questions? She was acting most indiscreetly. It’s 
bad manners. My thoughts on Danton are no part of the work her father pays me for.” 
Coming  into  the  dining  room,  Julien’s  ill  humor  was  shunted  to  the  side,  seeing 
Mademoiselle de La Mole wearing such deep mourning, which was all the more remarkable 
because no one else in the family was wearing black. 
After  dinner,  he  realized  that  the  flooding  enthusiasm  he  had  felt  the  entire  day  had 
completely  left  him.  Luckily,  the  academician  who  knew  Latin  had  been  dining  with  them. 
“Here’s a man who wouldn’t likely make fun of me,” Julien told himself, “if, as I suspect it is, 
asking Mademoiselle de La Mole about her mourning would be a stupid blunder.” 
Mathilde  had  been  looking  at  him  very  strangely.  “Here,  then,  is  female  flirtatiousness, 
Parisian  style,  exactly  as  Madame  de  Rênal  described  it  for  me,”  he  told  himself.  “I  wasn’t 
pleasant to her this morning. I didn’t give in to the silly notion of having a chat with her. And 
that made her think better of me. I have no doubt there’ll be the devil to pay on that score! 
Later  on,  her  arrogant  contempt  will  know  exactly  how  to  take  vengeance.  Let  her  do  her 
worst.  How  different  she  is  from  the  woman  I’ve  lost.  What  natural  charm  that  was!  What 
innocence! I knew her thoughts before she did, I saw them as they were being born. The only 
enemy  I  had, in  her  heart, was  the  fear  that  her  children  might  die. It  was  rational,  natural 
affection, kind and gentle even for me, though it made me suffer. I’ve been a fool. The ideas I’d 
formed about Paris stopped me from appreciating that sublime woman. 
“God in heaven, what a difference! What do I find here? Dry, arrogant vanity, every shade 
of narcissism, and nothing more.” 
The  diners  rose  from  the  table.  “Let’s  not  have  anyone  else  snaring  my  academician,” 
Julien  said  to  himself.  He  went  over  to  him,  as  they  were  going  into  the  garden,  took  on  a 
pleasant,  dutiful  air,  and  shared  his  fury  at  the  success  of  Victor  Hugo’s  modernist  drama, 
Hernani.2 
“If only we still lived in the era when bad art could be banned!...” he said. 
“Then Hugo would never have dared,” exclaimed the academician, with a gesture worthy 
of the great tragedian, Talma. 
As they were discussing flowers, Julien quoted lines from Virgil’s Georgica, and affirmed 
that nothing was so fine as the tame, mediocre verse of Jacques Delille. In short, he flattered 
the  academician  right  and  left.  This  accomplished,  he  noted,  most  casually:  “I  dare  say 
Mademoiselle de La Mole has had some money from a deceased uncle, for whom she’s wearing 
mourning.” 
“Ha! You live in this house,” said the academician, suddenly interrupting their stroll, “and 
you don’t know how crazy she is? Really, it’s most peculiar that her mother allows her to do 
                                                             
1 The title of a novel by Diderot (1713C84) that does not contain the quotation given. 
2 The premiére of Victor Hugo’s play (1830), which flouted the rules of classical French drama, caused such 
controversy that there were rhetorical feuds in the newspapers―and at least one brawl―between Romantics 
and the defenders of classicism. Seen as a manifesto of Romanticism, the play greatly offended conservatives, 
like those of the Académie Francaise. 
 
 
Chapter Ten: Queen Marguerite 
such  things.”  He  resumed  their  walk.  “But  it’s  not  exactly  by  strength  of  character  that  one 
shines, in this household. Mademoiselle de La Mole has enough of that for the whole lot of 
them, and leads them around by their noses. Today is the thirtieth of April!” And he stopped, 
once more, looking at Julien and smiling ironically. Julien smiled as knowingly as he could. 
“But  what  connection  can  there  possibly  be,”  he  said  to  himself,  “between  making 
marionettes out of everyone in the house, and wearing a black dress, and the thirtieth of April? 
I must be even denser than I’d supposed.” 
“I confess...” he told the academician, pursuing the question with the look in his eyes. 
“Let’s walk in  the garden,” said the academician, delighted, sensing the opportunity for 
telling a long, elegant tale. “Really! Is it actually possible you don’t know what happened on 
the thirtieth of April, in 1574?”3 
“Where?” asked Julien, amazed. 
“In the Place de Grève.” 
Julien was so perplexed that the name meant nothing to him. Curiosity, and the prospect 
of a fine tragic story―so deeply in harmony with his own nature―made his eyes sparkle in 
exactly the way a storyteller loves to see, in his listener’s expression. Delighted to have found a 
virgin ear, the academician unwound a long tale about how, on the thirtieth of April, 1574, the 
handsomest young man of that time, Boniface de La Mole,4 along with Annibal de Coconasso, 
a gentleman of Piedmont, and de La Mole’s friend, had been beheaded in the Place de Grève. 
De La Mole had been the adored lover of Queen Marguerite de Navarre―”and note,” added 
the academician, “that Mademoiselle de La Mole’s name is Mathilde-Marguerite. Young de La 
Mole  was  also  the  Duke  d’Alen04on’s5  favorite,  and  the  King  of  Navarre’s  close  friend―his 
mistress’s husband, afterward Henry IV. On the day of Mardi Gras, in 1574, the royal court was 
at Saint-Germain, with poor King Charles IX, who was dying. De La Mole wanted to rescue his 
friends, the royal princes, held captive at the court by Queen Catherine de Médici. He brought 
two  hundred  horsemen  to  the  very  walls  of  Saint-Germain,  the  Duke  d’Alen04on  was 
frightened, and de La Mole was thrown to the executioner. 
“But what so deeply touches Mademoiselle de La Mole, as she told me herself, seven or 
eight  years  ago,  when  she  was  twelve―because  she  has  a  mind,  a  mind!...”  And  the 
academician  raised  his  eyes  toward  heaven.  “What  struck  her  the  most,  about  this  political 
                                                             
3 The story of Boniface de La Mole (or La Molle) is set against the turbulent era of the Wars of Religion, or 
Wars  of  the  League,  in  the  second  half  of  the  sixteenth  century.  These  complicated  political  circumstances 
merit some explanation. At the death of Henri II in 1559, Catherine de Médici wielded enormous influence 
during the reigns of her three sons. Francis II (born 1544, reigned 1559C60), married Mary, Queen of Scots. He 
was succeeded by Charles IX (born 1550), who at his mother’s urging ordered the Saint Bartholomew’s Day 
Massacre―August 24, 1572―when agents of the king murdered a great number of Huguenot nobles gathered 
in Paris for the marriage of Marguerite de Valois to Henri, King of Navarre (the future Henri IV of France [ see 
note for p. 282, l. 1]). This act of calculated mass murder further inflamed the Wars of Religion. Charles died in 
1574, and the throne passed to the third brother, Henri III (1551C89), who acknowledged his Protestant cousin 
Henri  de  Navarre  as  his  heir  presumptive.  This  enraged  many  Catholics  who,  under  the  leadership  of  the 
Duke  de  Guise,  formed  the  Holy  League  (Sainte  Ligue)  to  prevent  Henri  de  Navarre’s  accession.  Henri  III 
himself  was  assassinated  in  1589.  Henri  de  Navarre  became  Henri  IV  of  France,  after  converting  to 
Catholicism. 
4 Joseph de Boniface, seigneur de La Mole, was, according to legend, one of Queen Marguerite’s many lovers, 
and was executed with his friend Annibal Coconasso in the Place de la Grève on April 30, 1574. Marguerite de 
Valois  became  immortalized  by  Alexandre  Dumas’s  1845  novel,  La  Reine  Margot.  Henri  had  their  marriage 
annulled in 1599. 
5 the fourth son of Henri II and Catherine de Médici; it was his death in 1584 that lead Henri III to name Henri 
de Navarre his heir. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
catastrophe, is that Queen Marguerite de Navarre, hidden in a house on Place de Grève, dared 
to ask the executioner for her lover’s head. And the next night, at midnight, she took the head 
in her carriage, and she herself buried it in a chapel at the foot of Montmartre Hill.” 
“Really?” exclaimed Julien, moved. 
“Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole  is  scornful  of  her  brother,  since  as  you’ve  seen  he  has  no 
interest whatever in all this ancient history, and never puts on mourning for the thirtieth of 
April.  Ever  since  this  famous  execution,  and  in  order  to  commemorate  de  La  Mole’s  close 
friendship with Coconasso―who, being Italian, was named Annibal―every man in the de La 
Mole  family  bears  that  name.  And,”  added  the  academician,  lowering  his  voice,  “this 
Coconasso, according to Charles IX himself, was one of the most savage of all the murderers, 
in  the  Saint  Bartholomew’s  Day  massacres  of  twenty-four  August,  1572...But  how  can  it  be 
possible, my dear Sorel, that you’ve not known these things, you who live in this house?” 
“You’ve  just  explained  to  me  why,  twice,  at  dinner  tonight,  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole 
called her brother Annibal. I thought I’d misheard her.” 
“She was scolding him. What odd tricks she plays!” 
He followed these remarks with five or six ironical observations.  Julien was shocked by 
the  glow  of  high  intimacy  in  the  academician’s  eyes.  “Here  we  have  two  servants  being 
malicious about our masters,” he thought. But  nothing  this academic might say would have 
surprised him. 
One day, Julien had stumbled on him, down on his knees in front of the Marquise de La 
Mole, begging that a nephew of his, who lived in the provinces, be given a collectorship of the 
tobacco tax. And that night, a young chambermaid of Mathilde’s who, just like Elisa, had been 
wooing him, put in his head the idea that her mistress’s mourning garb was not at all a way of 
getting  attention.  This  extremely  queer  notion  reached  right  to  the  depths  of  his  soul. 
Mathilde actually loved the long-dead de La Mole, dearly beloved of the most intelligent queen 
of her time, and a man who had died while trying to liberate his friends. And what friends! The 
first Prince of the Blood, and the future King Henry IV. 
Accustomed  to  the  perfect  simplicity  that  glowed  in  everything  Madame  de  Rênal  said 
and did, all Julien had seen in Parisian women was affectation; and, whenever his mood was 
melancholic, he had nothing to say to them. Mademoiselle de La Mole was an exception. 
He  began  to  understand  that  the  standard  for  beauty,  as  he  could  observe  it  among 
aristocratic  women,  did  not  necessarily  involve  coldness  of  heart.  He  had  long  after-dinner 
conversations with Mademoiselle de La Mole, who would sometimes walk in the garden with 
him,  by  the  drawing  room’s  open  windows.  She  told  him,  one  day,  that  she  was  reading 
d’Aubigné’s  history,  and  the  stories  of  Brant00me.6  “What  strange  things  for  her  to  read,” 
thought Julien, “when the marquise won’t let her have Walter Scott’s novels!”7 
One  day  she  told  him,  her  eyes  gleaming  with  pleasure―showing  how  sincerely  she 
admired it―the tale of what a young woman had done, in the days of Henry III. She had just 
been  reading  the  story,  in  l’Etoile’s  Memoirs:  finding  her  husband  unfaithful,  the  young 
woman had stabbed him. 
                                                             
6 Théodore-Agrippa d’Aubigné (1552C1630) was a Huguenot nobleman, historian, and poet; a friend of Henri 
de Navarre, he escaped the Saint Bartholomew’s massacre only by chance. Pierre de Bourdeilles, seigneur de 
Brant00me (ca. 1540C1614), was a soldier who turned to writing; he is most famous for his Memories and his 
Lives of Gallant Ladies, both of which are rich with frank anecdotes about life at the Valois courts. Both authors 
confirm the liaison of Marguerite and Boniface. 
7 The historical novels of Sir Walter Scott (1771C1832)―Ivanhoe, et al.―enjoyed immense popularity in France, 
contributing to the vogue of historical novels and plays in France. 
 
 
Chapter Ten: Queen Marguerite 
Julien’s  vanity  was  flattered.  A  woman  raised  in  an  environment  so  full  of  honor  and 
respect, and someone who, according to the academician, led her whole family around by their 
noses,  had  thought  it  worthwhile  to  talk  to  him,  and  in  a  way  that  came  rather  close  to 
friendliness. 
“No, I was wrong,” he thought, later on. “This isn’t intimacy. All I am is someone to whom 
she can tell this tragedy: she needs to speak about it. I’m considered a scholar, in this family. 
Well, I’m going to read Brant00me, d’Aubigné, l’Etoile.8 Then I’ll be able to argue about some of 
these stories Mademoiselle  de La Mole’s  been telling  me. I want to stop playing  this role of 
passive confidant.” 
Gradually,  these  conversations  with  the  girl―who  carried  herself  with  such  a  sense  of 
importance,  and  at  the  same  time  with  such  ease―became  more  interesting.  He  forgot  his 
sorrowful  role  as  a  working-class  revolutionary.  He  found  her  knowledgeable,  and  even 
rational. The opinions she held, in the garden, were very different from those she exhibited in 
the  drawing  room.  At  times  she  showed him  an  enthusiasm,  and  an  openness,  that  were  in 
absolute contrast to her usual manner, so lofty and so cold. 
“Those sixteenth-century Wars of the League are France’s heroic era,” she was saying to 
him  one  day,  her  eyes  glittering  with  intelligence  and  spirit.  “Everyone  was  fighting  for 
something they wanted, trying to make their party triumphant, and not just to ploddingly earn 
a medal, the way they did in your emperor’s time. You’ll surely agree there was less egoism, 
and less pettiness. I love that time.” 
“And Boniface de La Mole was its hero,” he said. 
“At  least  he  was  loved,  as  perhaps  it’s  sweet  to  be  loved.  What  woman  alive  today 
wouldn’t be horrified to touch her lover’s chopped-off head?” 
Madame de La Mole called to her daughter. To be useful, hypocrisy must be hidden, and 
Julien, as we have seen, had made Mademoiselle de La Mole more or less a confidante of his 
Napoleon worship. 
Now  alone  in  the  garden:  “There’s  the  huge  advantage  they  have  over  us,”  Julien  told 
himself. “Their ancestors’ history lifts them above vulgar feelings, and they don’t always have 
to  focus  on  where  their  bread  is  coming  from!  What  misery!”  he  added,  bitterly.  “I’m  not 
worthy  of  thinking  about  these  great  matters.  My  life  is  nothing  but  a  succession  of 
hypocrisies,  because  I  haven’t  got  an  income  of  a  thousand  francs,  with  which  to  buy  my 
bread.” 
“And what are you dreaming about, sir?” asked Mathilde, who had come running back. 
Julien was tired of self-contempt. His pride led him to tell her, frankly, the thoughts he’d 
been having. It made him blush quite violently, speaking of his  poverty to someone so very 
rich. He tried to make clear, by his proud tone, that he was not asking for a thing. Mathilde 
had never thought him so handsome; his expression conveyed a sensitivity and an openness 
he’d often lacked. 
Less  than  a  month  later,  Julien  was  walking,  intensely  thoughtful,  in  the  de  La  Mole 
garden;  his  face  no  longer  bore  the  hardness,  the  philosophic  arrogance,  imprinted  on  it  by 
long-continued  feelings  of  inferiority.  He  had  just  brought  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole  to  the 
drawing room door: she was claiming to have hurt her foot, running with her brother. 
“She leaned on my arm in such a peculiar way!” Julien said to himself. “Am I an arrogant 
puppy, or can she really have taken a liking to me? She listens to me so sweetly, even when I’m 
telling her what suffering my pride causes me! She, who’s so haughty with everyone! They’d be 
                                                             
8 Pierre de l’Etoile (1546C1611), a Parisian bourgeois, left a detailed diary of his time. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
truly  startled,  in  the drawing  room,  if  they  could  see  that  look  on  her  face.  That  sweetness, 
that goodness, isn’t something she ever shows, not to anybody.” 
Julien  tried  not  to  exaggerate  this  odd  friendship.  He  described  it  to  himself  as  a 
relationship at gunpoint. Every day, when they found themselves together again, and before 
they  could  resume  the  previous  night’s  almost  intimate  tone,  they  virtually  had  to  ask 
themselves: “Will we be friends today, or enemies?” Julien was very well aware that, if he ever 
let himself be insulted, with impunity, by this haughty girl, everything was all over. “If I have 
to quarrel with her, wouldn’t it be better, in a proper defense of my pride, if I started it, instead 
of just repelling the signs of contempt that, surely, will follow right behind the very smallest 
surrender of my personal dignity?” 
Several times, when they were not in good moods, Mathilde tried to play the great lady 
with him. She made these attempts with rare skill, but Julien roughly pushed them aside. 
One  day  he  interrupted  her  sharply:  “Has  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole  some  order  to 
transmit to her father’s secretary?” he said. “He is obliged to obey the marquis’s orders, and to 
respectfully  carry  them  out.  But,  otherwise,  the  marquis’s  secretary  has  nothing  to  say  to 
mademoiselle. He is not paid to communicate his thoughts to her.” 
This kind of behavior, and his strange doubts, drove away the boredom once so regularly 
afflicting  him,  in  that  resplendent  drawing  room  where  he’d  been  afraid  of  everything,  and 
where it had never felt proper to joke about anything. 
“It would be a good joke, if  she loved me! But whether she does or she doesn’t,” Julien 
went  on,  “I  have  for  my  friend  a  girl  who’s  intelligent,  in  front  of  whom  the  whole  house 
trembles, and most of all the Marquis de Croisenois―that infinitely polished young man, so 
gentle,  so  courageous,  who  has  all  the  advantages  of  birth  and  fortune,  either  one  of  which 
would  put  my  heart  so  completely  at  ease!  He’s  wildly  in  love;  he’ll  surely  marry  her.  Just 
consider all the letters Monsieur de La Mole has had me write to the lawyers on both sides, to 
settle the terms of the marriage contract! And I, who see myself so much the underling, with 
my pen in my hand, here I am, two hours later, in the garden again, victorious over this fine, 
good young man―for her preference is striking, utterly plain to see. And perhaps she dislikes 
him as a possible husband. She’s arrogant enough for that. And all the kindnesses she shows 
me, they come to me in my role as an employee-confidant! 
“But no: Either I’m crazy, or she’s paying court to me. The colder and more respectful I 
am to her, the more she comes looking for me. It might be a pretense, an affectation―but I 
can see her eyes light up when I appear without warning. Do Parisian women know how to go 
that far, with their game-playing? But what difference does it make to me! Here I’ve got all the 
appearances: let’s savor them. And Lord, how pretty she is! How I relish those big blue eyes, 
seen so close, and looking at me as they often do! What a difference between this spring and 
last year’s, in Besan04on, when I was miserable and sustained myself only by force of character, 
in the middle of three hundred nasty, dirty hypocrites! I was almost as nasty as they were.” 
When he fell victim to mistrust: “She’s making fun of me, that girl,” Julien would think. 
“She and her brother have made a pact to bamboozle me. But she really seems to despise her 
brother’s listlessness! ‘He’s courageous, and that’s all he is,’ she told me. ‘He hasn’t got a single 
thought bold enough to defy fashion! I am always required to defend him. I’m a girl, I’m only 
nineteen! How can I be forever faithful, day after day, to the hypocrisy they demand of us?’ 
“On  the  other  hand,  when  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole  looks  so  fixedly  at  me,  with  that 
strange expression in her big blue eyes, Count Norbert always looks away. That strikes me as 
suspicious.  Shouldn’t  he  be  indignant  if  his  sister  so  honors  a  household  servant?  And  I’ve 
heard  the  Duke  de  Chaulnes  talk  of  me  that  way.”  Remembering  this,  anger  replaced  every 
other feeling. “Is that peculiar old duke just crazy about old-fashioned ways of speech? 
 
 
Chapter Ten: Queen Marguerite 
“Lord, Lord, but she’s pretty!” Julien resumed, a tigerish look on his face. “I’ll have her, I’ll 
leave afterward, and anyone who chases after me had better watch out!” 
He became preoccupied with the idea; he was unable to think of anything else. Days went 
by, for him, as if they’d been hours. 
Over  and  over,  as  he  tried  to  focus  on  some  serious  business,  his  mind  would  let 
everything else fall away, and for a quarter of an hour he’d be lost in dreams, his heart beating 
hard,  his  head  hurting,  and  always  wondering  about  the  exact  same  thing:  “Does  she  really 
love me?” 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Chapter Eleven: A Young Girl’s Imperial Dominion 
I admire her beauty, but I’m afraid of her mind. 
―Mérimée 1 
Had Julien tried to analyze what went on in the drawing room, with the same intensity 
with  which  he  set  himself  to  dramatizing  her  beauty,  or  getting  himself  excited  about  the 
family’s natural arrogance―which she put aside for him―he would have understood how she 
ruled  over  everyone  around  her.  The  moment  anyone  displeased  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole, 
she  knew  exactly  how  to  strike  back  with  a  jest  so  carefully  calculated,  so  well  chosen,  so 
apparently  decent  and  decorous,  hurled  with  such  perfect  timing,  that  the  wound  kept 
growing worse and worse, the more the victim thought about it. Bit by bit, she would become 
increasingly  destructive  of  the  offending  party’s  self-esteem.  Since  she  had  absolutely  no 
interest in most of the things so very seriously sought by the rest of the family, to them she 
seemed forever cool and calm. Aristocratic drawing rooms are pleasant to discuss, when you’ve 
escaped from them, but that’s about all: sheer politeness, never progressing beyond politeness, 
is  worth  very  little  after  first  meetings.  Julien  had  experienced  this,  too,  after  an  initial 
enchantment, an initial surprise. “Politeness,” he told himself, “is merely the absence of that 
anger which creates bad manners.” Mathilde was frequently bored; it may well have been that 
she  would  have  been  bored  wherever  she  was.  Accordingly,  honing  an  epigram  was  for  her 
both a distraction and a genuine pleasure. 
It may have been in order to have victims a bit more amusing than her grandparents, the 
academician,  and  the  five  or  six  underlings  who  composed  their  court,  that  she  had 
encouraged the Marquis de Croisenois, Count de Caylus, and two or three other young men of 
the highest rank. All they were to her was new targets for epigrams. 
It pains us to admit, since we love Mathilde, that she had received letters from several of 
these young men, and had sometimes replied to them. We hasten to add that, in so doing, she 
was an exception to the rules of her time. Lack of prudence is not usually ascribable to young 
women who have been students at the noble Convent of the Sacred Heart of Jesus.2 
One  day,  the  Marquis  de  Croisenois  sent  her  back  a  significantly  compromising  letter 
that, the previous night, she had written him. This demonstration of great prudence seemed to 
him quite helpful, as a way of furthering his cause. But recklessness was what Mathilde liked in 
her  correspondence.  She  took  real  pleasure  in  games  of  that  sort.  She  did  not  speak  to  him 
again for a full six weeks. 
These young  men’s letters amused her, but according to her they were all alike, always 
heavy with “the most profound passion,” with “infinite melancholy.”3 
“They’re each and all the same perfect man, ready to leave on another Crusade,” she said 
to her cousin, Mademoiselle de Sainte-Hérédité. “Have you ever seen anything more insipid? 
And these are the letters I’m going to receive, all the rest of my life! Letters like this can only 
change  every  twenty  years,  when  the  world  changes  to  a  new  way  of  keeping  itself  busy. 
Letters had to be less colorless, in the days of Napoleon. All young aristocrats, back then, had 
                                                             
1 Prosper Mérimée (1803C70), one of the great French writers of the nineteenth century, was known especially 
for his short stories. He and Stendhal met in the late 1820s and became close friends. 
2 A fashionable Paris convent school for aristocratic girls. 
3 Clichés of Romantic literature, especially after Ch09teaubriand’s immensely popular short novels, René and 
Atala, which Stendhal despised. 
 
 
Chapter Eleven: A Young Girl’s Imperial Dominion 
seen or been involved in really grand deeds. My uncle, the Duke of N―――, was at the Battle 
of Wagram.”4 
“What  has  force  of  character  got  to  do  with  swinging  a  saber?  And  when  they  do  it, 
they’re always talking about it!” said her cousin. 
“Well!  I  like  those  stories.  To  be  in  a  genuine  battle,  one  of  Napoleon’s,  where  ten 
thousand soldiers were killed, that really tests your courage. Exposing yourself to danger lifts 
the soul, preserves it from the boredom in which, alas, my poor worshipers are immersed. And 
boredom  is  contagious.  Have  they  ever  thought  of  doing  anything  extraordinary?  They’re 
trying to win me: now there’s a wonderful adventure! I’m rich, and my father will push his son-
in-law. Ah, if only my father could find me, instead, someone who was just a tiny bit amusing!” 
As you can see, Mathilde’s way of looking at things, lively, candid, picturesque, had a bad 
effect on how she talked. Her remarks often seemed to her exceedingly polite friends in rather 
poor taste. Had she been less in fashion, they might almost have said that her way of talking 
was a bit overcolored to be true feminine delicacy. 
For  her  part,  she  was  certainly  unfair  to  the  handsome  cavaliers  who  filled  the  Bois  de 
Boulogne.5 She did not look to the future with terror―that would phrase it too forcefully―but 
with a disgust distinctly rare at her age. 
What could she hope for? Wealth, noble birth, intelligence, beauty, all had been heaped 
on her by the hands of Fate, or so people said to her, and so she believed. 
So this was how she thought, she who was the most envied heiress of the Faubourg Saint-
German, at the time when she began to take pleasure in walking with Julien. His pride amazed 
her; she admired the shrewdness of this petty bourgeois. Just as Father Maury had done, she 
assured herself, he’d know how to make himself a bishop. 
During these walks, the fashion in which our hero criticized some of her ideas, his honest, 
earnest opposition, soon began to preoccupy her; she thought about what he said; she told her 
cousin every little detail of their conversations, though she found herself unable to do justice 
to their full flavor. 
And suddenly an idea flashed on her: “I’m lucky enough to be in love,” she told herself, in 
an incredible ecstatic joy. “I’m in love, I’m in love, I am, I am! A young girl at my age, beautiful, 
spirited, where could I find such emotion, except in love? There’s no point even trying, I could 
never  fall  in  love  with  Croisenois,  Caylus,  and  all  the  others.  They’re  perfect,  maybe  too 
perfect, but―in a word―they all bore me.” 
She reviewed in her head all the descriptions of passion she’d read in Manon Lescaut, in 
La Nouvelle Hélo07se, in The Letters of a Portuguese Nun, etc., etc.6 Of course, it could only be a 
grand passion: a frivolous love was unworthy of a girl her age, a girl of her birth. For her, the 
only  thing  that  deserved  the  name  love  was  the  heroic  emotion  occurring,  in  the  whole  of 
French history, during the days of Henry III and of Bassompierre, Richelieu’s antagonist. Such 
love never wavered, vulgarly, when it met with obstacles: quite to the contrary, obstacles led to 
                                                             
4 One of Napoleon’s last significant victories was the Battle of Wagram, fought against Austria in 1809. The 
subsequent truce with Austria led to Napoleon’s marriage with Archduchess Maria Louisa von Hapsburg. 
5 Then on the outskirts of Paris, these woods were a fashionable place to ride (and to see and be seen) for the 
Parisian élite. 
6  Manon  Lescaut,  by  the  abbé  Prévost,  Rousseau’s  La  Nouvelle  Hélo07se,  and  Diderot’s  Lettres  d’une  religieuse 
portugaise  were  all  eighteenth-century  novels  with  vague  reputations  for  immorality,  especially  among 
conservatives like the La Moles. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
truly  great  deeds.  “How  wretched  that  there’s  no  real  court,  like  Catherine  de  Médici’s7  or 
Louis XIII’s!8 I think I could  do anything,  no matter how bold, no matter how grand. What 
wouldn’t I do if a passionate king, like Louis XIII, were sighing at my feet! I’d lead him straight 
into that peasant revolt, the Vendée,9 as Baron de Tully always says, and he’d go on from there, 
he’d reconquer his whole kingdom, there’d be an end to any more Constitutions10...and Julien 
would help me. What is he missing? Name and fortune. He’d make himself a name, he’d win 
himself a fortune. 
“Croisenois isn’t missing anything. For the rest of his life, all he’ll be is a sort of right-wing 
duke,  a  sort  of  liberal,  a  wobbly-minded  man,  forever  avoiding  extremes,  and  as  a  result, 
forever coming in second. 
“What great deed isn’t extreme when it’s first begun? Only when it’s been accomplished 
can it seem possible in the eyes of ordinary men. Yes―it has to be love, with all its miracles, 
that now will rule my heart: I feel its quickening fire. Heaven owes me this sign of favor. My 
happiness will be worthy of me. The days of my life will no longer, one by one, each coldly 
resemble  the  one  before  it.  There’s  already  grandeur,  and  true  audacity,  in  daring  to  love 
someone so far beneath me in social standing. We’ll see: Will he continue to deserve me? The 
first time I see weakness in him, I’ll give him up. A girl of my birth, and with the courtly nature 
they’ve  been  good  enough  to  concede  me  [this  was  one  of  her  father’s  favorite  expressions] 
must not behave like an idiot. 
“And  isn’t  that  the  role  I’d  be  playing  if  I  loved  the  Marquis  de  Croisenois?  I  would  be 
nothing more than a new edition of my cousins, for whom I feel such utter contempt. I know 
in advance everything the poor marquis would say to me, everything I’d then have to say to 
him. What kind of love makes you yawn? You might as well be pious and devout. There’d be 
the same kind of ceremony my youngest cousin had, when her marriage contract was signed, 
with all the grandparents there―unless they’d been upset by some clause the lawyer for the 
other side had put, in the night before.” 
                                                             
7 Wife of Henri II and mother of three kings of France (see note for p. 289, ll. 9C10). She was said to have brought 
the culture of the Renaissance to the French court. Her legend as a cruel, manipulative, almost witchlike figure 
began in her own lifetime. 
8 Louis’s court was a constant center of intrigues both political and amorous. 
9  An  Atlantic  coastal  region  just  south  of  Brittany  that  was  a  center  of  counterrevolutionary  insurrection. 
Motivated  by  deep  Catholicism  and  funded  by  émigrés  in  England,  as  many  as  forty  thousand,  mostly 
peasant, Vendéens formed a “catholic and royal army,” which conducted a fierce guerrilla war against the 
revolutionary government from 1793 to 1796, with flare-ups in 1799 and 1815. 
10 The Charte, or Constitution, of 1815 was a thorn in the side of the ultras despite the fact that they maintained 
power under it. 
 
 
Chapter Twelve: Will he be another Danton? 
Chapter Twelve: Will he be another Danton? 
A craving for excitement: that was my aunt’s nature, the beautiful Marguerite de Valois, who soon married 
the King of Navarre, now ruling France as Henry IVth. Gambling was the basic underlying, but secret, force 
in this likable princess’ character, as it had been in all the quarrels and the reconciliations she’d had with her 
brothers, from the age of sixteen on. Now, with what can a young girl gamble? With her most  precious 
possession, her reputation, the thing she must look after for her entire life. 
―Duke D’Angouleme, Natural Son of Charles IX, Memoirs1 
“There  will  be  no  signing  a  contract,  for  Julien  and  me,  no  lawyers:  it’s  all  heroic, 
everything open to chance. Except for noble status, which he lacks, this is exactly Marguerite 
de Valois’s love for the young de La Mole, the most distinguished man of his time. Is it my 
fault that the young men of the court are such intense partisans of acceptability, starting to 
shake at the very idea of anything even a little bit different? To them, a little trip to Greece, or 
to Africa, is the height of daring, and even then they only know how to march in step with 
everyone else. The minute they’re alone, they’re afraid―not of a Bedouin’s spear, but of being 
made to look ridiculous, and that fear drives them crazy. 
“My little Julien, on the other hand, only likes to act by himself. This privileged creature 
never so much as thinks of seeking support or assistance from others! He despises everyone, 
which is why I don’t despise him. 
“If Julien were noble, poor as he is, my love would be nothing but vulgar stupidity, an act 
of out-and-out miscegenation. I want nothing of the kind; it would have none of the qualities 
of  a  grand  passion,  none  of  the  immense  difficulties  to  be  conquered,  and  the  black 
uncertainty of what might come.” 
Mademoiselle de La Mole was so preoccupied with this fine chain of reasoning that, the 
next day, not thinking what she was saying, she praised Julien to the Marquis de Croisenois 
and her brother. Her eloquence soared so high that they grew annoyed. 
“Watch  out  for  that  young  fellow,  with  all  that  energy,”  exclaimed  her  brother.  “If  the 
Revolution ever starts up again, he’ll have every one of us guillotined.” 
She stopped herself from answering, and quickly began to tease both her brother and the 
Marquis de Croisenois about how afraid they were of anything or anyone energetic. At bottom, 
this  was  simply  fear  of  encountering  the  unexpected,  the  terror  of  falling  short  in  its 
presence.... 
“Always, gentlemen, always, this same fear of ridicule―a monster which, unluckily, died 
“There is no more ridicule,” Monsieur de La Mole liked to say, “not in a country where 
in 1816.” 
there are only two parties.” 
His daughter had grasped the idea. 
“And so, gentlemen,” she said to Julien’s enemies, “you’ll have lived your whole lives in 
great fear, and afterward they’ll tell you: 
“It wasn’t a wolf, but just its shadow.” 
Mathilde soon walked away. Her brother’s words had filled her with horror. He’d left her 
very much worried; but by the next day, she saw it as the most handsome of compliments. 
“In this nineteenth century, when all energy has died, Julien’s makes them afraid. I’ll tell 
him what my brother said; I want to see his response. But I’ll pick a moment when his eyes are 
gleaming. He won’t lie to me, then. 
                                                             
1 Charles de Valois (1573C1650). 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
“He’ll be a Danton!” she added, after a long, vague reverie. “Well! So the Revolution starts 
up  again.  What  roles  will  Croisenois  and  my  brother  be  playing?  It’s  been  written  out  in 
advance: sublime resignation. They’ll be heroic sheep, they’ll let themselves be swallowed up 
without a word. Their only  fear, as they die, will still be to do everything in good taste. My 
little Julien would blow out the brains of the Jacobin who comes to arrest him, no matter how 
small his hope of getting away. He’s not afraid of being in bad taste, not him.” 
This last observation made her thoughtful; it roused painful memories and wiped away all 
her boldness. It brought back the jests of Messieurs de Caylus, de Croisenois, de Luz, and her 
brother. These gentlemen had unanimously reproved Julien for his priestly airs: humble and 
hypocritical. 
“But,”  she  suddenly  responded,  her  eyes  bright  with  happiness,  “the  bitterness  and 
frequency of these jests proves that, despite themselves, he’s the most distinguished man we’ve 
seen  all  winter.  What  do  his  faults  matter,  his  absurdities?  He  has  grandeur,  and  they’re 
shocked by it, these young men so good and so forgiving in other respects. He’s poor, yes, and 
he’s studied to be a priest; they’re squadron chiefs, and they don’t need to study anything. It’s 
all very easy, for them. 
“For all the drawbacks of his eternal black suit, and his priestlike expression―which he 
truly needs, the poor boy, to keep from dying of hunger―what makes them afraid is how fine 
he is. It couldn’t be more obvious. And that priestly look, he doesn’t have it anymore, once 
we’ve been alone together for even a moment. And when these gentlemen say something that 
seems to them subtle and unexpected, don’t they immediately look toward Julien? I’ve often 
seen  it.  And  still  they  know  very  well  that  he  never  speaks  to  them  unless  they  ask  him  a 
question. He only speaks to me, he thinks I have a noble soul. When they object to something, 
he  says  only  enough  to  be  polite.  Then  he  quickly  turns  respectful.  But  he  talks  to  me  for 
hours,  and  he  doesn’t  insist  when  I  have  even  a  slight  objection.  And  all  winter  long,  there 
haven’t been any duels: it’s only by his words that he’s been drawing attention to himself. And 
my  father,  a  superior  man  who’s  doing  wonderful  things  for  the  family  fortune,  he  respects 
Julien. Everybody else hates him, but no one despises him, except my mother’s pious friends.” 
Count de Caylus had, or pretended to have, a great passion for horses; he spent his life in 
his stables, and often had his lunch there. This great passion, together with his habit of never 
laughing, made him highly regarded among his friends: he was the eagle of their little circle. 
The next day, when they met behind Madame de La Mole’s easy chair, Julien not being 
present, Monsieur de Caylus, supported by de Croisenois and by Norbert, strongly criticized 
Mademoiselle de La Mole’s high opinion of Julien, without any preliminaries, and virtually at 
the moment he saw her. She knew at once what he was up to, and found it delightful. 
“There they are, all banded together,” she said to herself, “against a man of genius who 
doesn’t have an income of thirty francs, and who can only answer them when they ask him a 
question.  They’re  afraid  of  what’s  under  that  black  suit.  How  would  it  be  if  he  wore 
epaulettes?” 
Her wit had never shone so brightly. As her attack got under way, she showered de Caylus 
and his allies with sarcastic jests. When their witty counterfire had been thoroughly snuffed 
out: 
“If,  tomorrow,  some  gentlemanly  country  bumpkin,  in  the  Franche-Comté  mountains, 
were  to  make  it  known  that  Julien  is  his  natural  child,  and  give  him  his  name  and  some 
thousands  of  francs,  in  six  weeks  he’d  have  mustaches  exactly  like  yours,  gentlemen;  in  six 
months  he’d  be  a  cavalry  officer,  exactly  like  you,  gentlemen.  And  then  the  grandeur  of  his 
character  would  no  longer  be  subject  to  your  ridicule.  I  can  imagine  you  forced  to  retreat, 
Monsieur  Duke-to-be,  to  this  old  and  empty  argument:  the  superiority  of  court  nobility  to 
 
 
Chapter Twelve: Will he be another Danton? 
provincial  nobility.  But  where  would  you  stand  if  I  were  wicked  enough  to  push  you  still 
further, if I were spiteful enough to make Julien’s newly discovered father a Spanish duke,2 a 
prisoner  of  war  in  Besan04on,  dating  from  Napoleon’s  time,  and  who,  motivated  by  his 
conscience, recognized his son on his deathbed?” 
These suggestions of illegitimate birth seemed to Messieurs de Caylus and de Croisenois 
in very poor taste. That was all they saw in Mathilde’s argument. 
However dominated by his sister Norbert might be, her remarks had been so plain that he 
assumed  a  very  sober  tone,  though  it  went  quite  poorly,  it  must  be  admitted,  with  his 
laughing, pleasant face. He risked a few words to her. 
“Are you ill, my dear?” Mathilde answered him, appearing pertly serious. “You must really 
feel poorly, to answer jests with moralities. 
“Moralities, from you! Are you looking for a post as a district governor?” Mathilde soon 
forgot Count de Caylus’s irritation, Norbert’s sulky mood, and the silent despair of Monsieur 
de Croisenois. She’d made up her mind about a fateful idea just now gripping her soul. 
“Julien  is  basically  honest  with  me,”  she  said  to  herself.  “At  his  age,  obliged  to  be  an 
underling, miserably driven as he is by astonishing ambition, he needs a lover. Perhaps I can 
be the one. But I see no sign of love in him. Reckless and bold as he is, he would surely have 
told me, had he been in love.” 
This uncertainty, and the debate within herself, which from then on constantly occupied 
her  mind,  and  which  acquired  new  arguments  every  time  Julien  spoke  to  her,  completely 
dispelled the periods of boredom to which she had been so vulnerable. 
As  the  daughter  of  a  man  of  sense  and  sensibility,  who  might  become  a  government 
minister and give its wooded lands back to the Church, Mademoiselle de La Mole had been the 
subject of extraordinary flattery, at the Sacred Heart of Jesus convent. This was a misfortune 
never redressed: she’d been persuaded that, because of all her advantages of birth, of fortune, 
etc., she ought to be happier than other people. This is the source of princes’ boredom, and of 
all their foolishness. 
Mathilde had never escaped the deadly effect of such ideas. No matter how intelligent a 
child may be, it cannot be capable, at age ten, of overcoming the flattery of an entire convent, 
especially when so apparently well founded. 
The  moment  she’d  decided  she  loved  Julien,  she  was  no  longer  bored.  She  felt  self-
congratulatory, every day, at having decided to throw herself into a great love affair. “This kind 
of  amusement  contains  a  good  many  risks,”  she  thought.  “So  much  the  better!  A  thousand 
times better! 
“Without a grand passion, I’d be languishing from boredom, right at the most beautiful 
time in my life, these years from sixteen to twenty. I’ve already lost the most beautiful of those 
years,  compelled  to  take  my  only  pleasure  from  listening  to  my  mothers’  friends  and  their 
idiotic chatter. They weren’t anything like so rigid and moralistic as they are today, from what 
I’ve heard, back in 1792, at Coblenz.”3 
While Mathilde was struggling with these intense doubts, Julien was bewildered by the 
long,  lingering  glances  she  lavished  on  him.  He  was  experiencing  vastly  increased  coldness 
from Count Norbert, and new onslaughts of arrogance from Messieurs de Caylus, de Luz, and 
de Croisenois. He was used to that. Sometimes it happened on days when, the evening before, 
he’d  been  more  brilliant  than  suited  his  position.  Without  the  unusual  reception  Mathilde 
                                                             
2 Many Spanish noblemen, including most of the royal family, were Napoleon’s prisoners after he invaded the 
Iberian peninsula in 1808. 
3 Coblenz, Germany, was the center of the émigré community in the early years of the Revolution. The so-
called Army of the Princes, led by Louis XVI’s brother and cousins, was headquartered at Coblenz. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
gave him, and the curiosity inspired in him by this entire circle of young aristocrats, he would 
have refrained from following the shining young fellows with mustaches into the garden, after 
dinner, as they went walking with Mademoiselle de la Mole. 
“Yes, I can’t possibly ignore it,” Julien told himself. “Mademoiselle de La Mole looks at me 
so very strangely. Yet even when those beautiful blue eyes are fixed on me, wide with utmost 
abandon, I always see a basically analytical stance, a cool calmness, and a maliciousness. Can 
these really be expressions of love? How differently Madame de Rênal looked at me!” 
After dinner, once, having first followed Monsieur de La Mole into his office room, Julien 
hurried  back  down  to  the  garden.  As  he  came  close  to  the  group  around  Mathilde,  without 
warning he was struck by loudly pronounced words. Mathilde was giving her brother a very 
difficult  time.  Julien  heard  his  own  name,  twice,  each  time  very  distinctly.  He  came  over  to 
them; suddenly there was total silence, though assorted unsuccessful attempts were made to 
break it. Both Mademoiselle de La Mole and her brother were too worked up to find another 
topic  of  conversation.  Messieurs  de  Caylus,  de  Croisenois,  de  Luz,  and  one  of  their  other 
friends, were as cold as glass to Julien. He left them. 
 
 
Chapter Thirteen: A Conspiracy 
Chapter Thirteen: A Conspiracy 
Random words, heard by chance, turn to hard facts in the eyes of a man of imagination, if there’s any fire 
burning in his heart. 
―Schiller1 
Again the next day, he surprised Norbert and his sister, who had been speaking of him. As 
he  joined  them,  a  deathly  silence  fell,  exactly  like  the  previous  evening.  He  was  hugely 
suspicious.  Are  these  pleasant  young  people  planning  a  way  to  make  fun  of  me?  He  had  to 
admit  this  was  far  more  likely,  and  much  more  natural,  than  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole’s 
pretended passion for a poor devil of a secretary. “In any case, do these people ever experience 
passion?  Mystification  is  their  specialty.  They’re  jealous  of  my  tongue’s  miserable  little 
superiority. 
Jealousy  remains  one  of  their  weaknesses.  They’re  transparently  clear. 
Mademoiselle de La Mole wants me to think she’s interested in me, quite simply so she can 
turn me into a spectacle for her intended husband.” 
This  bitter  suspicion  shifted  Julien’s  entire  moral  framework.  The  destructive  idea 
confronted  a  budding  love  in  his  heart;  it  had  no  difficulty  killing  it  off.  His  love  had  been 
based only on Mathilde’s rare beauty, or more likely on her queenly manner and the wonderful 
way she dressed. In such things, Julien was still a self-made social climber. It’s always said that 
a pretty aristocratic woman is the most astonishing thing of all, for a spirited peasant, when he 
reaches the higher rungs of society. It was hardly Mathilde’s character, all this time, that had 
set Julien to dreaming. He was sensible enough to understand that, in fact, he knew nothing 
about her character. Everything he’d been seeing of it might be no more than a pretense. 
For example: Nothing could make Mathilde miss Sunday mass; she went to church with 
her  mother  virtually  every  day.  If  some  careless  fellow,  in  the  de  La  Mole  drawing  room, 
happened to forget where he was and allowed himself even a distantly barbed remark about 
the  true  or  pretended  interests  of  either  church  or  state,  Mathilde  immediately  turned 
seriously  icy.  Her  glance  went  from  liveliness  to  all  the  impenetrable  haughtiness  of  an  old 
family portrait. 
But Julien knew for sure that she always had, in her room, one or two of Voltaire’s most 
philosophical  books.  He  himself  had  often  secretly  borrowed  volumes  of  that  magnificently 
bound  edition.  He  would  separate  somewhat  the  remaining  books,  concealing  what  he  had 
borrowed,  but  soon  realized  that  someone  else  was  reading  Voltaire.  He  fell  back  on  a 
seminary  trick,  putting  a  few  strands  of  hair  in  volumes  he  imagined  might  well  interest 
Mademoiselle de La Mole. As the weeks went by, all the hair disappeared. 
Monsieur de La Mole grew impatient with his bookseller, who was sending him all the so-
called Memoirs,2 and ordered Julien to buy whatever new volumes were moderately racy. But 
to keep the poison from spreading through the house, the secretary had been directed to place 
these in a small bookcase right in the marquis’s room. Julien was soon positive that if any of 
these new volumes were, to any degree, hostile to the interests of church or throne, it did not 
take  long  for  them  to  disappear.  He  was  equally  certain  that  it  was  not  Norbert  who  was 
reading them. 
Considerably  dramatizing  this  experience,  Julien  believed  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole 
possessed of the conniving nature of Machiavelli. A pose of such wickedness was, in her eyes, 
                                                             
1 Friederich von Schiller (1759C1805), German Romantic writer. 
2  Fraudulent  memoirs  of  famous  personages  of  the  revolutionary  era  proliferated  in  the  early  nineteenth 
century. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
quite charming―almost the only moral charm she enjoyed. Boredom, generated by hypocrisy 
and all his virtuous talk, threw him into such immoderate judgments. 
It was his imagination he was exciting, rather than letting himself be swept away by love. 
Only when he’d fallen into long reveries about Mademoiselle de La Mole’s lovely figure, 
and about her superb taste in clothing, her exceedingly white hands, her beautiful arms, the 
disinvoltura, the easy indifference of all her movements, did he find himself in love. Then, to 
round  off  her  charms,  he  thought  her  a  Catherine  de  Médici.  There  could  be  nothing  too 
profound, or too wicked, for the nature he assigned her. It was the ideal of all the Maslons, the 
de  Frilairs,  the  Castanedas,  the  ideal  he’d  admired  as  a  child.  In  other  words,  it  was  Paris’s 
ideal. 
Has there ever been anything more amusing than believing Parisians either profound or 
wicked? 
“It’s possible that this trio is making fun of me,” thought Julien. You can’t know him very 
well, reader, if you haven’t long since noticed the dark, cold expression his face took on when 
Mathilde  looked  at  him.  Bitter  irony  repelled  her  friendly  assurances,  as  the  amazed 
Mademoiselle de La Mole discovered, when she two or three times risked such gestures. 
Stung  by  this  sudden  strangeness,  the  young  girl’s  cold,  bored,  overintellectual  heart 
became as passionate as her nature could be. But Mathilde’s character also contained a great 
deal of pride, and the birth of an emotion that made all her happiness depend on someone else 
gave rise, as well, to a somber sadness. 
Julien had by now learned enough, since he’d come to Paris, to recognize what was and 
what wasn’t the dry sadness of boredom. Instead of being greedy for evening parties, for shows 
and any sort of distraction, as she had been, she avoided them. 
Music sung by Frenchmen bored Mathilde to death, yet Julien, whose regular duty it was 
to attend high society’s exits from the opera, noted that she made sure to have herself escorted 
to the opera just as often as she could. He fancied he could tell that she had lost some of that 
perfection, always so evident, before, in everything she did. Her remarks to her friends were 
sometimes  outrageously  sharp,  to  the  point  of  nastiness.  He  thought  she’d  fallen  onto  hard 
times  with  the  Marquis  de  Croisenois.  “This  young  man  must  be  desperately  in  love  with 
money,  not  to  throw  over  the  girl,  no  matter  how  rich  she  might  be,”  Julien  thought.  He 
himself, indignant at such affronts to masculine dignity, turned even colder to her. He often 
gave her answers bordering on the impolite. 
However determined he might be not to let himself be deceived by Mathilde’s shows of 
interest, on certain days they were so obvious that Julien, whose eyes had begun to be wide 
open, found her very pretty and was almost bowled over. 
“These young aristocrats are so shrewd, and so long-suffering,” he told himself, “that in 
the end they’ll defeat my terribly limited experience.” He had to leave all this, for a while. The 
marquis had just put him in charge of a number of small estates, and some ch09teaux, in lower 
Languedoc. A trip to the south of France was required; the marquis gave his grudging consent. 
Except in matters concerning the marquis’s highest ambitions, Julien had become his second 
self. 
“After all, they haven’t snared me,” Julien said to himself as he got ready for his departure. 
“Whether Mademoiselle de La Mole’s witticisms about these gentlemen were genuine, or only 
intended  to  make  me  trust  her,  it’s  been  amusing.  If  there’s  no  conspiracy  against  this 
carpenter’s  son,  I  simply  can’t  fathom  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole.  But  she’s  even  less 
understandable  to  the  Marquis  de  Croisenois.  Yesterday,  for  example,  her  bad  temper  was 
clearly real, and I had the pleasure of seeing a young nobleman, just as rich as I am penniless 
 
 
Chapter Thirteen: A Conspiracy 
and  plebian,  forced  to  give  up  and  acknowledge  me  the  favored  one.  That’s  the  greatest 
triumph I’ve had; it will still amuse me as I ride along the plains of Languedoc.” 
He had kept his departure secret, but Mathilde had known for a long time that, the next 
day, he was to leave Paris. She resorted to a severe headache, made worse by the dining room’s 
stuffy  air.  She  walked  up  and  down  the  garden,  and  her  quips  so  bloodied  Norbert,  the 
Marquis de Croisenois, de Caylus, de Luz, and several other young men who had dined with 
the de La Moles, that she finally drove them away. She was looking very strangely at Julien. 
“Her  expression  is  perhaps  part  of  the  comedy,”  thought  Julien,  “but  that  rapid 
breathing―all that agitation! Bah!” he told himself. “Who am I to pass judgment on all this? 
This  is  the  Parisian  woman  at  her  most  sublime,  her  most  subtle.  This  quick  breath,  which 
almost moved me, is something she must have learned from Léontine Fay,3 that actress she 
loves so much.” 
They had been left alone; their conversation visibly faded away. “No! Julien feels nothing 
for me,” Mathilde was telling herself, truly miserable. 
As he was saying good night, she gripped his arm: 
“You’ll have a letter from me, tonight,” she told him, her voice so changed that he could 
not recognize it. 
This immediately moved him. 
“My father,” she went on, “quite properly values the services you render him. You must 
not leave tomorrow. Find some excuse.” And then she ran away. 
Her  figure  was  charming.  It  would  be  impossible  to  have  prettier  feet;  she  ran  so 
gracefully that Julien was entranced. But who could imagine his next thought, after she had 
disappeared?  He  was  offended  by  the  imperative  tone  with  which  she  had  said:  “You  must 
not.”  Louis  XV,  as  he  was  dying,  was  deeply  offended  at  the  words  “you  must  not,”  spoken 
most awkwardly by his chief physician. And Louis XV was hardly a social climber. 
An hour later, a servant brought Julien a letter. It was a plain declaration of love. 
“Her style isn’t too terribly affected,” Julien said to himself, trying to make use of literary 
observations to restrain a joy that made him suck in his cheeks and, in spite of himself, laugh 
out loud. 
“So!”  he  cried  suddenly,  his  emotions  too  strong  to  be  held  in.  “I,  a  poor  peasant,  I’ve 
gotten a declaration of love from a great lady! 
“Me, I haven’t done so badly,” he added, checking his joy as much as he could. “I’ve been 
able to preserve my personal dignity. I’ve not said I love her.” He set himself to studying her 
writing: Mademoiselle de La Mole employed an extremely well-shaped English hand. He felt 
the need for something physical, to distract him from a joy that was very nearly delirium. 
“Your departure compels me to speak...It would be beyond my endurance not to see you 
any longer.” 
A thought struck Julien; it was like making a discovery. He broke off his examination of 
Mathilde’s  letter,  and  his  joy  swelled.  “I’ll  bring  it  to  the  Marquis  de  Croisenois!”  he  cried 
silently. “I who say nothing but serious words! And he’s so handsome! He has a mustache, a 
wonderful  uniform.  He’s  never  at  a  loss  for  words,  and  at  exactly  the  right  time,  something 
witty and subtle.” 
Julien  experienced  a  delightful  moment.  He  went  wandering  up  and  down  the  garden, 
crazed with happiness. 
Later,  he  went  up  to  the  Marquis  de  La  Mole’s  office  room,  for  the  marquis  had 
fortunately  not  gone  out  that  night,  and  explained  that,  happily,  he  wouldn’t  have  to  leave 
                                                             
3 A famous actress of the Parisian theaters. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Paris.  He  was  able  to  demonstrate,  fairly  easily,  by  showing  the  marquis  some  documents 
newly arrived from Normandy, that taking care of the Normandy lawsuits would force him to 
defer his departure for Languedoc. 
“I’m  very  relieved  you’re  not  going,”  the  marquis  informed  him  when  they  were  done 
talking business. “I like seeing you.” Julien left; the remark embarrassed him. 
“And I’m going to seduce his daughter―me! Perhaps her marriage to de Croisenois will 
be impossible―a marriage that glows in Monsieur de La Mole’s future. He may not become a 
duke himself, but his daughter will be a duchess.” Julien thought about leaving for Languedoc, 
in spite of Mathilde’s letter, in spite of the excuses he’d made to the marquis. That ray of virtue 
quickly flickered out. 
“How good of me,” he told himself, “me, a plebeian, to take pity on a family of such high 
rank! Me, who the Duke de Chaulnes calls a mere servant! How does the marquis build up his 
immense fortune? By mortgaging some of his income as soon as he learns, at court, that the 
next day there’ll be what looks like a coup d’état. And I, thrown to the lowest rungs by that 
harsh  stepmother,  Providence,  me  to  whom  she  gave  a  noble  heart  and  absolutely  no 
income―which means no bread, to put it exactly, no bread at all ―me, to turn down pleasure 
when  it’s  offered  to  me!  Clear  water  seeking  to  quench  my  thirst,  in  this  burning  desert  of 
mediocrity  which  I  cross  so  painfully!  Good  Lord,  I’m  not  so  stupid  as  that!  Everyone  for 
himself, in this desert of egoism, better known as life.” 
And he recalled looks of disdain cast on him by Madame de La Mole, and especially by 
the ladies, her friends. 
memory of virtue vanished. 
The  pleasure  of  triumphing  over  the  Marquis  de  Croisenois  was  the  final  touch:  his 
“Oh,  how  I  wish  he  were  furious!”  said  Julien.  “How  confidently  I’d  slash  him  with  a 
sword, now.” And he performed a deft maneuver with an imaginary weapon. 
“Before I could do that, I was a pedant, taking vulgar advantage of what little courage I 
had. After that letter, I am his equal. 
“Yes,” he told himself, with infinite delight and slowly measuring out his unspoken words, 
“our  worth,  de  Croisenois  and  I,  has  now  been  weighed,  and  the  scale  favors  the  poor 
carpenter from the Juras. 
“Fine!”  he  exclaimed  to  himself.  “That  will  be  the  signature  on  my  reply.  Don’t  you  go 
thinking,  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole,  that  I’m  forgetting  what  I  am.  I’m  going  to  make  you 
understand, and make you feel in your very bones, that you’re betraying a fine descendant of 
the  famous  Guy  de  Croisenois,  who  followed  Saint  Louis4  to  the  Crusades,  in  favor  of  a 
carpenter’s son.” 
Julien could not restrain his joy. He had to go down to the garden. His room, into which 
he had locked himself, seemed too narrow for him to draw a breath. 
“Me, a poor peasant from the Juras,” he repeated over and over to himself, “me, forever 
condemned to wearing this dreary black suit! Alas! Twenty years ago, I’d have worn a uniform 
like theirs! In those days, a man like me was either dead, or else he was a general at age thirty-
six. “The letter, which he held folded in his hand, endowed him with the height and bearing of 
a hero. “Of course, these days it’s true that, wearing such a black suit, at age forty you have a 
salary of a hundred thousand francs and you wear the noblest decoration in the land, like the 
Bishop of Beauvais. 
                                                             
4 King Louis IX (born 1214, reigned 1226C70), who led two crusades, one to Egypt, where he was captured and 
ransomed, the other to Tunis, where he died of the plague; he was canonized in 1296. The Bourbons often 
referred to themselves as the “sons of Saint Louis.” 
 
 
Chapter Thirteen: A Conspiracy 
“Oh yes!” he told himself, laughing like Mephistopheles, “but I’m smarter than they are; 
I’ve chosen this century’s uniform.” He felt a surge, both in his ambition, and in his affection 
for ecclesiastical garb. “How many cardinals were born even lower than me, and have risen to 
authority! My countryman, Granvelle,5 for example.” 
Gradually, Julien grew calmer; caution came floating to the surface. He recited to himself 
the words of his model and master, that great hypocrite, Molière’s Tartuffe: 
“I could believe these words, a decent trick.... I won’t trust anything that seems so sweet, 
Except a taste of her, and then I’ll sigh, Knowing she told the truth, and I have proof.” 
“Tartuffe was ruined by a woman, too,6 and he was as good as anyone else...Other eyes 
may  see  my  reply...for  which  there  will  be  the  following  remedy,”  he  said  slowly,  and  with 
controlled ferocity: “We’ll  begin with the choicest phrases from the sublime Mathilde’s own 
letter. 
“Yes, but suppose four of Monsieur de Croisenois’s servants throw themselves at me and 
snatch away the original.” 
“No, because I am well armed, and I’ve been known, as they say, to shoot at servants.” 
“So! One of them is brave; he jumps at me. He’s been promised two thousand francs. I kill 
him, or perhaps I wound him―wonderful: it’s just what they want. They throw me into prison, 
all very legally. And then I appear in court, and the judges sentence me, with vast justice and 
infinite equity, to live at the penitentiary at Poissy with Messieurs Fontan and Magalon.7 I lie 
down at night, there, with four hundred beggars, everybody on top of everybody else...And I 
show pity to these people!” he exclaimed to himself, standing bolt upright. “And do they show 
it  to  the  members  of  the  Fourth  Estate,  the  common  people,  when  they’ve  got  them  where 
they want them?” This was the last breath of his gratitude for Monsieur de La Mole, for in spite 
of himself that had been, till then, tormenting him. 
“Gently,  dear  gentlemen:  I  understand  this  minor  aspect  of  Machiavellianism.  Neither 
Father Maslon nor Monsieur Castaneda at the seminary could have done it better. Take this 
provocative letter away from me―and, like Colonel Caron,8 at Colmar, I’ll stroll to the firing 
squad. 
“One moment, gentlemen: I plan to send the fatal letter to be deposited, well hidden, by 
Father  Pirard.  He’s  a  very  decent  man,  a  Jansenist,  and  as  a  Jansenist  immune  to  fiscal 
temptation. Yes, but he opens letters. .. so I’ll send them to Fouqué.” 
I concede that Julien’s expression was ghastly, his face truly hideous. He fairly breathed of 
unadulterated criminality. He was a miserable man at war with all of society. 
“To arms!” Julien exclaimed to himself. Then he went out the front door, leaped down the 
steps,  and  went  straight  to  the  copyist  stall  at  the  corner.  The  man  was  frightened  by  his 
appearance. “Copy it,” he said, giving him Mademoiselle de La Mole’s letter. 
While the man did his work, Julien himself wrote to Fouqué; he begged him to take care 
of  this  precious  deposit. “But  no,”  he  said  to  himself,  breaking  off.  “The  secret  police  at  the 
                                                             
5 Born in Besan04on, the sixteenth-century prelate Antoine Perronet de Granvelle rose to become a trusted and 
influential  minister  to  the  Hapsburg  Holy  Roman  Emperor  Charles  V  and  his  son  Philip  II  of  Spain.  Their 
influence made him a cardinal in 1561. 
6 “Tartuffe aussi fut perdu par une femme.” A stunning sentence for anyone familiar with Tartuffe, as most of the 
French were and are. The lines quoted are from Tartuffe (see note for p. 281, ll. 28C32) as the hypocrite prepares 
to  seduce  Elmire,  the  virtuous  wife  of  his  preposterous  benefactor,  Orgon.  Most  people  would  say  that 
Tartuffe was unmasked by Elmire, his “ruin” being richly deserved. 
7 Both were sent to prison for publishing a satirical antigovernment revue, The Album. 
8 An officer executed for conspiring against the government. Stendhal saw Caron, like Fontan and Magalon, as 
a victim of the oppressive excesses of the Bourbons. Colmar: a small town in Alsace. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
post office will open my letter. .. no, gentlemen.” He went to the Protestant bookseller, bought 
an  enormous  Bible,  hid  Mathilde’s  letter,  carefully  and  ingeniously,  in  the  binding,  had 
everything  wrapped  up,  and  sent  his  package  via  stagecoach,  addressed  to  one  of  Fouqué’s 
workmen; even the man’s name was unknown to anyone in Paris. 
That done, he went happily, light-footedly back to the de La Mole house. “Our turn, now!” 
he exclaimed silently, as he turned the key and locked himself into his room. He threw off his 
black suit. 
“Really, Mademoiselle,” he wrote to Mathilde, “Mademoiselle de La Mole writes, and uses 
her father’s servant, Arsène, to deliver an exceedingly seductive letter to a poor carpenter from 
the  Juras,  surely  to  have  fun  at  his  simpleminded  expense....”  And  then  he  copied  out  the 
plainest, most revealing sentences from the letter he’d just received. 
His  letter  would  have  done  honor  to  the  cautious  diplomatic  skills  of  the  Chevalier  de 
Beauvoisis. It was still only ten o’clock. Drunk with happiness and a sense of his own power, all 
very  new  to  a  poor  devil,  Julien  went  to  the  Italian  Opera  House.  He  heard  his  friend 
Géronimo singing. Never had music exalted him to such heights. He was godlike. 
 
 
Chapter Fourteen: A Young Girl’s Thoughts 
Chapter Fourteen: A Young Girl’s Thoughts 
Such bepuzzzlement! What sleepless nights! God in heaven! Am I going to make myself contemptible? He 
himself will scorn me. But he’s leaving, he’s going away. 
―Alfred De Musset1 
It had not been easy for Mathilde to write. No matter what had awakened her interest in 
Julien,  he’d  soon  come  to  dominate  that  pride  which,  from  the  first  moment  she’d  become 
aware of it, had ruled, solitary, in her heart. Her haughty, cold spirit had been carried, for the 
very first time, into passionate feeling. But if it dominated over her pride, it remained loyal to 
that pride’s customary behavior. Two months of internal struggle, and of new sensations, in a 
word, renovated her entire moral existence. 
Mathilde  believed  she  was  reaching  happiness.  This  vista,  all-powerful  for  courageous 
hearts bound to superior minds, had long  been struggling against both her personal dignity 
and her sense of everyday responsibilities. One day she went to her mother, at seven in the 
morning,  asking  for  permission  to  hide  herself  at  Villequier.  The  marquise  didn’t  bother  to 
answer,  suggesting  only  that  the  girl  go  back  to  bed.  This  was  a  final  effort  by  ordinary 
common sense and deference to received notions. 
Fear of doing wrong and offending against the most sacred beliefs of the de Cayluses, the 
de Luzes, and the de Croisenoises, were hardly deeply seated in her soul. She did not think 
such people had been fashioned to understand her; had it been a question of buying a carriage, 
or a piece of property, she would have consulted them. Her true fear was that Julien might be 
disappointed in her. 
And perhaps she also worried: Was he only apparently rather than truly superior? 
She detested lack of character: this was her single objection to the handsome young men 
who surrounded her. The more gracefully they made jokes about whatever was not in fashion 
(or which tried to be fashionable, but did it badly), the lower they fell in her eyes. 
They  were  courageous,  and  that  was  all.  “And  still,  just  how  brave,  really?”  she  asked 
herself. “In duels, but duels are only a ritual. Duels are totally predictable, even as to what one 
says,  falling  to  the  ground.  Stretched  out  on  the  green  grass,  hand  on  heart,  the  other 
combatant  must  be  most  nobly  pardoned,  and  final  words  sent  to  a  lovely  one  left  behind 
(often an imaginary) beloved, who’s likely to go to a ball on the day the fallen one dies, to keep 
from arousing suspicion. 
“It’s  one  thing  to  face  danger  bravely,  leading  a  squadron  into  battle,  shining  steel  all 
around, but what about danger that’s solitary, strange, unpredictable, and genuinely ugly? 
“Alas!” Mathilde told herself. “At Henry III’s court there were men whose characters were 
as lofty as their birth! Ah, if Julien had fought at Jarnac, or at Montcontour, I’d have no doubts. 
In those strong, forceful times, the French were not dressed-up dolls. The day of battle, really, 
was the least of their problems. 
“Their  lives  were  not  all  wrapped  around,  like  an  Egyptian  mummy,  confined  in  some 
common  covering,  shared  by  everyone,  always  the  same.  Yes,”  she  added,  “it  took  more 
genuine courage to go home alone, an hour before midnight, leaving the Soissons mansion2 
where  Catherine  de  Médici  lived,  all  thronging  with  cutthroats,  than  it  does  today  to  go 
running  off  to  Algeria.3  A  man’s  life,  then,  involved  taking  one  chance  after  another. 
                                                             
1 An important figure in French romanticism, Musset (1810C57) was a poet, novelist, and playwright. 
2  or  H00tel  de  Nesle,  a  huge  sixteenth-century  town  house  that  belonged  to  Catherine  de  Médici;  the 
“cutthroats” swarming there are part of the legend of the woman and her times. 
3 The French colonization of North Africa began in 1830. Algiers fell to the French on July 4, 1830. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Civilization has now eliminated risks, especially unexpected ones. If anyone talks about such 
things,  he’s  smothered  in  witticisms;  if  they  actually  occur,  no  cowardliness  is  too  low  to 
accommodate our fears. Whatever insanity fear makes us commit, it’s forgiven. A degenerate, 
boring epoch! What would Boniface de La Mole have said, lifting his severed head out of his 
tomb, if he had seen seventeen of his descendants letting themselves be herded off like sheep, 
to be guillotined two days later? Death was absolutely certain, but it would have exhibited a 
lack of taste to defend themselves and, at least, kill a Jacobin or two. Ah! In France’s heroic 
age, in Boniface de La Mole’s time, Julien would have been a squadron leader, and my brother 
would have been the young priest, with very good manners, and caution in his eyes, reason in 
his mouth.” 
Several months earlier, Mathilde had given up hope of meeting anyone even faintly out of 
the  ordinary.  She  had  taken  some  pleasure  in  letting  herself  write  to  some  of  these  young 
aristocrats.  This  inappropriate  boldness,  so  reckless  in  a  young  girl,  might  well  have 
dishonored her in the eyes of Monsieur de Croisenois, as it might also to his father, the Duke 
of  Chaulnes,  and  all  their  family,  friends,  and  followers,  who  would  have  seen  the  intended 
marriage broken off and would have wanted to know why. When she’d written such a letter, in 
those days, she’d been unable to sleep. But those letters were nothing but replies. 
Now she’d dared to say she was in love. It was she who had written first (such a shocking 
word!), and to a man from the lowest levels of society. 
This would guarantee, if she should be discovered, eternal dishonor. Which of the women 
who came to see her mother would dare take her side? What words could they use, repeating 
them from one drawing room to another, to soften society’s frightful scorn? 
Even to say these things would have been ghastly, but to write them! “There are things one 
does not write,” exclaimed Napoleon when he heard that Bailen4 had been surrendered to the 
Spanish, and on what terms. And it was Julien who had told her this story, as if teaching her a 
lesson in advance. 
But all this was more or less trivial: Mathilde’s anguish had other causes. Putting aside the 
awful effect on society, the ineradicable, totally open stain of social contempt (since she had 
grossly offended against her class), Mathilde had written to a creature of a totally different sort 
than the de Cayluses, the de Luzs, or the de Croisenoises. 
The depths, the mysteriousness of Julien’s character would have been frightening, even in 
striking  up  an  ordinary,  everyday  relationship.  But  she  was  going  to  make  him  her  lover, 
perhaps her master! 
“What won’t he demand, if he ever has me under his thumb? Well! I’ll say, as Medea did: 
’In the midst of all these perils, I remain me!’5 
“Julien  has  absolutely  no  reverence  for  noble  blood,”  she  believed.  What’s  more,  quite 
possibly he had no love whatever for her! 
In  these  final  moments  of  terrible  doubt,  ideas  of  womanly  pride  occurred  to  her. 
“Everything has to be unique, for the kind of girl I am,” she exclaimed impatiently. Then the 
pride they’d instilled in her, from her very cradle, began to struggle against virtue. And at just 
that moment, Julien’s departure accelerated everything. 
(Characters like hers, fortunately, are very rare indeed.) 
That  evening,  very  late,  Julien  was  malicious  enough  to  have  the  porter  bring  down  an 
exceedingly  heavy  trunk,  and  the  servant  he  summoned  was  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole’s 
                                                             
4 A defeat for the Imperial Army in Spain in July 1809. Napoleon was as infuriated by the treaty, by which the 
French accepted blame for starting the Spanish war, as he was by the loss. 
5 A misquotation of Corneille’s Médée. (For Corneille, see note for p. 79, l. 3.) 
 
 
Chapter Fourteen: A Young Girl’s Thoughts 
footman.  “Perhaps  this  won’t  accomplish  anything,”  he  said  to  himself,  “but  if  it  succeeds, 
she’ll  think  I’ve  gone.”  He  went  to  bed  happy,  extremely  pleased  at  his  little  stratagem. 
Mathilde never closed her eyes. 
The next day, very early in the morning, Julien went out without being noticed. But he 
came back before eight o’clock. 
He’d barely walked into the library when Mademoiselle de La Mole appeared at the door. 
He gave her his written reply. He thought he ought to speak to her, and certainly there’d be no 
more convenient time, but Mademoiselle de La Mole refused to listen, and disappeared. Julien 
found this captivating: he would not have known what to say to her. 
“If this isn’t just a game that she and Count Norbert are playing, then the fire of such a 
strange love, which this girl of high birth conceives she feels for me, must have been lit by the 
icy-cold looks I’ve showered on her. I’d be a hopelessly stupid idiot if I ever let myself actually 
like this tall blonde doll.” Thinking this way let him be colder and more calculating than ever 
before. 
“In  the  coming  combat,”  he  added, “pride  of  birth  will  be  like  a  tall  hill,  constituting  a 
military position between her and me. There’s where we’ll have to maneuver. I was very wrong 
to stay in Paris: putting off my departure is detrimental, and it leaves me vulnerable, if all this 
is indeed merely a game. What risk was there in going away? I’d be making fools of them, if 
they  were  making  a  fool  of  me.  If  she’s  really  interested  in  me,  I’d  be  heightening  it  a 
hundredfold.” 
Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole’s  letter  had  so  intensely  gratified  Julien’s  vanity  that,  while 
relishing  what  had  happened,  he’d  forgotten  to  think  very  seriously  about  the  utility  of 
removing himself from the scene. 
It was a fatal flaw in his character, this extraordinary sensitivity to his mistakes. This one 
deeply upset him; he’d almost stopped thinking of the incredible victory he’d had just before 
this  minor  setback,  when,  toward  nine  o’clock,  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole  appeared,  barely 
inside the library door; after throwing a letter to him, she ran off. 
“It looks as if this is going to be an epistolary novel,” he said, picking it up. “This is an 
enemy feint; me, I’m going to respond with coldness and virtue.” 
With a haughtiness that fueled his inner delight, the letter asked for a decisive reply. He 
amused himself, as he wrote his two pages, by playfully toying with the people who might be 
trying  to  make  a  fool  of  him  and,  still  in  this  humor,  toward  the  end  of  his  response, 
announced that he would be leaving the following morning. 
His letter was done. “The garden will do very well for sending it to her,” he thought, so 
there he went. He looked up at Mademoiselle de La Mole’s window. 
It was on the second floor, next to her mother’s rooms; but underneath her window there 
was a large mezzanine. 
The ground floor had been raised high enough so that, walking along the line of linden 
trees, his letter in his hand, Julien could not have been seen from Mathilde’s window. The tall, 
arching  trees  got  in  the  way.  “Really!”  Julien  said  to  himself,  annoyed.  “Yet  another  risky 
development! If someone’s trying to make a fool of me, just having me seen with a letter in my 
hand will do very nicely; my enemies will be pleased.” 
Norbert’s room was just above his sister’s, and if Julien were to walk out from under the 
arching  vault  of  the  tall  trees,  Norbert  and  his  friends  would  be  able  to  follow  his  every 
movement. 
Mademoiselle de La Mole appeared behind the glass; he let her have a quick glimpse of 
his letter; she bent her head in acknowledgment. He turned at once and ran back to his room 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
and,  as  it  happened,  met  on  the  stairs  the  lovely  Mathilde,  who  snatched  up  the  letter, 
completely at her ease, her eyes laughing. 
“What passion there was in poor Madame de Rênal’s eyes,” Julien said to himself, “if, even 
after  six  months  of  our  relationship,  she  dared  accept  a  letter  from  me!  Never  in  her  life,  I 
think, did she ever look at me with laughing eyes.” 
The rest of his reaction was not anything like so clear: Was he ashamed of how petty he 
was being? “But what a difference, too,” his thought continued, “in the elegance of her dressing 
gown, the elegance of everything she wears!” Just seeing Mademoiselle de La Mole, from thirty 
feet  away,  any  man  of  taste  could  guess  her  social  standing.  That  was  definitely  a  positive 
thing. 
Caught up in his jesting, Julien still did not admit all he was thinking. There had been no 
Marquis de Croisenois for Madame de Rênal to sacrifice for him. His only rival had been that 
lowly deputy governor, Monsieur Charcot, who’d given himself the name de Maugiron, since 
there were no more de Maugirons. 
At five, Julien received a third letter; she’d thrown it to him, from the library door. Once 
again,  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole  ran  away.  “What  a  mania  for  writing!”  he  said  to  himself, 
laughing,  “when  conversation  is  so  readily  available!  The  enemy  wants  my  letters,  that’s 
obvious―and  they  want  more  than  one!”  He  was  in  no  hurry  to  open  this  one.  “Still  such 
elegant  phrases,”  he  was  thinking,  but  then  he  turned  pale  as  he  read  on.  There  were  only 
eight lines: 
I need to talk to you; I must talk to  you,  and tonight.  When the clock sounds an  hour 
after midnight, be in the garden. Take the gardener’s big ladder from near the well; place it 
against my window and climb up to me. There’ll be a full moon: it doesn’t matter. 
 
 
Chapter Fifteen: Is it a Conspiracy? 
Chapter Fifteen: Is it a Conspiracy? 
What  a  bitter  space  between  conceiving  and  executing  a  noble  project!  What  empty  terrors!  What 
indecision! It’s life and death―but it’s far more: it’s honor! 
―Schiller 
“This is becoming serious,” Julien thought,...”and a bit too clear,” he added after further 
thought. “Hmm! This beautiful lady can talk to me in the library, with a freedom that, by the 
grace of God, is absolute. The marquis is so afraid I might show him my accounts, he never 
walks  in.  Hah!  Monsieur  de  La  Mole  and  Count  Norbert,  the  only  people  who  ever  appear 
here, are away virtually all day long. It’s perfectly easy to see them, when they’re returning―
and my sublime Mathilde, for whose hand a ruling prince would not be too noble, wants me to 
be guilty of something so abominably rash. 
“Plainly, they either want to ruin me or, at least, to make fun of me. First they wanted me 
to  ruin  myself  with  my  letters;  my  letters  were  too  cautious.  Well!  They’ve  got  to  have 
something  clearer  than  daylight.  These  handsome  little  fellows  think  I’m  either  extremely 
stupid  or  a  hopeless  fop.  The  devil!  In  full  moonlight,  to  climb  up  a  ladder,  like  that,  to  a 
second  story  twenty-five  feet  high!  They’d  have  plenty  of  time  to  see  me,  even  from  the 
neighboring houses. How handsome I’ll look, up on my ladder!” Julien went up to his room 
and, whistling, began to pack his trunk. He’d made up his mind to leave, and not to bother 
replying. 
But this sensible solution did not put his heart at ease. “Suppose, by some odd chance,” he 
suddenly  said  to  himself,  his  trunk  now  closed,  “suppose  Mathilde  is  acting  in  good  faith! 
Then, in her eyes, I’d be playing the role of a perfect coward. I have no noble birth, so I have to 
have a great character―cash on demand, and no easy little forgeries―and that character has 
to be solidly proven: the deeds need to speak for themselves....” 
He spent a quarter of an hour in reflection. “Why try to deny it?” he finally said. “I’ll be a 
coward in her eyes. I’d give up not only the most brilliant woman in high society, as everyone 
said at Duke de Retz’s ball, but also the divine pleasure of seeing the Marquis de Croisenois, a 
duke’s son who will himself be a duke, sacrificed for me. A charming young man, with all the 
qualities I lack: quick wit, birth, money. 
“I’ll be sorry the rest of my life―not for her, there are lots of mistresses! ‘But there’s only 
one  honor!’  as  Corneille’s  old  Don  Diego1  says―and  here,  facing  the  first  danger  I’ve  been 
offered,  I  clearly  and  simply  pull  back―because  that  duel  with  Monsieur  de  Beauvoisis  was 
almost a joke. This is entirely different. I might be shot by a servant, at point-blank range, but 
that’s not the most serious risk. I might be disgraced. 
“This is getting serious, my boy,” he added, clownishly, brightly. “It’s all about ’onor, it is. 
What poor devil, thrown so far down by chance, ever gets an opportunity like this? I’ll do well 
with other women, yes, but never one so high up....” 
He thought for a long time, walking rapidly up and down his room,  from time to time 
stopping abruptly. A magnificent marble bust of de Richelieu was kept in the room; in spite of 
himself,  he  found  himself  drawn  to  it.  De  Richelieu  seemed  to  be  looking  at  him  rather 
harshly,  as  if  scolding  him  for  lacking  the  audacity  so  proper  and  natural  to  the  French 
character. “In your time, you great man, would I have hesitated? 
“At the worst,” he finally told himself, “let’s suppose this is all a trap; it remains very dark 
and exceedingly compromising for a young girl. They know I’m not someone who’ll stay silent. 
They’d have to kill me. That was fine in 1574, the days of Boniface de La Mole, but today’s de 
                                                             
1 Father of the hero in Le Cid, a noble old soldier who, as a true Cornelian, puts honor before everything. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
La  Moles  would  never  risk  it.  This  family  is  no  longer  what  it  was.  They’re  so  jealous  of 
Mademoiselle de La Mole! Tomorrow there’d be four hundred drawing rooms ringing with her 
shame―and with such pleasure! 
“The servants gossip among themselves about the obvious preference I’ve been shown. I 
know it, I’ve heard them.... 
“On the other hand, her letters! ... They might believe I’ll have them on me. If they can 
surprise me in her room, they could take them. I’d have to deal with two, three, four men―
who knows? But where would they find such men? Where can you find discreet servants, here 
in Paris? The law frightens them...By God! the de Cayluses, the de Luzes, the de Croisenoises 
themselves! Being there just then, and the stupid figure I’d cut, in the middle of them―that 
might tempt them. Watch out for what happened to Abélard,2 Monsieur Secretary! 
“So,  by  God!  Gentlemen,  you’ll  carry  the  scars  of  our  combat;  I’ll  slash  your  faces,  as 
Caesar’s soldiers cut up Pompey’s men, at Pharsalia3...And as for the letters, I can find them a 
safe hiding place.” 
Julien made copies of the last two, hid them in a volume of the library’s beautiful Voltaire, 
and brought the originals to the post. 
When  he  returned:  “What  madness  am  I  throwing  myself  into?”  he  asked  himself, 
surprised  and  alarmed.  He  had  spent  an  entire  quarter  of  an  hour  without  looking  straight 
ahead, facing what was to happen next, that same night. 
“But if I don’t do it, I’ll despise myself afterward. This will linger on, my whole life long, as 
something  questionable―and  for  me  that  sort  of  uncertainty  is  the  bitterest  misery  of  all. 
Wasn’t that what I felt about Amanda’s lover? I think I’d be far readier to forgive myself some 
simple crime: once I admitted it, I’d stop thinking about it. 
“Hah!  I’ll  have  been  competing  against  a  man  bearing  one  of  the  best  names  in  all 
France―and  then  cheerfully,  of  my  own  volition,  I’ll  have  said  he  was  the  better,  I  was  the 
inferior one! It’s plain enough: not to do this is cowardice. And that settles it,” Julien exclaimed 
silently, jumping to his feet...”Besides, she’s so very pretty. 
“If this isn’t a betrayal, what madness she’s committing for my sake! ... It’s a puzzle, by 
God! So, gentlemen, it’s up to me, just me, to turn the joke into a serious affair, and that’s what 
I intend to do. 
“Yet what if they tie up my arms, as I’m coming into the room. Maybe they’ve set up some 
ingenious device. 
“Well,  it’s  like  a  duel,”  he  assured  himself,  laughing.  “‘There’s  a  riposte  for  every  sword 
stroke,’ as my fencing teacher says, ‘but God, who wants it over and done with, makes one of 
the two forget how it’s done.’ In any case, here’s how I’ll deal with them.” He pulled his pistols 
out of his pocket and, even though they were charged and loaded, he readied them all over 
again. 
He  still  had  several  hours  of  waiting.  In  order  to  be  doing  something,  Julien  wrote  to 
Fouqué: 
                                                             
2 As a young priest, Pierre Abélard (1079C1142 or 44) was hired to tutor Hélo07se (1101C64), the bright niece of a 
wealthy  Parisian  merchant.  They  fell  in  love,  were  secretly  married,  and,  when  the  girl  was  found  to  be 
pregnant, her furious uncle had Abélard castrated. The two lovers were sent to distant cloistered monasteries, 
communicating  only  by  letter.  Their  tragic  love  story  became  a  touchstone  in  French  literature,  and  their 
correspondence  in  Latin  survives.  Abélard  went  on  to  become  one  of  the  leading  theologians  in  Europe, 
engaging  in  polemic  battles  with  the  Sorbonne  and  Saint  Bernard  of  Clairvaux.  Hélo07se’s  letters  reveal  a 
woman of sharp and independent intellect. 
3  According  to  Plutarch,  Julius  Caesar  ordered  his  hardened  veterans  to  slash  at  the  faces  of  his  enemy 
Pompey’s soldiers, who were reputed to be vain young Roman patricians. 
 
 
Chapter Fifteen: Is it a Conspiracy? 
My friend: Don’t open the letter, here enclosed, unless there’s been an accident and you 
hear  that  something  strange  has  happened  to  me.  In  that  event,  erase  the  names  from  the 
manuscript  I’m  sending  you,  and  make  eight  copies,  to  be  sent  to  the  newspapers  in 
Marseilles,  Bordeaux,  Lyons,  Brussels,  etc.  Ten  days  later,  have  the  manuscript  printed  and 
send the first copies to the Marquis de La Mole. And fifteen days later, strew the other copies, 
at night, along the streets of Verrières. 
The short manuscript he had enclosed, explaining and justifying, and which Fouqué was 
only to read in case of accident, had been written as a narrative; he had made it as minimally 
compromising as possible for Mademoiselle de La Mole, but nevertheless it clearly stated his 
own position. 
Julien had finished sealing this package just as the dinner bell sounded; it made his heart 
beat. Preoccupied with the narration he had just been composing, his imagination was full of 
tragic foreboding. He could see himself seized by the servants, tied, carried down to a cellar, a 
gag  in  his  mouth.  Once  there,  one  of  the  servants  would  stand  guard  over  him,  and  if  the 
honor of the noble family required a tragic ending, it would be easy to finish him off with a 
poison that left no traces. Then they could say he’d died of some illness, and they’d bring him 
back to his room, dead. 
Moved  by  his  own  narrative,  like  a  playwright  by  his  drama,  Julien  entered  the  dining 
room  with  a  feeling  of  genuine  fear.  He  looked  at  all  the  servants,  in  their  full  regalia.  He 
examined their faces. “Which of these people have been picked for tonight’s expedition?” he 
asked  himself.  “In  this  family,  memories  of  Henry  III’s  court  are  so  much  alive,  so  often 
recalled, that if they believe there has been an outrage against the family, they’re likely to be 
more decisive than other people of their rank.” He looked at Mademoiselle de La Mole, trying 
to  read  the  family’s  plans  in  her  eyes.  She  was  pale  and  looked  thoroughly  medieval.  He’d 
never seen her looking so noble and grand; she was truly beautiful, and imposing. He almost 
fell in love with her. “Pallida morte futura,4 her pallor prophesies death,” he said to himself. 
After dinner, though he pretended to spend time walking in the garden, it was useless; 
Mademoiselle de La Mole did not appear. Had he been able to talk to her, just then, it would 
have taken a great weight from his heart. 
Why  not  admit  it?  He  was  afraid.  Since  he  was  determined  to  go  ahead  with  it,  he 
shamelessly indulged his fear. “Provided that, when it’s time to act, I have the courage to carry 
me through,” he told himself, “what difference does it make what I’m feeling right now?” He 
checked the location, hefting the ladder to be sure of its weight. 
“This is a tool,” he said to himself, laughing, “which it seems to be my destiny to make use 
of!  Here,  just  as,  before,  in  Verrières.  But  what  a  difference!  Then,”  he  continued,  sighing, 
“there  was  no  need  to  mistrust  the  person  for  whom  I  endangered  myself.  And  what  a 
difference, also, in the danger! 
“I  might  have  been  killed,  in  Monsieur  de  Rênal’s  gardens,  without  necessarily  being 
dishonored.  They  could  perfectly  well  have  made  my  death  unexplainable.  Here,  what 
abominable stories they’re going to be telling, at the de Cayluses, the de Chaulneses, the de 
Retzes, etc.―indeed, everywhere. I will go down in history as a monster. 
“Or  maybe  only  for  two  or  three  years,”  he  answered himself,  laughing  once  again,  but 
this time at himself. But the thought made him feel suddenly weak. “And I, where will I find 
anyone to argue for me? Supposing Fouqué prints my little pamphlet, posthumously, why, that 
will  be  yet  another  infamy.  What!  I’m  welcomed  into  the  house,  and  to  pay  back  the 
hospitality they gave me, the kindness they showered on me, I print a pamphlet about what 
                                                             
4 From Virgil’s Aeneid, the phrase describes Dido. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
happened! I attack a woman’s honor! Ah, let me be betrayed―a thousand times better, that 
way.” 
It was a ghastly evening. 
 
 
Chapter Sixteen: One O’Clock in the Morning 
Chapter Sixteen: One O’Clock in the Morning 
The garden was very big, designed fairly recently and in perfect taste. But the trees were more than a century 
old. The effect was somewhat rustic. 
―Massinger1 
He was about to write a counterorder to Fouqué, when one o’clock sounded. He locked 
the  door  to  his  room  noisily,  as  if  he  were  shutting  himself  in  for  the  night.  Then  he  loped 
around  the  whole  house,  like  a  wolf,  especially  on  the  top  floor,  where  the  servants  were 
quartered. He saw nothing unusual. One of Madame de La Mole’s maids was having a party, 
and  the  servants  were  happily  emptying  the  punch  bowl.  “The  ones  who  are  laughing  like 
that,”  thought  Julien,  “can’t  be  the  ones  participating  in  a  nocturnal  expedition.  They’d  be 
more serious.” 
At  last  he  went  and  stood  in  a  dark  corner  of  the  garden.  “If  their  plan  is  to  hide 
themselves from the de La Mole servants, the ones who are supposed to surprise me will have 
to come in over the garden walls. 
“If Monsieur de Croisenois has any sense about all this, he has to know how much less 
compromising it would be, for the young woman he wants to marry, to surprise me before I’ve 
reached her room.” 
He performed a very precise military reconnaissance. “This is a question of my honor,” he 
thought. “If I let something slip by me, it won’t be an excuse―not to me―if I tell myself: ’I 
never thought of that.’” 
The weather was depressingly fine. The moon had risen about eleven o’clock; by twelve-
thirty, the side of the house facing the garden was fully lit. 
“She’s  insane,”  Julien  told  himself.  When  one  o’clock  sounded,  there  was  still  light  in 
Count Norbert’s windows. Never in all his life had Julien been so terrified: all he saw were the 
risks he was taking, nor was he enthusiastic about taking them. 
He went to get the big ladder, waited five minutes so she had time to countermand her 
instructions,  and  at  five  after  one  set  the  ladder  against  Mathilde’s  window.  He  climbed  up 
quietly, pistol in hand, astonished not to have been attacked. As he reached the window, she 
threw it open, noiselessly. 
“There  you  are,  sir,”  Mathilde  said  to  him,  very  emotionally.  “I’ve  been  following  your 
movements for the last hour.” 
Julien was deeply embarrassed; he did not know how to behave; he felt no love whatever. 
In his embarrassment he thought he might as well act the lover, so he tried to kiss Mathilde. 
“For shame!” she said, pushing him away. 
Very  happy  to  have  been  repulsed,  he  quickly  glanced  around  him.  The  moon  was  so 
bright that the shadows it cast in Mathilde’s room were black. “But there could well be men so 
well hidden that I can’t see them,” he thought. 
“What’s that in your side pocket?” Mathilde asked, delighted to have found a subject for 
conversation. She was feeling strangely tormented: all those feelings of restraint and shyness, 
so natural to a well-bred girl, had resumed their sway and were torturing her. 
“I’ve  got  all  sorts  of  weapons,  as  well  as  pistols,”  Julien  replied,  equally  happy  to  have 
“The ladder has to be removed,” said Mathilde. 
“It’s  huge,  and  it  might  break  the  glass  in  the  room  down  below,  or  the  ones  in  the 
something to say. 
mezzanine.” 
                                                             
1 Philip Massinger (1583C1640), a British playwright, and a contemporary of Shakespeare. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
“The glass mustn’t be broken,” Mathilde answered, trying unsuccessfully to speak in an 
ordinary conversational tone. “You could, I should think, lower the ladder, using a rope tied to 
the first rung. I always keep ropes in my room.” 
“And this is a woman in love!” thought Julien. “She has the nerve to say she’s in love! Such 
calm, such sensible precautions, show me very plainly that I’m not triumphing over Monsieur 
de Croisenois, as I so foolishly believed. I’ve simply become his successor. Really, what does it 
matter?  Am  I  in  love  with  her?  I’ve  won  a  victory  over  de  Croisenois,  because  he’ll  be 
exceedingly  angry,  having  a  successor  at  all,  and  angrier  still  to  have  that  successor  be  me. 
How arrogantly he looked at me, yesterday night, at Café Tortoni,2 pretending he didn’t even 
know me! How nastily he greeted me, afterward, when he couldn’t get out of it any longer.” 
Julien had tied a rope to the ladder; it went down quietly, leaning far enough out from the 
balcony to keep from touching the glass panes. “Just the time to kill me,” he thought, “if there’s 
someone hidden in Mathilde’s room.” But a profound silence still hung over everything. 
The ladder touched the ground; Julien managed to lay it down in a bed of exotic flowers, 
along the wall. 
“What  will  my  mother  say,”  said  Mathilde,  “when  she  sees  her  beautiful  flowers  all 
crushed? ... You’ve got to throw the rope down, too,” she added with immense calm. “If anyone 
sees it leading back to the balcony, it won’t be easy to explain.” 
“And  how  me  go  ’way?”  Julien  said  wryly,  assuming  a  Creole  accent.  (One  of  the 
chambermaids had been born in San Domingo.3) 
“You, you’ll leave by the door,” said Mathilde, fascinated by the idea. 
“Ah, this is a man fully worthy of my love!” she thought. 
Julien  had  just  dropped  the  rope  into  the  garden;  Mathilde  took  him  by  the  arm.  He 
thought he’d been seized by some enemy, and turned around quickly, drawing a dagger. She’d 
thought she heard a window opening. They stood motionless, not even breathing. The moon 
fell full on them. There was no other sound, no further cause for alarm. 
Then they were once again seriously embarrassed, both of them. Julien made sure that the 
door had been properly closed, all the bolts thrown. He’d thought of looking under the bed 
but did not dare; there could be a servant or two under there. In the end, he was so worried 
that prudence would make him regret the omission, at some future date, that he looked. 
Mathilde had been gripped by all the torments of extreme shyness. This horrified her. 
“What have you done with my letters?” she asked at last. 
“Just  the  time  to  shake  up  these  gentlemen,  if  they’re  listening,  and  to  avoid  a  battle!” 
thought Julien. 
“The first one is hidden in a huge Protestant Bible, which the mail coach carried away, 
last night, and will be taking far away.” 
He spoke very clearly, as he gave her all the details, so he could be heard by anyone who 
might be hidden, perhaps, in the two big mahogany armoires, which he hadn’t dared look into. 
“The other two are in the mail, going to the same place as the first.” 
“Good Lord! Why all these precautions?” asked Mathilde, astonished. 
“Is there some reason for lying to her?” thought Julien. And he told her all his suspicions. 
                                                             
2  A  very  successful  and  fashionable  café  in  the  Boulevard  des  Italiens,  Café  Tortoni  opened  in  1804  and 
specialized in ice cream. 
3 The French lost the colony of Saint-Domingue, now Haiti, to Toussiant Louverture’s insurrection in 1791. 
Bonaparte sent his brother-in-law General Leclerc to retake the island in 1802; Leclerc captured Louverture, 
who died in France, but Haitians, under the leadership of Dessalines, drove the French troops off the island 
and declared independence in 1804. 
 
 
Chapter Sixteen: One O’Clock in the Morning 
“That’s why your letters were so cold!” Mathilde exclaimed, sounding more irrational than 
tender,  but  suddenly,  devastatingly,  changing  to  a  pronoun  implying  familiarity,  even 
intimacy. 
Julien was no longer listening closely. Once he had heard her use conclusively intimate 
language,  he  lost  his  head―or,  at  least,  he  lost  all  his  suspicions.  He  found  the  courage  to 
embrace  this  wonderfully  beautiful  girl,  for  whom  he  felt  immense  respect.  She  only  partly 
pushed him away. 
He fell back on his memory, as he had done once before, in Besan04on, with Amanda, and 
recited some of the loveliest phrases of La Nouvelle Hélo07se.4 
“You have a man’s heart,” she said endearingly, without really listening to his words. “I 
wanted to test your courage; I admit it. Your early suspicions and your determination show me 
that you’re even braver than I could have believed.” 
Mathilde  was  consciously  trying  to  keep  using  intimate  language;  she  was  obviously 
paying more attention to this new and unfamiliar way of speech than to what she was actually 
saying. Intimate words, devoid of any tenderness, did not please him: he was stunned by the 
complete absence, in his heart, of any sign of happiness. At last, trying to feel it, he fell back on 
rationality. He could see that this exceedingly proud young girl thought very well of him, and 
he knew she never praised anyone or anything unreservedly. This argument satisfied his self-
esteem. 
It  was  not,  indeed,  that  same  intensity  of  sensual  pleasure  he  had  experienced,  several 
times, with Madame de Rênal. He felt no tenderness whatever: this was the vigorous happiness 
of ambition, for Julien was ambitious, above all else. Once again, he talked about the people he 
had suspected, and the precautions he had devised. As he spoke, he thought how best to take 
advantage of his triumph. 
Still  deeply  embarrassed,  and  apparently  staggered  by  what  she  had  done,  Mathilde 
seemed delighted to have found a topic for conversation. They discussed how they might be 
able to meet again. Julien was thoroughly enjoying the wit and courage he had proved, once 
more,  as  they  were  talking.  They  were  dealing  with  extremely  clear-sighted  people;  little 
Tanbeau was certainly a spy; but he and Mathilde were not exactly fools, either. 
What would be easier than to meet in the library, the most convenient place of all? 
“I  can  appear,  without  creating  any  suspicion,  in  any  part  of  the  house,”  added  Julien, 
“and very nearly in Madame de La Mole’s room.” Crossing through that room, to  get to her 
daughter’s, was completely unavoidable. If Mathilde thought it better that he always arrive by 
ladder, he would expose himself to that trivial danger, his heart drunk with joy. 
Listening to him speak, Mathilde was shocked by his sense of triumph. “He’s already my 
master!” she told herself. She felt remorse gripping her; her rational mind was horrified by the 
remarkable act of madness she’d committed. Had she been able to, she would have annihilated 
both herself and Julien. When by sheer force of will she could momentarily beat back remorse, 
shyness  and  suffering  modesty  made  her  wretchedly  miserable.  She  had  had  no  idea  of  the 
frightful state in which she would find herself. 
“But, still, I need to talk to him,” she finally told herself. “That’s understood: you speak to 
your lover.” And then, to fulfill this obligation, and with a tenderness that was still more in the 
words she used than in the tone of her voice, she told him several decisions she had made, 
these last few days. 
                                                             
4 Rousseau’s sentimental novel of love, thought risqué in some circles. The title alludes to Abélard’s Hélo07se 
(see note for p. 320, l. 28). 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
She  had  decided  that  if  he  were  courageous  enough  to  come  to  her,  via  the  gardener’s 
ladder, as she had directed he should, she would be entirely his. But never were such tender 
words spoken more coldly and politely. To this point, their rendezvous had been utterly frigid. 
It was almost enough to turn love into something detestable. What a lesson in morality, for a 
young, careless girl! Was a moment like this worth the pain of losing one’s whole future? 
After long hesitation, which an observer might have thought caused by strong distaste―
so hard is it for a woman to abandon her sense of what she owes herself, even in yielding to a 
will equally strong―Mathilde ended by becoming his loving mistress. 
In  truth,  their  ecstasies  were  a  bit  willed.  Passionate  love  was  still  a  model  they  were 
imitating, rather than something real. 
Mademoiselle de La Mole felt that she had fulfilled her duty to herself and to her lover. 
“The poor boy,” she told herself, “has demonstrated perfect bravery; he ought to be happy; or 
else I’m the one with a deficient character.” But she wished she could buy off, in return for an 
eternity of misfortunes, the cruel necessity in which she found herself caught up. 
In  spite  of  the  horrible  violence  she  was  doing  to  herself,  she  remained  absolutely  in 
control of her words. 
There was no regret, no reproach, to spoil this night that seemed to Julien strange rather 
than  happy.  What  a  difference,  Good  Lord!  from  his  final  twenty-four  hours  in  Verrières! 
“These lovely Parisian manners have acquired the secret of spoiling everything, even love,” he 
told himself, most unfairly. 
He shaped these reflections while standing in one of the large mahogany armoires, which 
he’d gone into at the first sounds heard in the adjoining rooms, which belonged to Madame de 
La Mole. Mathilde went to mass with her mother, the maids were soon out of the rooms, and 
Julien escaped quite easily, before they returned to finish their work. 
He mounted his horse and hunted up the most solitary parts of a forest close to Paris. He 
remained  far  more  amazed  than  happy.  The  sort  of  happiness  that  now  and  then  filled  his 
heart was like that of a young second lieutenant, who, after an astonishing battle, has just been 
made a colonel, on the spot, by the commanding general. He felt himself borne to an immense 
height.  Everything  that  had  been  above  him,  the  night  before,  was  now  at  his  level  or  even 
below him. Little by little, the farther he got from Paris, the more his happiness grew. 
If  he  had  no  tenderness  in  his  soul,  it  was  because―however  strange  the  words  may 
seem―Mathilde,  in  everything  she  had  done  with  him,  had  been  fulfilling  a  duty.  She  had 
experienced nothing unforeseen in all that happened during their night together, except the 
misery and shame she’d found, instead of the absolute felicity of which novels had told her. 
“Was I wrong? Was I not in love with him?” she asked herself. 
 
 
Chapter Seventeen: An Old Sword 
Chapter Seventeen: An Old Sword 
I now mean to be serious; ―it is time, 
Since laughter nowadays is deemed too serious. 
A jest at vice by virtue’s called a crime. 
―Byron, Don Juan 
She did not come down to dinner. Later, she appeared in the drawing room, very briefly, 
but  did  not  look  at  Julien.  Her  conduct  seemed  to  him  strange.  “But,”  he  thought,  “I  don’t 
know their customs; she’ll give me some good reason for these things.” All the same, impelled 
by  the  strongest  curiosity,  he  studied  Mathilde’s  expression,  and  could  not  conceal  from 
himself  that  she  seemed  wry  and  nasty.  This  was  obviously  not  the  same  woman  who,  the 
night before, had enjoyed―or had feigned―an ecstatic happiness far too great to be real. 
The next day, and the day after that, her coldness remained the same; she did not look at 
him; she was not aware of his existence. Gripped by intense discomfort, Julien was a thousand 
miles from the triumphant feelings which, that first day, had been all there was in his heart. 
“Could  this,  by  any  chance,”  he  asked  himself,  “be  a  return  to  virtue?”  But  this  was  too 
bourgeois a word for haughty Mathilde. 
“In everyday life,” Julien thought, “she has hardly any religious belief. She approves of it as 
useful to the interests of her class. 
“But  couldn’t  plain  female  delicacy  be  reproaching  her  for  the  sin  she’s  committed?” 
Julien now believed he had been her first lover. 
“Still,”  he  told  himself,  at  other  moments,  “it  must  be  conceded  that  there  is  nothing 
na07ve, simple, or tender in her whole manner of being. I’ve never seen her haughtier. Does she 
despise  me?  It  would  be  like  her  to  reproach  herself  for  what  she’s  done for  me,  strictly  on 
account of my low birth.” 
While Julien, full of preconceived judgments, drawn from books as well as his memories 
of Verrières, was haunted by the chimera of a tender mistress who, from the moment she had 
made  her  lover  happy,  was  no  longer  concerned  with  his  existence,  Mathilde’s  vanity  was 
wildly angry with him. 
Since she had not been bored in two months, she was no longer worried about boredom; 
thus, without having the slightest suspicion of it, Julien had lost his greatest advantage. 
“I’ve  given  myself  a  master!”  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole  told  herself,  succumbing  to  the 
blackest,  most  sorrowful  regret.  “He’s  enormously  honorable,  for  what  that’s  worth,  but  if  I 
push  his  vanity  over  the  edge,  he’ll  take  his  revenge  by  letting  the  world  know  our 
relationship.”  Mathilde  had  never  had  a  lover,  and  being  in  a  state  which  makes  even  the 
sourest souls dream tender illusions, she was consumed by the bitterest of black thoughts. 
“He  has  immense  power  over  me,  since  he  rules  by  terror  and  can  punish  me  with 
tremendous pain if I push at him too hard.” This alone was enough to lead Mademoiselle de La 
Mole  to  show  him  stern  disrespect:  her  character’s  primary  attribute  was  courage.  Nothing 
could have set her in restless motion, and cure her of her endless boredom, without forever 
quickening her sense that she was gambling for the highest of all stakes, her very existence at 
risk. 
On  the  third  day,  with  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole  stubbornly  refusing  to  acknowledge 
him, after dinner Julien followed her, clearly against her will, into the billiard room. 
“So,  sir,  you  feel  possessed  of  some  mighty  power  over  me,”  she  said,  with  barely 
restrained anger, “since, quite directly against my wishes, unmistakably expressed, you intend 
to speak to me? ... Are you aware that no one in the world has ever dared do that?” 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Nothing could be so amusing as the dialogue between these two lovers, unaware that they 
were each driven by intensely passionate hatred of the other. Neither of them endowed with 
much patience, and both being accustomed to the ways of good society, they were soon flatly 
declaring eternal enmity. 
“I am forever bound to secrecy, I swear it!” said Julien. “I might add that I’d never speak to 
you  again,  except  that  such  a  marked  change  could  damage  your  reputation.”  He  bowed 
respectfully and left. 
He had performed, without much difficulty, what seemed to him his duty; it would never 
have  occurred  to  him  that  he  was  in  love  with  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole.  There  was  no 
question he hadn’t loved her three days earlier, when he’d been hidden in the big mahogany 
armoire. But  his soul suffered a sharp sea change the moment he saw he’d broken with her 
forever. 
His relentless memory made him retrace every detail of that night, which in truth had left 
him so cold. 
The very next night after the decisive rupture, Julien almost drove himself mad, forced to 
admit that he was in love with Mademoiselle de La Mole. 
Ghastly struggles followed on this discovery: his emotions had been tossed every which 
Two days later, instead of being haughty with Monsieur de Croisenois, he came close to 
way. 
tearfully embracing him. 
He was accustomed to misery, and that lent him a whiff of common sense: he decided to 
leave for Languedoc, packed his trunk, and went to arrange his trip. 
He  felt  faint  when,  arriving  at  the  mail-coach  office,  he  found  that  by  a  strange 
coincidence there was an available seat, for the next day, in the coach going to Toulouse, the 
capital of Languedoc. He bought his ticket and returned to inform the Marquis de La Mole of 
his departure. 
Monsieur de La Mole had gone out. More dead than alive, Julien went to the library to 
wait for him. How did he feel, when he there encountered Mademoiselle de La Mole? 
Seeing him, she put on a nasty expression, which he could not possibly misunderstand. 
Carried away by his misery, confused and surprised, Julien had the weakness to say to her, 
in the tenderest voice, and truly from the heart: “So you don’t love me anymore?” 
“I’m horrified that I gave myself to the first one who came along,” Mathilde said, weeping 
with self-directed fury. 
“The  first  one  who  came  along!”  Julien  exclaimed,  running  over  to  where,  hung  in  the 
library as a curiosity, there was an ancient, medieval sword. 
His misery, which he had thought at its height when he spoke to her, was intensified a 
hundredfold, seeing her tears of shame. He would have been the happiest of men if he could 
have killed her. 
Just  as,  with  some  difficulty,  he’d  drawn  the  sword  from  its  ancient  sheath,  Mathilde, 
thrilled by this wonderfully new sensation, came toward him, haughtily; her tears had stopped. 
The thought of the Marquis de La Mole, his benefactor, came vividly into his mind. “I’d be 
killing  his  daughter!”  he  told  himself.  “How  awful!”  He  started  to  throw  the  sword  down. 
“Certainly,” he thought, “she’s going to howl with laughter, seeing this melodramatic gesture,” 
and that idea made him once more calm and quite collected. He looked at the ancient sword’s 
blade, suddenly curious: it was as if he were trying to find some rusty spot. Then he put the 
sword back in its sheath and, with immense, quiet poise, set it on the gilded brass nail from 
which it had been hung. 
 
 
Chapter Seventeen: An Old Sword 
The whole process, very slow toward the end, lasted a solid minute. ...Mademoiselle de La 
Mole was looking at him, stunned. “I’ve really been at the point of being killed by my lover!” 
she told herself. 
The  idea  carried  her  back  to  the  most  beautiful  times  of  Charles  IX’s  and  Henry  III’s 
century. 
Julien had just replaced the sword; she stood immobile in front of him, and there was no 
longer any hate in her eyes. It must be admitted that she was exceedingly seductive just then; 
certainly, no woman had ever less resembled a Paris doll (this being Julien’s major objection to 
Parisian women). 
“I’m going to fall back into caring for him,” Mathilde thought. “And he’ll be convinced, 
here  and  now,  he’s  my  lord  and  master,  once  I  let  myself  relapse―and  just  when  I’ve  been 
speaking to him so strongly.” She fled. 
“My  God,  but  she’s  lovely!”  said  Julien,  watching  her  run  off.  “Here’s  this  creature  who 
threw herself into my arms, just a week ago, and with such passion! ... And those moments will 
never return! And it’s my fault! Right then, at such an extraordinary moment, so fascinating, I 
let myself be insensitive! ... I must confess I was born insipid and incredibly wretched.” 
Monsieur de La Mole came in. Julien quickly told him of his departure. 
“For where?” asked the marquis. 
“For Languedoc.” 
“No,  if  you  please.  I’m  saving  you  for  higher  matters.  If  you  do  leave,  it  will  be  to  the 
North...Accordingly, in military terms, I confine you to quarters. You will oblige me by never 
being absent for more than two or three hours. I may need you on very short notice.” 
“So,”  he  thought,  “I  can’t  even  take  myself  away!  God  knows  how  long  the  marquis  is 
going to keep me here in Paris. Good God! What’s going to become of me? And I haven’t got a 
friend I can look to for advice. Father Pirard wouldn’t let me finish the first sentence; Count 
Altamira would suggest that I join him in some conspiracy. 
“But I’m insane, I know it. I’m out of my mind! 
“Who could help me, what’s going to happen?” 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Chapter Eighteen: Terrible Times 
And  she  admits  it  to  me!  She  tells  me  everything,  every  little  detail!  Her  beautiful  eyes,  watching  me  so 
intently, show me the love she feels for someone else! 
―Schiller 
 
Thrilled to the bottom of her soul, Mademoiselle de La Mole could think of nothing but 
the happiness of having almost been killed. She even said it to herself: “He’s worthy of being 
my master, having been about to kill me. How many handsome young society men would have 
to be melted into one, to reach such a fit of passion?” 
She  had  to  admit  how  really  handsome  he’d  been  when  he’d  climbed  up  on  a  chair, 
replacing the sword exactly as the decorator had so picturesquely hung it! “After all, I wasn’t so 
crazy, falling in love with him.” 
Just then, had she been offered some more or less honorable way of restarting their love 
affair,  she’d  gladly  have  taken  it.  Julien,  who’d  double-locked  himself  into  his  room,  was 
overcome  by  the  most  violent  despair.  Among  other  crazy  notions,  he  thought  of  throwing 
himself at her feet. If, instead of hiding himself in a secluded place, he had gone wandering in 
the garden and around the house, so he could be ready for whatever might happen, he might 
conceivably,  in  no  more  than  a  second,  have  changed  his  frightful  misery  into  the  liveliest 
happiness. 
But we’re now reproaching him for being deficient at what, had he not been thus lacking, 
would also have kept him from the sublime act of seizing the ancient sword which, at that very 
moment,  had  made  him  so  handsome  in  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole’s  eyes.  So  favorable  to 
Julien,  this  whim  lasted  the  whole  day.  Mathilde  painted  a  charming  picture  for  herself, 
composed of the brief moments when she had loved him; she mourned them. 
“Really,”  she  said  to  herself,  “my  passion  for  the  poor  boy  only  lasted,  as  far  as  he’s 
concerned, from one in the morning, when I saw him coming up his ladder, his pistols stuffed 
into  his  pocket,  until  eight  the  next  morning.  It  was  fifteen  minutes  later,  as  I  was  hearing 
mass at Sainte-Valerie, that I began to think he’d fancy himself my master, and might well try 
to force me into obeying him, using terror as his weapon.” 
After  dinner,  far  from  fleeing  Julien,  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole  spoke  to  him  and,  as  it 
were, coerced him into following her to the garden; he acquiesced. For him, it was a new sort 
of test. Not fully aware what she was doing, Mathilde yielded to the love she was beginning to 
feel  for  him  once  more.  She  took  great  delight  in  walking  beside  him,  looking  with  great 
interest at his hands, which that morning had taken up the sword, intending to kill her. 
After that, and everything else that had happened, there could no longer be any question 
of conversing as once they had. 
Mathilde  gradually  began  to  talk  to  him,  trustingly,  intimately,  about  the  state  of  her 
heart. She found an odd, sensual pleasure in this sort of talk; she began to tell him about her 
passing fancies for Monsieur de Croisenois, for Monsieur de Caylus... 
“No! For Monsieur de Caylus too!” Julien exclaimed, all the bitter jealousy of a discarded 
lover ringing in his words. That was how Mathilde took it, and was not a bit offended. 
She went on torturing Julien, detailing her sometime feelings in the most graphic fashion, 
and speaking both intimately and truthfully. He could tell she was describing what had really 
taken place. It was painful for him, noticing that as she spoke she was learning what was truly 
in her heart. 
Jealousy’s miseries cannot get much worse. 
 
 
Chapter Eighteen: Terrible Times 
Suspecting  that  a  rival  is  loved  is  horrible  enough,  but  having  the  details  of  that  love 
confessed to you, in detail, by the woman you adore is, surely, the worst of all miseries. 
How Julien was being punished for his arrogance, thinking himself favored over de Caylus 
and  de  Croisenois!  With  what  intimate  wretchedness  and  emotion  he  now  exaggerated,  to 
himself, every single one of their trifling advantages! With what ardent good faith he despised 
himself! 
Mathilde  seemed  to  him  adorable;  words  alone  are  too  feeble  to  express  his  adoration. 
While walking beside her, he cast furtive glances at her hands, her feet, her queenly bearing. 
He  was  ready  to  fall  at  her  feet,  overpowered,  annihilated  by  love  and  misery,  and  crying: 
“Have pity!” 
“And this bewitchingly beautiful woman, so far above all others, who once loved me, will 
surely soon be in love with Monsieur de Caylus!” 
Julien could not have doubted Mademoiselle de La Mole’s sincerity: the tone of truth was 
too  obvious  in  everything  she  was  saying.  So  that  his  misery  might  be  absolutely  complete, 
there were moments when, because she was remembering so intently what, at one time, she 
had felt for Monsieur de Caylus, Mathilde would speak as if she were in fact still in love with 
him. Plainly, there was love in her voice. Julien could hear it very clearly. 
Had his chest been filled with boiling lead, he would have suffered less. How could the 
poor fellow, brought to this pitch of misery, possibly have imagined that, precisely because she 
was speaking to him, Mademoiselle de La Mole took such great pleasure in summoning up the 
old love fancies she had felt, once upon a time, for Monsieur de Caylus or Monsieur de Luz? 
Nothing  can  describe  Julien’s  anguish.  He  was  listening  to  these  confiding,  intimate 
details  of  the  love  she’d  felt  for  others,  even  as  they  walked  along  the  same  row  of  lindens 
where, so few days before, he’d been waiting for the clock to sound and summon him to her 
room. No human soul can experience any greater misery. 
This  kind  of  intimate  cruelty  went  on  for  eight  long  days.  Mathilde  would  sometimes 
seem to hunt for opportunities to speak to him, and would sometimes seem to do no more 
than  keep  herself  from  avoiding  him.  And  the  subject  of  their  conversations,  to  which  they 
both seemed to return, in a sort of ecstatic savagery, was the tale of her feelings for other men. 
She told him the letters she’d written, recalling even the precise words employed, sometimes 
reciting  whole  sentences  from  memory.  Toward  the  end,  she  appeared  to  be  contemplating 
Julien with a kind of malign pleasure. His sorrows were shining joys to her. 
It’s clear that Julien had no experience of life; he had not even read novels. Had he been a 
bit less gauche, and had he been able to say, coolly and calmly, to this young girl he so adored, 
and who told him such intimate and strange secrets: “Let’s face it; I may not be as lofty as all 
these other gentlemen, but just the same the one you love is me....” 
Perhaps she might have been happy to be understood. At least, his success would have 
been  entirely  dependent  on  the  grace  with  which  he’d  expressed  the  idea,  and  the  exact 
moment he’d chosen to say it. No matter what, he would have freed himself, and with positive 
effects for him, from a situation bound to become monotonous for her. 
“And you no longer love me, and I adore you!” Julien told her one day, frantic with love 
and misery. This stupidity was very nearly the worst he could have committed. 
His words destroyed, in the twinkling of an eye, all the pleasure Mademoiselle de La Mole 
had been finding, talking to him about the state of her heart. She began to be amazed that, 
after all of that, he had not taken offense at her accounts; she had started to think, just when 
he  made  this  doltish  remark,  that  perhaps  he  no  longer  loved  her.  “His  pride  has  surely 
extinguished his love,” she had told herself. “He’s not a man to quietly listen to himself being 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
compared, unfavorably, to the likes of de Caylus, de Luz, de Croisenois, and admitting they’re 
better than he is. No, I won’t see him at my feet anymore!” 
In the days leading up to this moment, in all the innocence of his misery, Julien had often, 
and  most  sincerely,  silently  praised  the  brilliant  qualities  of  these  gentlemen;  he  even 
exaggerated them. This tendency had not escaped Mademoiselle de La Mole. It had amazed 
her.  But  she  had  not  guessed  its  cause.  Julien’s  frantic  soul,  by  praising  a  rival  he  thought 
loved, was identifying with the other’s happiness. 
His deeply candid, and totally stupid, remark changed everything in an instant. Certain of 
being loved, Mathilde utterly despised him. 
She had been walking with him when he’d spoken those blundering words; she left him 
on the spot, and her final glance expressed the most awful disgust. Back in the drawing room, 
she never looked at him again. The next day, scorn had completely taken over her heart. There 
was no longer any question of the urge that, for an entire week, had made her treat Julien as 
her most intimate friend. The very sight of him seemed disagreeable. Her feelings bordered on 
utter  disgust;  there  can  be  no  way  to  express  the  extraordinary  contempt  she  felt  when  her 
eyes happened to fall on him. 
Julien had not understood anything of what had been going on in Mathilde’s heart, the 
past  week,  but  he  understood  her  contempt.  He  had  the  good  sense  to  let  himself  be  as 
invisible as he could, and never so much as glanced at her. 
But there was deadly pain in so completely depriving himself of her presence. He felt that 
his misery was constantly growing. “A man’s heart contains only so much courage,” he said to 
himself. He spent his days looking out his little window, up in the attic. He kept the blinds 
carefully  though  not  fully  closed;  he  could  at  least  see  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole  when  she 
went into the garden. 
How he felt, after dinner, when he saw her walking with Monsieur de Caylus, Monsieur 
de Luz, or someone else for whom, once upon a time, she had felt vague stirrings of love! 
Julien had not known such misery existed. He found himself at the edge of crying aloud; 
his once steady soul had been turned upside down, shaken awry from top to bottom. 
Thinking of anything other than Mademoiselle de La Mole had become obnoxious; he’d 
become incapable of composing even the simplest of letters. 
“You’ve gone crazy,” the marquis told him. 
Trembling at the thought of being found out, Julien spoke of sickness and even began to 
believe  it.  Luckily  for  him,  the  marquis  amused  himself  at  dinner,  teasing  Julien  about  his 
coming trip: Mathilde understood it might be a very long one. There had already been days 
when  he  simply  fled  from  her,  and  the  brilliant  young  gentlemen,  possessing  everything 
missing in this pale, grave person, previously so attractive to her, were quite unable, now, to 
distract her from her meditative reveries. 
“Any ordinary girl,” she told herself, “would have hunted among these young men for the 
one she wanted; they draw all the girls’ glances, in drawing rooms. But it is characteristic of 
genius not to let its thoughts be dragged into ruts ordinary minds have created. 
“When I’m with someone like Julien, who is deficient only in wealth, as I am not, I will 
always  draw  people’s  attention;  I  will  not  go  through  life  unnoticed.  Far  from  endlessly 
worrying  about  a  revolution,  as  all  my  cousins  do―they’re  so  afraid  of  the  common  people 
that they won’t scold a coachman who takes them where they don’t want to go―I’ll make sure 
I play a role, and a great one, because the man I’ve chosen has real character, and boundless 
ambition.  What  is  he  lacking?  Friends,  money?  I’ll  give  him  all  that.”  But  in  her  mind  she 
rather tended to treat Julien as an inferior, someone to be loved when she felt like it. 
 
 
Chapter Nineteen: Comic Opera 
Chapter Nineteen: Comic Opera 
O how this spring of love resembleth 
The uncertain glory of an April day, 
Which now shows all the beauty of the sun 
And by and by a cloud takes all away! 
―Shakespeare 
Busy with thoughts of the future, and the special role she expected to play, Mathilde soon 
began to long for the dry, metaphysical discussions she had often had with Julien. She could be 
wearied by such lofty notions, but sometimes she also missed the happy moments spent in his 
company.  Nor  did  she  remember  these  without  feeling  remorse,  and  at  certain  times  it 
overwhelmed her. 
“But even having a weakness,” she told herself, “a girl like me deserves to forget her duty 
only for a man who’s worthy. It mustn’t be said that his handsome mustache, or the graceful 
way  he  mounts  his  horse,  were  what  seduced  me,  but  his  far-seeing  thoughts  on  France’s 
future,  his  perception  of  similarities  between  what’s  going  to  swoop  down  on  us  and  the 
British Revolution of 1688.1 And, yes, I’ve been seduced,” she replied to her sense of remorse, “I 
was  a  weak  woman,  but  at  least  I  wasn’t misled  by  merely  external  matters,  like  a  brainless 
doll. 
“If there is another revolution, why couldn’t Julien play the role of Roland, and I the part 
of that Girondin leader, Madame Roland?2 I’d prefer being her to being Madame de Sta05l:3 in 
our  time,  personal  immorality  will  be  an  obstacle.  No  one’s  ever  going  to  reproach  me  for 
falling twice; I’d die of shame.” 
Mathilde’s  reveries  weren’t  all  as  somber  as  the  notions  just  transcribed:  that  must  be 
conceded. 
unimportant. 
She  looked  at  Julien,  finding  a  charming  grace  in  everything  he  did,  no  matter  how 
“No  question  about it,” she  said to herself. “I’ve managed to crush  out of him even the 
slimmest sense that he has any rights. 
“The wretched look, the profound passion with which the poor fellow told me he loved 
me, a week ago, surely proves it. Yes, it’s true, it was quite extraordinary how I flared up at 
words so glowing with respect, and spoken with such passion. I’m his wife, am I not? What he 
said was perfectly reasonable and, I must say, I found it pleasant. Julien still loves me, even 
after  those  endless  conversations  when  all  I  talked  to  him  about,  and  so  cruelly―I  agree―
were just vague stirrings of love, born out of the boredom of my existence, love that I imagined 
                                                             
1 The political turbulence of seventeenth-century Britain―the execution of Charles I, Cromwell’s protectorate, 
the return of the Stuarts under the protection of General Monck―was a constant point of reference for the 
revolutionary and postrevolutionary generations. The year 1688 was the time of the “Glorious Revolution,” 
which drove James II into exile and brought to the throne the more conciliatory (and Protestant) William of 
Orange and Mary Stuart, James’s daughter. 
2  Jean-Marie  Roland  de  La  Platière  (1734C93)  was  a  leader  of  the  Girondin  party  (see  note  for  p.  282,  l.  26), 
minister  of  the  interior  in  1792;  his  wife,  Jeanne-Marie  (1754C93),  was  a  highly  educated  woman  whose 
influential salon was a gathering place for moderate Republicans. The Rolands opposed the execution of Louis 
XVI, which earned them the enmity of Robespierre and the Jacobins. Roland fled to Rouen in January 1793; 
hearing there of his wife’s execution, he killed himself. 
3 Madame de Sta05l’s (see note for p. 278, l. 1) list of reputed lovers included Talleyrand, the Count de Narbonne, 
Joseph  Bonaparte,  and  especially  Benjamin  Constant.  The  story  of  their  stormy  affair  is  told  from  his 
perspective in the novel Adolphe, and from hers in Corinne. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
I felt for those young aristocrats: he’s so jealous of them. Ah, if he knew how little danger they 
represent for me! how, when I compare them to Julien, they seem bloodless, all of them copies 
of one another.” 
As her mind shaped these notions, Mathilde was drawing random lines, in pencil, on a 
page in her sketchbook. One of the profiles she’d produced both amazed and delighted her: it 
was strikingly like Julien. “It’s the voice of heaven! This is one of love’s miracles,” she exclaimed 
to herself, ecstatically. “Now I’ll surely draw his portrait.” 
She  ran  up  to  her  room,  shut  herself  in,  and  set  to  work,  trying  hard  to  really  draw  a 
portrait of Julien. But she could not: the profile she’d drawn by accident always resembled him 
most closely. She was utterly enchanted: it seemed to her proof positive of a great passion. 
She didn’t close her sketchbook until much later, when her mother called her to go to the 
Italian opera. There was only one idea in her head: catch Julien’s attention, so she could get 
her mother to have him accompany them to the performance. 
He did not appear; the only people with whom the ladies shared their box were some dull 
commoners. During the opera’s first act, Mathilde dreamed most passionately of the man she 
loved. But in the second act―sung, it must be admitted, to a melody worthy of Cimarosa4―
she heard a maxim about love, and it pierced her to the heart. The heroine was proclaiming: “I 
must be punished for loving him so wildly; I love him far too much!” 
From the moment Mathilde heard this sublime aria, the whole world seemed to disappear 
for her. She was spoken to; she did not reply. Her mother was scolding her, but Mathilde could 
barely see the marquise. Her ecstasy reached an exalted, passionate state comparable to the 
most  violent  sensations  that,  for  some  time,  Julien  had  been  feeling  for  her.  The  divinely 
graceful aria, in which she heard the strikingly apposite maxim, filled every moment when she 
was not thinking directly of Julien. Her love of music, that night, left her feeling as Madame de 
Rênal always had, when thinking of Julien. Mind-made love is of course subtler than true love, 
but  its  moments  of  enthusiasm  are  limited:  it  understands  itself  too  well;  it  is  always 
evaluating, passing judgment. Rather than deranging the mind, it throbs only to the beating of 
thought. 
Returning to the house, no matter what Madame de La Mole might say, Mathilde claimed 
she was feeling feverish, and spent much of the night playing the melody, over and over, on 
her piano. She sang the words of the famous aria5 that had so charmed her: 
Devo punirmi, devo punirmi, Se troppo amai, etc. 
I must be punished, I must be punished, I love him too much. 
After that wild night, she believed she’d managed to triumph over her love. 
(Writing these things, I know, will still further injure this unfortunate author. Prigs and 
prudes  will  accuse  me  of  indecency.  But  it  does  no  harm  to  young  women,  shining  so 
brilliantly  in  Parisian  drawing  rooms,  to  suggest  that  one,  just  one,  among  them  might  be 
susceptible  to  the  insane  acts  disfiguring  Mathilde’s  character.  She’s  a  completely  imaginary 
person,  and  indeed  conceived  well  outside  the  manners  and  mores  which,  in  the  pages  of 
history, will secure such a distinguished place for our nineteenth-century civilization. 
(It is, after all, not prudence that might be thought deficient, among the young girls who 
have ornamented this winter season’s dances and balls. 
(Nor do I think anyone can accuse them of excessive scorn for glittering fortunes, horses, 
handsome estates, and everything that guarantees a fine position in the world. Far from feeling 
                                                             
4 Domenico Cimarosa (1749C1801), Italian composer. He and Mozart were Stendhal’s favorite composers; his 
comic operas were very successful in Paris. 
5 Mathilde’s aria has not been found in any known opera. 
 
 
Chapter Nineteen: Comic Opera 
bored by all such advantages, these are usually precisely what they have their hearts most set 
upon. And if there is passion in their hearts, it is these things that have aroused it. 
(Nor  is  it  love  that  beclouds  the  fortunes  of  gifted  young  men  like  Julien.  They  tie 
themselves  by  unbreakable  bonds  to  some  coterie  and,  when  the  coterie  makes  its  fortune, 
society rains down on them all the good things it has to offer. But woe to the learned man who 
belongs  to  no  coterie:  even  his  minor,  distinctly  doubtful  successes  will  be  criticized,  and 
noble virtue will be victorious, stealing them away. 
(Ah, my dear sir: a novel is a mirror, taking a walk down a big road. Sometimes you’ll see 
nothing but blue skies; sometimes you’ll see the muck in the mud piles along the road. And 
you’ll accuse the man carrying the mirror in his basket of being immoral! His mirror reflects 
muck,  so  you’ll  accuse  the  mirror,  too!  Why  not  also  accuse  the  highway  where  the  mud  is 
piled, or, more strongly still, the street inspector who leaves water wallowing in the roads, so 
the mud piles can come into being. 
(Then we’re all agreed: Mathilde’s character is impossible, in this time we live in, this age 
no less prudent than virtuous. I suspect you’ll find it less irritating, now, as I continue telling 
the tale of this lovable girl’s foolishness.) 
All the next day, she watched for chances to reaffirm her triumph over wild passion. Her 
central goal was to offend Julien in every possible way; still, nothing she did escaped him. 
Julien  was  too  miserable,  and  above  all  too  shaken,  to  comprehend  so  complicated  a 
passionate  maneuver;  still  less  was  he  able  to  understand  how  strongly  positive  were  her 
feelings about him. Her maneuver still further defeated him: never, in all probability, had his 
misery  been  so  extreme.  His  mind  had  so  little  control  over  his  actions  that,  if  some  sour-
tongued  philosopher  had  said  to  him―”Think  how  you  can  quickly  take  advantage  of  any 
favorable inclinations. In this sort of mind-made love, as one sees it in Paris, no state of being 
lasts  longer  than  two  days”―Julien  would  not  have  understood  him.  But  however  excited, 
however exalted he might be, he retained his sense of honor. His primary responsibility was 
discretion;  he  understood  that.  To  seek  advice,  to  tell  his  suffering  to  the  first  person  who 
came along, would have been, for him, happiness like that experienced by the lost soul who, 
crossing a burning desert, is blessed by a falling drop of ice-cold water. He knew the danger, 
he was sure he’d reply to any indiscreet questioner with a flood of tears; he shut himself in his 
room. 
He saw Mathilde walking in the garden, at some length. When she left, he went down. He 
went over to a bush from which she had plucked a flower. 
It was a dark night; he could let himself feel all his misery without fear of being seen. It 
was obvious to him that Mademoiselle de La Mole was in love with one of the young officers; 
she had just been talking and laughing with a group of them. She had loved him, but she had 
recognized how unworthy of her he was. 
“And, really, I’m not worth very much,” Julien told himself, with deep conviction. “All in 
all, I’m exceedingly dull, very common, terribly boring to other people, unbearable to myself.” 
He  was  fatally  revolted  by  every  one  of  his  good  qualities,  by  everything  he  had  once  loved 
with such enthusiasm, and in this state of inverted imagination he set himself to judging life in 
terms of imagination. This is decidedly a superior man’s mistake. 
Several times the idea of suicide came to him. It had many attractions, it was like some 
delicious sleep, it was a whole glass of ice water offered to the wretch who, in a desert, is dying 
of thirst and heat. 
“My death would make her despise me even more!” he cried to himself. “What a memory 
I’d leave behind me!” 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Fallen into this final abyss of misery, the only resource a human being has left is courage. 
Julien wasn’t clever enough to tell himself: “I have to keep trying.” But as he looked up at the 
window  of  Mathilde’s  room,  he  saw  through  the  blinds  that  she  had  put  out  her  light.  He 
pictured  to  himself  that  charming  room,  which  he  had  seen,  alas,  only  once  in  his  life.  His 
imagination could reach no further. 
He heard the clock sounding one, and he listened, and then he said, in a flash: “I’m going 
to climb up the ladder.” 
This  was  a  stroke  of  genius;  good  arguments  came  flocking  after.  “Could  I  be  more 
miserable?” he asked himself. He ran over to the ladder; the gardener had chained it in place. 
Breaking  the  cocking  hammer  off  one  of  his  pistols,  and  working,  now,  with  superhuman 
strength,  he  twisted  a  link  from  the  chain  and,  in  minutes,  had  the  ladder  set  against 
Mathilde’s window. 
“She’s going to be furious, she’ll pour scorn on me, but who cares? I’ll kiss her, a final kiss, 
then I’ll go up to my room and I’ll kill myself. .. my lips will touch her cheek before I die!” 
He flew up the ladder, he knocked on the blinds. In a few moments Mathilde heard him, 
she tried to open the blinds, but the ladder was in the way. Julien clamped his fingers around 
the iron hook (meant to hold the blinds open) and, at the continuing risk of dashing himself to 
the ground, shook the ladder so violently that it moved to one side. Mathilde was able to open 
the blinds. 
He threw himself into the room, more dead than alive. 
“So it’s you!”6 she said, as she ran into his arms.... 
Who could describe Julien’s overflowing happiness? Mathilde’s was almost as great. 
She became her own enemy; she denounced herself to him: 
“Punish me for my horrible pride,” she told him, wrapping him so tightly in her arms that 
she nearly suffocated him. “You’re my master, I’m your slave, I need to beg your pardon, on my 
knees, for having revolted against you.” She left his arms and fell at his feet. “Yes, you’re my 
master,” she told him, still drunk with happiness and love. “Rule over me forever; punish your 
slave, harshly, when she tries to revolt.” 
The next minute, she pulled herself away from him, lit a candle―and then Julien had to 
struggle hard, to keep her from cutting off her hair, all down the one side. 
“I want to remember,” she told him, “that I’m your servant. If I’m ever overwhelmed by 
my disgusting pride, just show me this hair and say: ’It’s no longer a question of love, nor is it a 
matter of what emotion you feel in your heart, at this moment. You have sworn to obey: On 
your honor, obey.’” 
But it’s better to suppress the details of such frenzy, such happiness. 
Julien’s valor matched his happiness. “I must go back down the ladder,” he told Mathilde, 
“when we can see dawn shining on the distant chimneys, off to the east, on the other side of 
the gardens. The sacrifice I impose on myself is worthy of you. I will be depriving myself of 
hours  spent  in  the  most  amazing  happiness  the  human  heart  can  taste,  but  it’s  a  sacrifice  I 
make on behalf of your reputation. If you know my heart, you know the violence I’m doing to 
myself. Will you always be to me what you are at this moment? But honor speaks for you; it is 
enough. Let me inform you that, since we were first together, suspicion has not been directed 
solely  at  burglars.  Monsieur  de  La  Mole  has  set  up  a  watch  in  the  garden.  Monsieur  de 
Croisenois is surrounded by spies; they know everything he does, each and every night....” 
                                                             
6 “C’est donc toi!” in French; Mathilde uses the intimate tu form with Julien for the first time. 
 
 
Chapter Nineteen: Comic Opera 
Hearing  this,  Mathilde  roared  with  laughter.  Her  mother  and  one  of  the  maids  were 
awakened; suddenly Mathilde was being spoken to, through the closed door. Julien looked at 
her: she was pale, even as she scolded the maid and refused to speak to her mother. 
“But if they think of opening their windows, they’ll see the ladder!” he told her. 
He  wound  her  one  final  time  in  his  arms,  then  threw  himself  down  the  ladder,  sliding 
rather than climbing down; he was on the ground almost instantly. 
Three seconds later, the ladder was under the arching linden trees, and Mathilde’s honor 
had been preserved. Julien came back to his senses and found himself covered with blood and 
very nearly naked: he had been hurt, letting himself slide down so precipitously. 
Surging happiness had given him all his rightful energy: twenty men might have come at 
him, and to attack them by himself would, just then, have been only one more delight. Luckily, 
his  military  valor  was  not  put  to  the  proof.  He  set  the  ladder  back  in  its  usual  place;  he 
replaced the chain he’d taken off, nor did he forget to erase, in the bed of exotic flowers under 
Mathilde’s window, the imprint left by the ladder. 
As, in the darkness, he wiped his hand along the soft earth, making sure the imprint had 
indeed been completely effaced, he felt something fall on his hands. It was her hair, all down 
one side, which she had cut off and thrown to him. 
She was at her window. 
“Here’s  what  your  servant  sends  you,”  she  told  him,  not  at  all  softly.  “It’s  the  sign  of 
eternal obedience. I surrender my capacity to make judgments: be my master.” 
Overcome,  Julien  was  ready  to  pick  up  the  ladder  and  climb  back  up  to  her.  At  last, 
reason prevailed. 
Getting back into the house, from the garden, was not at all easy. He finally managed to 
force  a  cellar  door;  when  he  reached  the  main  part  of  the  house  he  had  to  break  open,  as 
quietly  as  he  could,  the  door  to  his  room.  In  his  concern  and  excitement,  he  had  left 
everything in the little room he’d fled from so rapidly, including the key, which was in his suit 
pocket. “Just as long,” he thought, “as she thinks of hiding all those fatal clothes!” 
At last, weariness overcame happiness and, just as the sun was rising, he fell into a deep 
sleep. 
It was not easy for the lunchtime bell to awaken him; he appeared in the dining room. 
Mathilde  came  in  shortly  afterward.  Julien’s  pride  flared  with  happiness,  seeing  the  love 
shining  in  the  eyes  of  this  extraordinarily  beautiful  woman,  surrounded  as  she  was  by  such 
homage. But prudence soon had reason to be frightened. 
Pretending that she’d not had time to do her hair properly, Mathilde had so arranged it 
that he could see, at a glance, the full extent of the sacrifice she’d made for him in cutting off 
her  hair  the  night  before.  If  so  beautiful  a  face  could  be  spoiled  by  anything,  Mathilde  had 
managed it. One whole side of her ash blonde hair had been cut within half an inch of her 
head. 
During lunch, Mathilde’s behavior fully lived up to this initial recklessness. It might have 
been  supposed  that  she  was  determined  to  let  the  whole  world  know  her  wild  passion  for 
Julien. Fortunately, the Marquis and Marquise de La Mole were preoccupied, that day, with a 
list  of  high  decorations7  to  be  awarded,  and  which  did  not  include  Monsieur  de  Chaulnes. 
Toward the end of the meal, it happened that Mathilde, who was speaking to Julien, called him 
my master. He reddened to the white of his eyes. 
                                                             
7 Again, the cordon bleu of the Order of the Holy Spirit (see note for p. 264, ll. 14C15). 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Whether by chance, or because Madame de la Mole had been careful to arrange it that 
way, Mathilde was not left alone at any time during the entire day. But that evening, as they 
were going from the dining room into the drawing room, she found a moment to say to Julien: 
“Don’t think this is an excuse, on my part, but my mother has just decided that one of her 
maids is going to spend nights in my room.” 
The  day  went  by  like  lightning.  Julien  was  bursting  with  joy.  Starting  at  seven  in  the 
morning, the next day, he was at his place in the library. He hoped Mademoiselle de la Mole 
would take the trouble to come there: he had written her an enormously long letter. 
He  did  not  see  her  until  hours  later,  at  lunch.  She’d  done  her  hair,  this  time,  with 
immense  care:  with  incredible  artfulness,  all  the  hair  she  had  cut  off  seemed  never  to  have 
disappeared. She looked at Julien, once or twice, but her eyes were polite and calm, and there 
was no longer any question of calling him my master. 
Julien’s astonishment stopped him from breathing...Mathilde was reproaching herself for 
virtually everything she had done for him. 
After  more  mature  thought,  she’d  decided  he  was  someone,  not  perhaps  completely 
common, but at least not sufficiently extraordinary to deserve all the strange foolishness she 
had dared on his behalf. All in all, she was scarcely thinking about love; she was wearied by 
love, that day. 
Julien’s  heart  was  leaping  like  that  of  a  boy  of  sixteen.  Terrible  doubt,  amazement, 
despair, all took their turn, during lunch, which seemed to him to last forever. As soon as he 
could decently rise from the table, he very nearly threw himself, rather than merely running, 
toward the stable, saddled his horse without waiting for a stable hand, and left at a gallop. He 
dreaded dishonoring himself by some show of weakness. “I need to kill my heart with physical 
exertion, with fatigue,” he said to himself as he galloped in the Meudon woods.8 “What have I 
done, what have I said, to deserve such a disgrace? 
“Today, I must do nothing, I must say nothing,” he thought, as he returned. “I’m just as 
dead  physically  as  I  am  mentally.  Monsieur  Julien  is  no  longer  alive.  This  is  his  corpse  that 
keeps on moving.” 
                                                             
8 Forest west of Paris, near Saint-Cloud. 
 
 
Chapter Twenty: The Japanese Vase 
Chapter Twenty: The Japanese Vase 
His heart did not understand, at first, the full extent of his misery; he was more upset than moved. But as 
his mind was restored, slowly, to rationality, he came to feel the depth of his misfortune. For him, life’s 
pleasures were completely annihilated: all he could feel was the sharp point of despair, as it cut into him. But 
what’s the use of speaking about physical pain? What merely bodily suffering is the equal of this? 
―Jean-Paul1 
The  dinner  bell  was  sounding;  Julien  barely  had  time  to  dress.  When  he  reached  the 
dining  room,  he  found  Mathilde,  who  was  pleading  with  her  brother  and  Monsieur  de 
Croisenois  not  to  attend  the  party  at  Suresnes,  the  home  of  Madame  de  Fervaques,  the 
marshall’s widow. 
It would have been difficult for her to be more captivating or pleasant. After dinner, they 
were joined by Messieurs de Luz, de Caylus, and several of their friends. It might have been 
said that Mademoiselle de La Mole had resumed, not merely her worship of fraternal affection, 
but also the most demanding observance of social convention. Though the weather was lovely 
that night, she insisted they should not go into the garden; she wished them to stay near the 
easy chair in which, as usual, Madame de La Mole was sitting. The blue sofa was clearly to be 
the group’s center, as it had been that winter. 
Mathilde  was  ill  disposed  to  the  garden,  or  at  least  it  left  her  totally  indifferent:  it  was 
connected to memories of Julien. 
Misery weakens the mind. Our hero was awkward enough to stand close to the little straw 
chair, which had once witnessed such brilliant victories. No one said a word to him, today; his 
presence was imperceptible―or worse. Those of Mademoiselle de La Mole’s friends seated at 
the  far  end  of  the  sofa,  near  him,  tried  to  turn  their  backs  to  him,  or  at  least  he  had  that 
impression. 
“I’ve fallen out of favor at court,” he thought. He wanted to study, for a moment, these 
people who were pretending to crush him with their disdain. 
Monsieur de Luz’s uncle held a high position, close to the king, so as newcomers joined 
the  group,  the  handsome  young  officer  began  the  conversation,  each  and  every  time,  with 
striking news: his uncle had departed for Saint-Cloud at seven that morning, and expected to 
be  there  that  evening,  and  to  stay  there  that  night.  This  information  was  conveyed  in  what 
seemed complete geniality, but it was always set forth. 
Watching  Monsieur  de  Croisenois  with  the  harsh  eye  of  misery,  Julien  noticed  the 
extraordinary importance which that friendly, and so very handsome, young man attributed to 
occult forces. He carried this so far that his face darkened and he turned sullen when he saw 
even a mildly important event explained by some simple, entirely natural cause. “He’s more 
than  a  bit  crazy,”  Julien  said  to  himself.  “This  sounds  strikingly  like  Emperor  Alexander2  of 
Russia, as Prince Korasoff described him to me.” During his first year in Paris, after leaving the 
seminary, dazzled by the utterly novel graces of all these genial young gentlemen, Julien could 
not help admiring them. Their real character was just beginning to reveal itself. 
“I’m playing an unworthy role, here,” he suddenly thought. How was he to get away from 
his little straw chair without being horribly clumsy? He tried to think of a way, but this was 
setting novel problems for a mind already elsewhere occupied. He fell back on his memory, 
                                                             
1  Pen  name  of  Johann  Paul  Friedrich  Richter  (1763C1825),  German  Romantic  writer  greatly  influenced  by 
Rousseau. 
2 Czar Alexander I (born 1777, reigned 1801C25), grew increasingly mystic and erratic in his later years. His 
death was never officially certified, and there were rumors that he had actually abdicated and withdrawn to a 
monastery. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
which was, it has to be admitted, not very rich in resources of this kind. The poor fellow was 
still  uneasy  with  social  custom,  so  he  seemed  perfectly  clumsy,  as  well  as  perfectly  obvious, 
when he rose to leave the drawing room. Misery was all too obvious in everything he did. He 
had played, for three-quarters of an hour, the role of a supplicant underling, from whom no 
one bothers to hide exactly what they think of him. 
The  critical  observations  he  had  just  made  about  his  rivals,  however,  kept  him  from 
treating his misery too tragically, and to solace his pride he had the memory of what had taken 
place two nights earlier. “Whatever advantages they may have over me,” he thought, walking 
alone in the garden, “Mathilde has never been to any of them what, twice in her life, she’s been 
willing to be for me.” 
It  was  as  far  as  his  wisdom  went.  He  had  absolutely  no  comprehension  of  this  bizarre 
woman’s character, she whom Fate had made complete mistress of his happiness. 
He spent the day trying to kill, by way of weariness, both himself and his horse. In the 
evening, he carefully stayed away from the blue sofa, to which Mathilde remained faithful. He 
noticed that Count Norbert would not so much as look at him, when they crossed paths in the 
house. “It must be violently difficult,” he thought, “for such a naturally polite man.” 
For  Julien,  sleep  would  have  been  happiness.  Despite  his  fatigued  body,  wonderfully 
alluring memories began to take over his imagination. He was not clever enough to see that 
long  days  of  riding  through  the  woods  near  Paris  affected  him,  and  him  only;  they  had  no 
effect on Mathilde’s heart, or on her mind. He was leaving his destiny entirely up to chance. 
He fancied that there was one thing which would be infinitely soothing to his sorrows: it 
would be to speak to Mathilde. And yet, what could he dare say to her? 
And this is what, at seven in the morning, he was dreamily considering when, suddenly, 
he saw her come into the library. 
“I’m aware, sir, that you wish to speak to me.” 
“Good Lord! Who said that to you?” 
“I know it: why does it matter how? If you’re not a man of honor, you can destroy me, or 
at least attempt to. But such a danger, which I do not consider real, will certainly not prevent 
me from being honest. I no longer love you, sir. My insane imagination deluded me....” 
After this terrible blow, frantic with love and misery, Julien attempted to argue himself 
back into favor. Nothing could have been more absurd. Argue yourself out of being disliked? 
But reason no longer had any control over his actions. Blind instinct compelled him to delay 
this final determination of his fate. He felt that, while he was still talking, it would not be all 
over. Mathilde did not listen to him; the sound of his words irritated her. She could not have 
believed he’d have the audacity to interrupt her. 
Remorse, caused by virtue and by pride, had made her, that morning, equally wretched. 
To some extent, she was overwhelmed by a frightful idea: she had given claims on herself to a 
petty  priest,  a  peasant’s  son.  “This  is  almost  the  same,”  she  told  herself,  in  moments  of 
exaggerating her misery, “as if I had to reproach myself, having had a weakness for one of the 
servants.” 
For proud, bold spirits, it’s a short step from anger at themselves to anger at others. Wild 
fury is, in such cases, a lively pleasure. 
In  a  flash,  Mathilde  soared  into  action,  covering  Julien  with  furiously  exaggerated 
contempt. She had immense resources, especially in the arts of torturing people’s vanity and 
inflicting the most savage wounds. 
For the first time in his life, Julien found himself subjected to the workings of a superior 
mind, motivated by extraordinary hatred, and entirely directed at him. He was unable even to 
think  of  defending  himself;  indeed,  he  began  to  share  her  burning  contempt.  As  he  heard 
 
 
Chapter Twenty: The Japanese Vase 
Mathilde heaping up her disdain, her cruelties, all cleverly calculated to destroy whatever good 
opinion  he  might  have  had  of  himself,  he  felt  she  was  right,  and  she  could  not  have  said 
enough of such things. 
She  herself  felt  a  delicious,  thrilling  pride  in  thus  punishing  herself,  and  him,  for  the 
worship of him that, several days earlier, had so overcome her. 
There was no need for her to create out of nothing, or to plan for the first time, the cruel 
things she spoke with such satisfaction. All she had to do was repeat what the anti-love forces, 
deep in her heart, had already been saying for a week. 
The  things  she  said  kept  multiplying  Julien’s  terrible  misery.  He  tried  to  run  off; 
Mademoiselle de La Mole held him where he was, with an authoritative grip on his arm. 
“Take  notice,  please,”  he  said,  “that  you’re  speaking  very  loudly.  You’ll  be  heard  in  the 
next room.” 
“I don’t care!” she responded haughtily. “Who’s going to dare tell me they’ve overheard 
me? I want to cure―forever!―any ideas your petty vanity may have had about me.” 
When Julien was able to leave the library, he was so stunned that he actually could not 
feel  his  misery  so  deeply  as  before. “Well!  She  doesn’t  love  me  anymore,”  he  kept  repeating 
aloud, as if to help himself determine his position. “She has apparently loved me for a week or 
so―and I, I’ll love her forever. 
“How can it be possible that, just a few days ago, she had absolutely no place in my heart, 
none whatever!” 
Mathilde’s heart was flooded with delighted pride. She had managed to break with him 
forever!  To  triumph  so  completely,  over  so  powerful  a  passion,  made  her  perfectly  happy. 
“Now this little gentleman will understand, once and for all, that he neither has nor will have 
the slightest dominion over me.” She was so intensely happy that, truthfully, at that moment 
there was no love left in her. 
After  such  an  awful  scene,  as  humiliating  as  it  was  dreadful,  love  would  have  become 
impossible for anyone less impassioned than Julien. Without forgetting for an instant what she 
owed  herself,  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole  had  directed  distasteful  remarks  at  him,  deftly 
calculated to seem truths even when remembered more calmly. 
The conclusion Julien had drawn, in the first moments that followed such an astonishing 
scene,  was  that  Mathilde’s  pride  was  boundless.  He  believed  firmly  that,  between  them, 
everything was finished forever, and yet the next day, at lunch, he was awkward and shy in her 
presence. It was not a failing that, until then, he could have been reproached with. In little as 
in large matters, he knew precisely what he was owed, and what he wanted to do, and he did 
it. 
That  day,  after  lunch,  when  Madame  de  La  Mole  was  asking  him  for  a  seditious  and 
distinctly  rare  pamphlet,  brought  to  the  library  that  morning  by  her  parish  priest,  Julien 
knocked over an old vase, in blue porcelain, and almost inconceivably ugly. 
Madame de La Mole stood up, uttering a cry of distress, and came nearer, to look at the 
shattered pieces of her precious vase. “This was from old Japan,” she said. “It came to me from 
my  great  aunt,  the  Abbess  at  Chelles.3  It  had  been  a  present  from  the  Dutch  to  the  Duke 
d’Orléans, when he was Regent of France, and he had given it to his daughter....” 
Mathilde  had  been  watching  her  mother,  delighted  to  see  the  blue  vase  broken;  it  had 
always  seemed  to  her  horribly  ugly.  Julien  said  nothing,  not  particularly  upset.  He  saw 
Mademoiselle de La Mole quite near him. 
                                                             
3  Aristocratic  convent  east  of  Paris.  The  Regent  Duke  d’Orléan’s  daughter  Louise-Adéla07de  was  Abbess  of 
Chelles in the early eighteenth century. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
“This vase,” he told her, “has been destroyed forever, as has also been destroyed a feeling 
that used to be master of my heart. Please accept my apologies for all the stupidities I have 
committed.” And he left. 
“One might say, really,” said Madame de La Mole as he walked out, “that this Monsieur 
Sorel is both proud and pleased by what he’s just done.” 
Her words fell directly on Mademoiselle de La Mole’s heart. “It’s true,” she said to herself. 
“My  mother  has  guessed  correctly:  that  was  exactly  how  he  felt.”  And  then  the  joy  she  had 
been feeling, because of the scene she’d created for him the night before, ceased to exist. “So, 
it’s  all  over,”  she  told  herself,  apparently  quite  calmly.  “What  remains  to  me  is  a  frightful 
warning. This is a ghastly mistake, and humiliating! It ought to be enough to keep me sensible, 
and for the whole rest of my life.” 
“Why didn’t I speak the truth?” thought Julien. “Why does the love I had for this crazy 
female still torment me?” 
This love, far from flickering out, as he had hoped it would, made rapid progress. “She’s 
crazy, of course she is,” he told himself. “But does that make her less adorable? Is it possible to 
be prettier? Isn’t every vivid pleasure the most elegant of civilizations can offer―isn’t all of it 
absolutely, perfectly united in Mademoiselle de La Mole?” These memories of past happiness 
overwhelmed Julien, and rapidly tore down what reason had tried to erect. 
Reason fights in vain against memories of this kind. Its hardest labors only add to their 
charm. 
Twenty-four hours after the old Japanese  vase was broken, Julien was  without question 
one of the most miserable men on earth. 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-One: The Secret Note 
Chapter Twenty-One: The Secret Note 
Because everything I’m telling you, I’ve seen for myself. And if I might have been deceiving myself, seeing it, 
I certainly won’t deceive you, telling it. 
―A Letter to the Author 
The  marquis  summoned  him.  Monsieur  de  La  Mole  seemed  rejuvenated,  his  eyes  were 
sparkling. 
“Let’s talk about that memory of yours,” he said to Julien. “I’m told it’s prodigious! Could 
you learn four pages by heart, and go to London, and recite them back? But not changing a 
word...” 
The  marquis  was  irritably  crumpling  up  that  day’s  The  Legitimist,  and  trying, 
unsuccessfully, to disguise an intense seriousness, unlike anything Julien had ever seen in him, 
even when they’d been dealing with the de Frilair lawsuit. 
Julien had seen enough of how these things were done; he felt sure he was supposed to 
appear taken in by all the marquis’s casual talk. 
“That issue of The Legitimist may not be very interesting. But, if monsieur will allow me, 
tomorrow morning I will have the honor to recite it back to you, complete and entire.” 
“Ha! Even the advertisements?” 
“Word for word, and not one missing.” 
“On your honor?” replied the marquis, suddenly very serious indeed. 
“Yes, sir. What might trouble my memory, and only this, would be worrying that I might 
somehow fail to keep my word.” 
“It’s only that, yesterday, I forgot to ask you the question. Nor need I ask you to swear 
never  to  repeat  what  you’re  going  to  hear:  I  know  you  too  well  to  thus  insult  you.  I  have 
answered for you. I’m going to conduct you to a drawing room, in which there will be twelve 
people. You will take notes on what each of them says. 
“Don’t be concerned: this will not be a disorderly conversation; each will speak when his 
turn arrives. I don’t mean in some formal sequence,” the marquis added, returning to the light, 
subtle  way  so  natural  to  him.  “While  we  are  speaking,  you  will  write  perhaps  twenty  pages. 
We’ll come back here, you and I, and we’ll reduce those twenty pages to four. These are the 
four pages you will recite back to me, tomorrow morning, instead of the whole issue of The 
Legitimist. You’ll leave for London soon afterward. You will have to travel as a young pleasure 
seeker. Your goal: not to be noticed by anyone. In London, you will go to a very great person. 
Once there, you’ll need a good deal more skill. It will be a question of deceiving all those who 
surround him: whether among his secretaries, or whether among his servants, there are people 
who have been bought by our enemies, and who are on the watch for our agents, whenever 
they come, so as to intercept them. 
“You will carry a letter of recommendation, of no significance. 
“The  moment  His  Excellency  looks  at  you,  you  will  take  out  my  watch,  which  I  hereby 
lend you for this trip. Take it, now, while we’re on the subject, and let me have yours. 
“The  duke  himself  will  be  prepared  to  write  down,  while  you  dictate  to  him,  the  four 
pages you will have memorized. That done, but―note this carefully―not before, you may, if 
His Excellency questions you, tell him about the meeting you are going to attend. 
“It may help you to avoid boredom, along the way, to be aware that, between Paris and 
the minister’s house, there are people who would ask for nothing better than to put a bullet 
into  Father  Sorel.  For  then  his  mission  would  be  over,  and  everything  would  be  much 
delayed―you see, my dear fellow, how would we know you’re dead? Your zeal won’t be much 
help, then, in sending us notice. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
“Go,  right  now,  and  buy  yourself  totally  new  clothes,”  the  marquis  continued  seriously. 
“Make  yourself  look  like  a  fashionable  young  man  of  two  years  ago.  For  tonight,  you  must 
seem  rather  unkempt.  Once  you’re  on  your  way,  on  the  other  hand,  you  will  dress  as  you 
usually do. Are you startled? Will your sense of mistrust help you guess? Yes, my friend: one of 
the venerable people you’re going to be listening to, telling us his opinions, is very capable of 
sending out information, as a result of which you might very well be given a dose of opium, 
tonight, in some nice little inn where you’ll have ordered yourself supper.” 
“It might be better,” said Julien, “to go forty or fifty miles farther, rather than by the direct 
route. It’s Rome I’ll be going to, I suppose....” 
The marquis looked at him with a haughtiness, and a dissatisfaction, that Julien had not 
seen since Upper Bray. 
“You’ll know that, sir, when I consider it proper to tell you. I don’t like questions.” 
“That wasn’t a question,” Julien replied volubly. “I swear it, sir. I was thinking out loud, 
trying in my head to find the safest route.” 
“Yes,  it  did  seem  that  your  mind  was  far  away.  Do  not  forget  that  an  ambassador,  and 
above  all  one  of  your  age,  should  never  seem  to  be  seeking  information  he  has  not  been 
offered.” 
Julien was deeply mortified: he had been wrong. His vanity hunted for some excuse, and 
“Realize, also,” added Monsieur de La Mole, “that we always tend to appeal to our hearts, 
when we’ve done something foolish.” 
An hour later, Julien came back to the marquis, dressed like a very junior employee, in old 
clothes, with a tie not entirely white, and a generally priggish appearance. 
The  marquis  roared  with  laughter,  seeing  him,  and  only  then  was  Julien’s  vindication 
found none. 
complete. 
“If this young man betrays me,” Monsieur de La Mole said to himself, “in whom might I 
trust? Yet when it comes to doing what must be done, somebody has to be trusted. My son and 
his  glowing  friends  are  every  one  of  them  brave,  they’ve  got  loyalty  enough  for  a  hundred 
thousand men. If they have to fight, they’ll die on the steps of the throne. They understand 
everything. .. except exactly what, right now, needs to be done. I’ll be damned if I can see one 
of  them  who’s  capable  of  memorizing  four  pages  and  traveling  a  hundred  and  fifty  miles 
without  being  sniffed  out.  Norbert  would  know  how  to  get  himself  killed,  as  his  ancestors 
did―but so can a peasant drafted into the army....” 
The  marquis  dropped  into  deep  thoughtfulness:  “And  still,  when  it  comes  to  getting 
himself killed, perhaps this young Sorel would do that as well as my son....” 
“Let’s get into the carriage,” said the marquis, as if repelling an unwelcome idea. 
“Sir,” said Julien, “while they were mending this suit, I memorized the first page of today’s 
Legitimist.” 
The marquis took the paper; Julien recited it, without a word out of place. “Good,” said 
the  marquis,  very  diplomatic  that  evening.  “While  we’ve  been  doing  this,”  he  thought,  “the 
young man has been paying no attention to the streets we’re traveling along.” 
They  came  to  a  large,  rather  dismal  drawing  room,  one  part  of  it  paneled  and  another 
draped in green velvet. In the center of the room, a sullen servant finished setting up a large 
table,  meant  for  dining,  which,  by  means  of  a  huge  green  tablecloth,  heavily  ink-spotted, 
plainly  discarded  by  some  minister’s  office,  he  then  changed  into  a  table  at  which  business 
could be conducted. 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-One: The Secret Note 
The  master  of  the  house  was  an  enormous  man,  never  named;  Julien  thought  both  his 
face  and  his  speech  showed  someone  who  was  slow  to  act,  concerned  mostly  with  his  own 
digestive processes. 
The marquis had signaled Julien to remain at the lower end of the table. To keep from 
seeming out of place, he busied himself, sharpening quill pens. Out of the corner of his eyes he 
counted seven participants, though he could see only their backs. Two of them were speaking 
to Monsieur de La Mole as if they were his equals; the others seemed more or less deferential. 
A new participant entered; there was no announcement. How odd, Julien thought: no one 
is ever announced in this drawing room. Is this a precaution taken in my honor? To welcome 
this latest attendee, everyone rose. Like three others, he wore the most exalted of all medals. 
Conversation  was  hushed.  All  Julien  could  go  on,  as  he  sought  to  shape  an  opinion  of  the 
newcomer,  was  his  face  and  his  bearing.  He  was  short,  stocky,  of  very  high  color;  his  eyes 
sparkled and showed no expression but the malice of a wild boar. 
Julien’s attention was diverted by the immediate arrival of someone utterly different. This 
was  a  tall  and  exceedingly  thin  man,  wearing  three  or  four  vests.  His  eyes  were  gentle,  his 
movements polished. 
“He  looks  a  lot  like  the  old  Bishop  of  Besan04on,”  thought  Julien.  He  was  obviously  an 
ecclesiastic,  apparently  of  no  more  than  fifty  or  fifty-five:  no  one  could  have  looked  more 
paternal. 
The young Bishop of Agde appeared, and seemed distinctly surprised, looking down the 
table, to see Julien. He had not spoken a word to our hero since the ceremony at Upper Bray. 
His  startled  glance  embarrassed  and  irritated  Julien.  “Lord!”  he  said  to  himself.  “Is  knowing 
someone  always  going  to  be  a  disaster?  All  these  great  lords,  none  of  whom  I’ve  ever  seen, 
don’t intimidate me a bit, and yet this young bishop’s glance freezes my bones! I’m obliged to 
agree with him; I’m an odd fellow, and a most unfortunate one.” 
A very short man with exceedingly dark skin soon came in, accompanied by a good deal 
of noise and fuss. He began speaking the moment he was inside the door. His complexion was 
yellowish;  he  seemed  rather  mad.  As  soon  as  this  unstoppable  talker  entered,  the  earlier 
arrivals clustered in groups, apparently to avoid the boredom of having to listen to him. 
As they moved away from the fireplace, they came closer to the end of the table where 
Julien sat. He grew more and more embarrassed: in the end, no matter what efforts he made, 
he could not fail to understand their words, and no matter how little experience he possessed, 
he could not fail to understand, and quite fully, the importance of the things they were very 
openly  discussing.  Yet  how  strongly  these  seemingly  lofty  persons,  though  under  his 
surveillance, must desire their proceedings to remain secret! 
Working slowly, carefully, Julien had already sharpened twenty quill pens. His supply of 
pens was going to run out. He tried to see some directive in Monsieur de La Mole’s glance, but 
the marquis had forgotten him. 
“What I’m doing is ridiculous,” Julien told himself while sharpening his pens. “But people 
with  rather  mediocre 
faces,  and  given―by  others  or  by  themselves―such  huge 
responsibilities,  are  surely  highly  sensitive.  There’s  something  unfortunately  too  inquisitive, 
and too little respectful, about the way I look at people, and obviously I annoy them. But if I sit 
here with my eyes lowered, it will seem as if I’m trying to soak up their words.” 
His embarrassment was intense: he was hearing some bizarre things. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Chapter Twenty-Two: The Discussion 
The  Republic:  for  each  person,  today,  prepared  to  sacrifice  everything  for  the  public  good,  there  are 
thousands―millions―who acknowledge nothing but their pleasure, their vanity. Your reputation, in Paris, 
is based on your horse and carriage, and not on your virtue. 
―Napoleon, Memoirs 
A servant hurried in, calling: “Monsieur the Duke of ―――.” 
“Shut up: you’re nothing but a fool,” said the duke as he came in. He spoke these words so 
well,  and  so  majestically  that,  in  spite  of  himself,  Julien  understood  that  knowing  how  to 
display  anger  at  a  servant  was  all  the  knowledge  this  great  man  possessed.  Julien  raised  his 
eyes,  then  quickly  lowered  them.  He  had so  well  grasped  the  new  arrival’s  importance  that, 
trembling, he hoped his glance had not been an indiscretion. 
The  duke  was  a  man  of  fifty,  dressed  like  a  dandy,  with  a  jaunty  step.  His  head  was 
narrow, his nose was large and aquiline, as was his face: it would have been difficult to have a 
bearing nobler or less significant. His coming signaled the meeting’s start. 
Julien’s  psychophysiological  observations  were  interrupted  by  Monsieur  de  La  Mole’s 
voice: 
“Let me introduce you to Monsieur Sorel,” the marquis said. “He has been endowed with 
an astonishing memory. I spoke to him only an hour ago, about the mission with which he’s to 
be honored, and in order to give me proof of his memory, he learned by heart the first page of 
today’s Legitimist.” 
“Ah,  the  news  from  abroad,  about  that  poor  fellow,  N―――,”  said  the  master  of  the 
house. He picked up the newspaper, hurriedly, and gave Julien an amused glance, wanting to 
demonstrate his importance: “Speak, sir,” he directed. 
There was total silence; all eyes were fixed on Julien, who recited so accurately that, after 
twenty lines: “That will do,” said the duke. The very short man with the eyes of a wild boar sat 
down. He was to preside, and was hardly in his chair when he pointed out, for Julien, a card 
table,  and  gestured  that  it  be  brought  near.  Julien  set  himself  at  this  smaller  table,  with  his 
writing materials. He counted twelve people sitting around the green cloth. 
“Monsieur  Sorel,”  said  the  duke.  “Please  retire  to  the  adjoining  room.  You  will  be 
summoned.” 
The master of the house grew excited. “The shutters haven’t been closed,” he murmured 
to his neighbor. “You’ll learn nothing by peering through the window!” he shouted, stupidly, at 
Julien. “Here I am,” thought our hero, “caught up in a conspiracy, or maybe something more. 
Luckily, it’s not the sort that leads to the executioner’s block. But even if there’s danger, I owe 
the marquis that, and more. Happily, I’ll have the chance to atone for all the sorrows I may 
bring him, some day.” 
Julien went into the next room. 
His  mind  occupied  with  his  own  sorrows,  and  his  misery,  he  stared  all  around  him,  so 
intently that he’d never forget the place. Only then did he recall not having heard the marquis 
tell the coachman where they were to go, and that the marquis had ordered a cab, which he’d 
never done before. 
Julien spent a long time alone with his thoughts. He was in a drawing room hung with red 
velvet, striped with gold braid. A side table along the wall bore a large ivory crucifix; on the 
fireplace mantel was de Maistre’s On the Pope, with gilt edges and magnificently bound. Julien 
opened it, in order not to seem as if he’d been listening. From time to time they spoke quite 
loudly, in the next room. Finally, the door was opened; he was called. 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Two: The Discussion 
“Say  to  yourselves,  gentlemen,”  said  the  chairman,  “that  as  we  speak  we  are  in  the 
presence of the Duke of ―――. This gentleman,” he said, gesturing toward Julien, “is a young 
cleric, devoted to our holy cause, who will readily repeat, by means of his amazing memory, 
even the least of our remarks. 
“You have the floor, sir,” he said, indicating the man with the fatherly appearance, the one 
who wore three or four vests. To Julien, it would have seemed most natural to call him “the 
triple-vested man.” Julien took a sheet of paper and wrote, and wrote. 
(The author would have preferred, at this point, to insert a page consisting of nothing but 
ellipses. “That would look awful,” said the publisher, “and, for such a lightweight book, looking 
bad is, quite simply, death.” ― “Politics,” the author replied, “is a stone tied around literature’s 
neck,  and  in  less  than  six  months,  it  sinks  under  the  weight.  Politics  set  among  the 
imagination’s  concerns  is  like  a  pistol  shot  fired  at  a  concert.  The  noise  mangles  without 
energizing. It does not harmonize with the sound of any instrument in the orchestra. Politics 
will  mortally  offend  half  your  readers,  and  bore  the  other  half,  who  would  have  found  the 
discussion  fascinating,  and  wonderfully  lively,  in  the  morning  newspaper....”  ―  “If  your 
characters don’t talk politics,” responded the publisher, “they’ll cease to be the Frenchmen of 
1830, and your book will no longer be a mirror, as you claim it is....”) 
Julien had twenty-six pages of notes. What follows are some thoroughly pallid excerpts, 
since  it  has  been  necessary,  as  always,  to  suppress  absurdities,  for  too  many  of  them  would 
have seemed obnoxious, or even unreal (see Reports from the Law Courts). 
The triple-vested man, who bore a paternal look (a bishop, more than likely), laughed a 
good deal, and when he laughed his eyes, under their wavering lids, turned very bright and far 
less indecisive than usual. This man, the first to speak, after the duke was done (“but duke of 
what?” Julien asked himself), apparently so he could express the general opinion and serve the 
function of an assistant public prosecutor, seemed, to Julien’s mind, to fall into the vagueness 
and absence of definite conclusions for which, so often, such officers of the court are reproved. 
As the discussion continued, indeed, the duke went so far as to scold him on just that account. 
After several remarks of a moral nature, rather glibly philosophical, the triple-vested man 
declared: 
“Noble England, led by so great a man as the immortal Pitt,1 spent forty billion francs to 
check  the  Revolution.  If  my  colleagues  will  allow  me  to  broach,  with  a  certain  degree  of 
frankness,  a  melancholy  notion,  England  did  not  clearly  understand  how,  with  a  man  like 
Bonaparte―especially when all one has with which to oppose him are an assemblage of good 
intentions―only personal measures can be decisive....” 
“Ah!”  said  the  master  of  the  house,  looking  uncomfortable.  “So  we’re  still  praising 
assassination!” 
“Spare  us  your  sentimental  sermons,”  exclaimed  the  chairman,  distinctly  annoyed.  His 
wild boar eyes glittered ferociously. “Go on,” he said to the triple-vested man. The chairman’s 
cheeks and forehead had turned purple. 
“Noble  England,”  the  speaker  resumed,  “has  been  crushed,  today,  because  every 
Englishman,  before  he  buys  his  bread,  is  compelled  to  pay  the  interest  on  the  forty  billion 
francs which were employed against the Jacobins. They no longer have a Pitt―” 
                                                             
1 William Pitt the Younger (1759C1806) succeeded his father as prime minister at age twenty-four; he took an 
interest in Continental politics when revolutionary armies conquered the Low Countries in 1796. Under his 
direction,  the  British  subsidized  the  anti-French  coalitions  until  1801,  when  he  resigned  over  Anglo-Irish 
politics.  His  successor  sought  conciliation  with  France,  but  Bonaparte’s  relentless  ambitions  renewed  the 
Anglo-French conflict and brought Pitt back to power in 1804. He died in office in 1806, just after Napoleon’s 
massive victory over the Allies at Austerlitz. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
“They have the Duke of Wellington,”2 said a military-looking man, assuming a stance of 
high importance. 
“Please: silence, gentlemen,” exclaimed the chairman. “If we keep on arguing, there’ll be 
no point to bringing in Monsieur Sorel.” 
“We are aware that the gentleman has many ideas,” said the duke, irritated; he stared at 
the  interrupter,  a  former  Napoleonic  general.3  Julien  could  tell  that  these  words  referred  to 
something  personal  and  deeply  offensive.  Everyone  smiled;  the  turncoat  general  appeared 
outraged beyond belief. 
“There is no longer a Pitt, gentlemen,” the speaker said again, with the discouraged air of 
a man desperate to lead his listeners to reason. “Were there a new Pitt in England, it would not 
be possible to hoax a nation, a second time, by the same methods―” 
“And that is why a conquering general, a Bonaparte, is forever impossible in France,” cried 
the military interrupter. 
This  time,  neither  the  chairman  nor  the  duke  dared  show  their  anger,  although  Julien 
thought he could see in their glances that they certainly wished to. They lowered their eyes, 
and the duke satisfied himself by sighing so loudly that he was heard by everyone. 
But the speaker had grown annoyed. 
“You’re  pressuring  me  to  be  done,”  he  said  angrily,  and  putting  completely  aside  his 
smiling politeness, and the measured language that Julien had thought was an expression of 
his  character:  “You’re  pressuring  me  to  be  done,  you’re  ignoring  all  the  efforts  I’ve  been 
making to keep from offending anyone’s ears, no matter how long they may be. So, gentlemen, 
I will be brief. 
“And I will tell you in blunt language: England no longer has a penny for the good cause. 
Pitt  himself  could  return,  and  even  with  his  genius  he  couldn’t  manage  to  hoax  the  small 
landowners  of  England,  because  they  know  that  even  the  short  Waterloo  campaign,  all  by 
itself,  cost  them  a  billion  francs.  Since  what  you  want  is  blunt  talk,”  the  speaker  added, 
growing more and more excited, “let me tell you: Help yourselves ―because England hasn’t got 
a  guinea  to  give  you,  and  when  England  won’t  pay,  then  Austria,  Russia,  Prussia,  who  only 
have courage, but have no money, can do nothing against France, beyond a campaign or two. 
“You  may  expect  that  the  young  soldiers  mustered  by  Jacobinism  will  be  beaten  in  the 
first  campaign,  and  perhaps  in  the  second,  but  by  the  third―though  I  may  seem,  to  your 
prejudiced eyes, too much like a revolutionary―in the third campaign you’ll have the soldiers 
of 1794, who were no longer the peasant conscripts of 1792.”4 
At this point, the interruptions came from three or four voices, speaking at the same time. 
“Sir,”  said  the  chairman  to  Julien,  “go  into  the  next  room  and  make  a  fair  copy  of  the 
beginning of your notes, as you have so far written them.” Julien left, to his great regret. The 
speaker had just launched into probabilities that Julien had long been accustomed to ponder. 
“They’re afraid I’ll make fun of them,” he thought. 
When  he  was  called  back,  Monsieur  de  La  Mole  was  saying,  with  a  seriousness  that 
seemed to Julien, who knew him so well, decidedly sarcastic: 
                                                             
2 Arthur Wellesley (1769C1852), hero of the battle of Waterloo. The “Iron Duke” had a long career in British 
politics, including prime minister in 1828C30. With Metternich, he was one of the great leaders and symbols of 
the effort to preserve a conservative status quo in Europe. 
3  Many  of  Napoleon’s  generals,  whether  out  of  political  ambition  or  disgust  with  the  emperor’s  relentless 
bellicosity, rallied to the Bourbons in 1814 and 1815. 
4 The revolutionary armies acquired skills and talented leaders in the two years of war against allied royalist 
forces. 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Two: The Discussion 
“...Yes, gentlemen, it’s above all those miserable people who just might say, as La Fontaine 
had his sculptor wondering: 
“Will it be a god, a table, or a washbowl? 
“‘It  will  be  a  god!’  proclaims  the  great  writer  of  fables!  These  words,  so  noble  and  so 
profound,  seem  to  describe  you,  gentlemen.  Act  by  yourselves,  and  France  will  reappear, 
almost as noble as our ancestors made it, and as we ourselves actually saw it before the death 
of Louis XVI. 
“England―or at least its noble lords―find this unspeakable Jacobinism as abominable as 
we  do.  Without  English  gold,  Austria,  Russia,  and  Prussia  will  produce  only  two  or  three 
campaigns. Will that be enough to lead to a successful occupation, like that which Monsieur 
de Richelieu5 squandered, so stupidly, in 1817? I do not think so.” 
At this point there was an interruption, but it was stifled by a “Hush!” from everyone else. 
Once more, the interrupter had been the former general, who longed for the nation’s grandest 
medal, and wanted his name to appear prominent among the authors of the secret note. 
“I do not think so,” Monsieur de La Mole repeated when the noise died down. He stressed 
“I,” with an insolence that charmed Julien. “That’s well played,” he said to himself, even as he 
made  his  pen  fly  almost  as  rapidly  as  the  marquis’s  words.  With  a  single,  well-said  word, 
Monsieur de La Mole had wiped out the turncoat general’s twenty campaigns. 
“It’s not only foreigners,” the marquis continued, his words carefully measured, “to whom 
we may owe a new military occupation. All the young fellows who write incendiary articles in 
The  Globe6  may  provide  you  with  three  or  four  thousand  young  captains,  among  whom, 
perhaps, might be found a Kléber, a Hoche, a Jourdain, a Pichegru, but not so well meaning.”7 
“We haven’t known how to make him glorious,” said the chairman. “Pichegru should have 
been kept immortal.” 
“Finally: France must have two parties,” resumed Monsieur de La Mole, “two parties not 
only in name, but two clearly defined parties, distinct and separate. We need to be aware of 
who and what must be crushed. On the one hand, journalists, voters, public opinion―in short, 
youth  and  all  who  admire  it.  While  they  stupefy  themselves  with  the  noise  of  their  empty 
words, we―we have the clear advantage of consuming the budget.” 
Here there was another interruption. 
“You  sir,”  said  Monsieur  de  La  Mole  to  the  interrupter,  with  admirable  arrogance  and 
facility,  “if  the  word  shocks  you,  then  you  don’t  ‘consume’  the  budget:  you  devour  forty 
thousand  francs,  as  a  line  item  in  the  state  budget,  and  eighty  thousand  which  you  receive 
from the king’s budget.8 
                                                             
5 The Duke de Richelieu in question (1766C1822), descendant of the great cardinal, was Louis XVIII’s prime 
minister from 1815 to 1818 and from 1820 to 1822. Had the Allied occupation that he “stupidly squandered” in 
1817 lasted much longer, civil war was a real possibility. The reactionaries at Monsieur de La Mole’s secret 
meeting  regret  that  the  Allies  did  not  help  to  reestablish  absolutism;  this  is  merely  one  aspect  of  their 
detachment from reality. 
6 Newspaper of the liberal opposition in the late Restoration. Stendhal was a contributor. 
7 Four non-nobles who rose quickly through the meritorious ranks of the revolutionary armies. The Alsatian 
Jean-Baptiste Kléber (1753C1800) made his name in the Vendée and in Germany, followed Bonaparte to Egypt, 
and was assassinated in Cairo after Bonaparte returned to France to seize power in 1799. Louis-Lazare Hoche 
(1768C97)  fought  in  the  Vendée  and  against  the  Austrians.  Jean-Baptiste  Jourdan  (1762C1833)  survived  the 
revolutionary  wars,  served  under  Joseph  Bonaparte  in  Italy  and  Spain,  and  switched  allegiance  to  the 
Bourbons  and  ultimately  to  Louis-Philippe  d’Orléans.  Pichegru  became  a  royalist  and  later  plotted  against 
Napoleon (see note for p. 284, ll. 32C35); it is probably these good intentions that the marquis is referring to. 
8 Refers to the Civil List, a rich source of income for politically connected aristocrats ruined by the Revolution. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
“Well, sir, since you compel me, let me use you, boldly, as an example. Like your noble 
ancestors, who followed Saint Louis to the Crusades, you really should be able to show us, for 
those thousands of francs, at least a regiment, a company―what am I saying! Half a company, 
if it were composed of fifty combat-ready men, all dedicated to the good cause, to life, and to 
death. All you have is servants who, in case there’s a revolution, will make you afraid of them. 
“The throne, the altar, the nobility may perish tomorrow, gentlemen, as long as you have 
still not created, in every district, a force of five hundred dedicated men. Dedicated, let me say, 
not only with the courage of Frenchmen, but also with the steadiness of the Spanish. 
“Half of this troop should be composed of our children, our nephews―in a word, of real 
gentlemen. Each of them will have at his side, not some word-crazed petty bourgeois, ready to 
hoist  the  tricolor  flag  if  another  18159  gives  him  yet  another  chance,  but  a  good  peasant, 
simple,  frank,  like  Cathelineau.10  Our  young  sons  and  nephews  will  have  taught  them―the 
peasants ought to be sons of the women who nursed their betters.11 Each of us ought to give up 
one-fifth of our income, in order to form this little, dedicated troop of five hundred in each 
district. And then you’ll be able to rely on a foreign occupation. Foreign soldiers will never get 
as far as Dijon, on their own, if they can’t be sure of finding five hundred friendly soldiers in 
every department. 
“Foreign  kings  will  only  listen  to  you  when  you  inform  them  of  twenty  thousand 
gentlemen, ready to take up arms, on their behalf, and open the ports of France. This will be 
painful, you may say. Gentlemen, it’s the price of keeping ourselves alive. Between liberty of 
the  press,  and  our  existence  as  gentlemen,  it  is  war  to  the  death.  Turn  yourself  into 
manufacturers, or peasants―or pick up your guns. Be timid, if you so choose, but do not be 
stupid. Open your eyes. 
“Formez  vos  battalions,  get  your  battalions  ready,  I  say  to  you,  in  the  words  of  the 
‘Marseillaise,’12  that  Jacobin  song.  Then  you’ll  have  some  noble  King  Gustavus  Adolphus,13 
moved by an imminent threat to the very principle of monarchy, who will come five hundred 
miles from his own country, and do for us what that Gustavus did for the Protestant princes. 
Do you prefer to go on talking, and never act? In fifty years all there will be, in Europe, is the 
presidents of republics―not a king left. And when those four letters―K-I-N-G―disappear, so 
too will all the priests and all the gentlemen. All I can see is candidates paying court to dirt-
covered majorities. 
                                                             
9 i.e., another revolution or threat to the Bourbons, referring to Napoleon’s return from Elba in March 1815. 
The tricolor flag, still the official flag of France, was adopted by the Empire and banned by the Restoration. 
10 A peasant leader in the Vendée rebellion (see note for p. 298, l. 18). 
11 Under the ancien régime, wealthy parents sent their newborns to the country to be nursed, and then raised 
for  up  to  five  years.  The  marquis  is  referring  to  the  supposedly  unshakable  lifelong  loyalty  of  these  foster 
families― the frères et soeurs de lait,literally milk-brothers and -sisters―to their young noble charges: part and 
parcel of the nostalgia of these men for the aristocratic golden age, when peasants knew their place and their 
duty to their betters. 
12  Like  the  tricolor  flag,  the  “Marseillaise”  was  considered  to  be  a  symbol  of  the  worst  excesses  of  the 
Revolution. Banned by Bonaparte and the Restoration, it was not adopted as the French national anthem until 
1879. The lyrics are in fact quite violent. 
13 Stendhal―or the marquis―seems to be blurring the lives of two kings of Sweden. Gustavus IV Adolphus 
(born  1778,  reigned  1792C1809)  fought  against  the  French  Revolution  on  monarchic  principle,  and  was 
deposed  by  a  palace  coup  in  1809.  Gustavus  II  Adolphus  (born  1594,  reigned  1611C32)  made  himself  the 
protector of German Protestant princes against the Catholic Hapsburgs of Austria (and thus in allegiance with 
the Catholic Louis XIII and the Cardinal de Richelieu) during the Thirty Years War. 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Two: The Discussion 
“In spite of there being, right now, as you have said, no proven general in all of France, 
known to and loved by everyone, and our army being organized solely in the interests of the 
throne  and  the  altar,  and  all  our  good  old  soldiers  having  been  discharged  from  the  ranks, 
every  single  Austrian  and  Prussian  regiment  contains  fifty  junior  officers  who  have  seen 
combat. 
“And there are two hundred thousand young men, petty bourgeois all of them, who long 
for war....” 
“Leave off these unpleasant truths,” said a sober dignitary, in an imposing voice; he was 
clearly  someone  high  on  the  list  of  ecclesiastical  worthies,  for  Monsieur  de  La  Mole  smiled 
pleasantly, instead of becoming angry. To Julien, this was a very plain sign. 
“Enough of these unpleasant truths,” the dignitary repeated. “Let us sum up, gentlemen: a 
man, facing amputation of a gangrenous limb, would make a serious mistake, were he to tell 
his  surgeon:  ’This  sick  limb  is  perfectly  healthy.’  Forgive  me  the  expression,  gentlemen:  the 
noble Duke of ――― is our surgeon.” 
“There’s  the  key  word,  it’s  finally  been  said,”  thought  Julien.  “Tonight  I’ll  be  galloping 
toward ―――.” 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Chapter  TwentyCThree:  The  Clergy,  Their  Woodlands,  And 
Freedom 
The  first  law  of  existence  is  self-preservation,  staying  alive.  You  sow  hemlock  seed  and  expect  to  see 
ripening corn! 
―Machiavelli 
The  sober  dignitary  went  on.  He  was  clearly  knowledgeable;  he  set  forth  large  verities 
with a gentle, measured eloquence that Julien found infinitely pleasant: 
“First: England hasn’t got a guinea to help us; thriftiness and Hume1 are all the fashion, 
there.  Even  their  noncomformist  Saints2  will  give  us  nothing,  and  Mister  Henry  Brougham3 
will only laugh at us. 
“Second: It will be impossible to obtain more than two campaigns from Europe’s kings, 
absent English money; and two campaigns against the petty bourgeoisie will not be enough. 
“Third:  We  must  form  an  armed  party  in  France,  without  which  the  chief  European 
monarchies will not risk even those two campaigns. 
“The fourth point I venture to propose to you, as something quite obvious, is this: 
“No  armed  party  can  be  formed  in  France  without  the  clergy.  I  tell  you  this  boldly, 
gentlemen, because I’m going to prove it to you. The clergy must be given everything. 
“Primarily because the Church conducts its business night and day, and is guided by men 
of high capacity who are positioned, far from any exposure to storms, nine hundred miles from 
your frontiers―” 
“Ah! Rome, Rome!” exclaimed the master of the house. 
“Yes,  my  dear  sir,  Rome!”  the  cardinal  replied  proudly.  “Whatever  witticisms,4  more  or 
less  ingenious,  may  have  been  fashionable  when  you  were  young,  I  will  say  to  you, 
emphatically, that in 1830 the clergy, guided by Rome, are the common people’s only voice. 
“Fifty thousand priests say the same things, on the day decreed by their leaders, and the 
people―who after all supply the soldiers―are more affected by the voices of their priests than 
by all the little poetry in the world....” 
(This very personal remark evoked murmurs.) 
“The Church’s genius is superior to yours,” the cardinal went on, raising his voice. “Every 
step already taken toward that central achievement, having an armed party in France, has been 
accomplished  by  us.”  He  produced  the  facts:  “Who  sent  eighty  thousand  guns  to  the 
Vendée?...” etc., etc. 
“But  while  the  clergy  are  not  in  possession  of  their  woodlands,5  they  have  nothing.  As 
soon  as  war  starts,  the  minister  of  finance  writes  to  his  agents  that  no  one  has  any  more 
money, except for the priests. France truly has no faith, and it loves war. Whoever can give her 
war  will  be  doubly  popular,  because  war―to  use  the  common  phrase―means  starving  the 
                                                             
1 A rationalist and skeptic, the great Scottish philosopher David Hume (1711C76) was no friend to the sort of 
reactionary monarchism preached at his meeting. 
2 The Quakers; French Romantics were fascinated by their simplicity and devotion. 
3 Another troublesome Scot; a liberal leader in Parliament, notable for his opposition to the slave trade. 
4 The anticlericalism of the philosophes was widespread in the late eighteenth century, especially among the 
upper classes, even among certain aristocratic clergymen. 
5 Wood being the basic fuel and construction material of the time, woodlands (bois) were the most valuable 
real estate. The clergy had been the largest proprietors of woodlands under the ancien régime, and under the 
Restoration the Church sought compensation, if not actual restitution, for these assets. 
 
Chapter TwentyCThree: The Clergy, Their Woodlands, And Freedom 
 
Jesuits.  Making  war  means  freeing  those  prideful  monsters,  the  French,  from  the  threat  of 
foreign intervention.” 
The cardinal’s remarks were positively received. 
“Monsieur  de  Nerval,”  he  declared,  “must  resign  from  the  government.  His  name  is 
senselessly provoking.” 
At these words, they all rose and began speaking at the same time. “They’re going to send 
me away again.” Julien thought. But even the wise chairman had forgotten Julien was there, or 
that he even existed. 
Everyone was looking toward a man Julien recognized. This was Monsieur de Nerval, the 
prime minister; Julien had seen him at Duke de Retz’s ball. 
Confusion was at its height, as the newspapers say, reporting on Parliament. After a long 
quarter of an hour, silence was partially restored. 
Then Monsieur de Nerval rose, speaking apostolically: 
“I will not tell you,” he said, his voice quite odd, “that I don’t enjoy being prime minister. 
“It has been indicated, gentlemen, that my name significantly intensifies Jacobinism, by 
making many moderates oppose us. Accordingly, I would gladly retire from my post, but our 
Lord’s ways can only be seen by a very few. Still,” he added, staring directly at the cardinal, “I 
have a mission.6 Heaven has said to me: ’Either you will bring your head to the scaffold or else 
you  will  reestablish  monarchy  in  France,  and  reduce  Parliament  to  what  it  was  under  Louis 
XV’―and, gentlemen, I will do exactly that.” 
He fell silent, he sat down once more, and there was not a sound to be heard. 
“Now  there’s  a  fine  actor,”  thought  Julien.  He  deceived  himself,  as  he  usually  did,  in 
seeing more in other people than was really there. Excited by an evening of such lively debate, 
and above all by the sincerity of the discussion, at that moment Monsieur de Nerval believed 
in his mission. He was wonderfully courageous, but not endowed with much common sense. 
Midnight  sounded,  during  the  silence  that  followed  those  fine  words:  “I  will  do  exactly 
that.”  It  seemed  to  Julien  that  there  was  something  imposing  and  funereal  in  the  striking 
pendulum. He was moved. 
The discussion soon resumed, with heightened energy and, above all, incredible na07vité. 
“These gentlemen will have to have me poisoned,” Julien thought, at some points. “How can 
they say such things in front of a working-class man?” 
Two o’clock sounded, and they were still talking. The master of the house had been asleep 
for  a  long  time;  Monsieur  de  La  Mole  had  to  summon  a  servant  to  bring  in  new  candles. 
Monsieur  de  Nerval,  the  prime  minister,  had  left  at  one  forty-five,  not  without  having  paid 
considerable attention to Julien’s face, employing a pocket mirror he had with him. Everyone 
relaxed, once he had gone. 
While candles were being replaced: “God only knows what that man will say to the king!” 
the triple-vested man said in a low voice, to the man next to him. “He’s capable of making us 
seem utterly foolish and destroying our future.” 
“But you have to concede that he’s unusually conceited, and even impudent, coming here. 
He used to come, before he rose to be prime minister. But power changes everything, washes 
away whatever a man once cared about. He really ought to be aware of that.” 
                                                             
6 In the early years of the Consulate, many royalists hoped that Bonaparte would fulfill the role played by 
General  Monck  in  England  in  1660,  leading  the  military  to  restore  the  monarchy.  They  were  quickly 
disabused. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
The prime minister had barely walked out of the room, when Bonaparte’s former general 
closed his eyes. Then he talked about his health, his wounds, looked at his watch, and went 
away. 
“I would wager,” said the triple-vested man, “that our general is running after the prime 
minister. He’ll be excusing himself for having been found here, and claiming he can pull us 
this way and that.” 
When the half-asleep servants had finished with the candles: 
“Let  us  now  consult,  gentlemen,”  said  the  chairman,  “without  further  attempts  at 
persuading one another. Let us turn to that note which, forty-eight hours from now, will be 
read by our foreign friends. We’ve talked about government ministers. We can now say that 
Monsieur de Nerval has broken with us―and what do ministers matter? We’ll do with them as 
we will.” 
With a delicate smile, the cardinal agreed. 
“There  is  nothing  easier,  it  strikes  me,  than  to  sum  up  our  position,”  said  the  young 
Bishop  of  Agde,  with  the  intensely  focused,  passionate  compulsion  of  the  most  exalted 
fanaticism. He had been silent, until now. His eyes, Julien had noted, were at first mild and 
calm; they had been aflame ever since the discussion’s first hour. By this point, his soul was 
bubbling over like lava at Vesuvius. 
“From  1806  to  1814,  England  made  only  one  mistake,”  he  said,  “which  was  not  to  act 
directly  and  personally  against  Napoleon.  Once  that  man  created  dukes  and  high  court 
officers, once he’d reestablished the throne, the mission God had entrusted to him was done. 
He was good for nothing but the flames. The Holy Scriptures teach us, in many ways, how to 
do away with tyrants.” (Here there were several quotations in Latin.) 
“Today,  gentlemen,  it’s  not  a  man  we  need  to  burn,  but  Paris.  France  follows  Paris  in 
everything.  What  good  will  it  do  to  arm  your  five  hundred  men,  in  every  administrative 
department? That’s a risky task, and it will be endless. Why entangle France in a matter which 
depends entirely on Paris? Paris alone, with its newspapers and its drawing rooms, has created 
the evil. Let this modern Babylon perish. 
“Let  us  be  done,  at  last,  with  the  question  of  Paris  or  the  Church.  This  immense 
destruction would actually serve the worldly interests of the throne. Why did Paris never emit 
so much as a puff, under Bonaparte? Go ask the artillerymen of Saint-Roch....”7 
Only at three in the morning did Julien leave, with Monsieur de La Mole. 
The marquis was ashamed and weary. For the first time, in speaking to Julien, there was 
something like entreaty in his voice. He asked that Julien give him his word, never to reveal 
the excessive zeal―if that was the correct word―which, by chance, he had witnessed. “Only 
                                                             
7  On  October  5,  1795―  13  vendémiaire  according  to  the  revolutionary  calendar  still  in  effect―troops  under 
General Bonaparte fired on a crowd of royalists who had gathered near the Church of Saint-Roch, hoping to 
spark a counterrevolutionary coup. Bonaparte’s actions established him as an agent of government authority 
and solidified his ties to Barras and the Directory government. 
The  meeting  described  accurately  reflects  the  political  mood  and  instability  of  the  last  months  of  the 
Restoration. Discontent was widespread and secret societies proliferated, on the right and the left, although 
not  to  the  extent  the  public  imagined.  The  politics  of  the  Marquis  de  La  Mole’s  group  suggests  the 
archconservative Chevaliers de la Foi (see note for p. 22, l. 23), an aristocratic, counterrevolutionary association 
founded  in  1801,  whose  members  included  some  of  the  greatest  names  of  the  French  aristocracy  (i.e., 
Montmorency,  La  Rochefoucauld).  Many  of  the  Chevaliers  were  also  members  of  the  Congrégation,  thus 
giving the latter group an undeserved reputation for political activism. There are no historical indications that 
either the Chevaliers or any other group ever sought to overthrow the French government with the help of 
foreign invaders. 
 
Chapter TwentyCThree: The Clergy, Their Woodlands, And Freedom 
 
mention these things to our foreign friend if he insists, most seriously, on knowing about our 
young wildmen. Do these hotheads worry about the state being overthrown? They’ll become 
cardinals; they’ll take refuge in Rome. But us, in our great houses, we will be massacred by the 
peasants.” 
The  secret  note,  which  the  marquis  composed  on  the  basis  of  Julien’s  large  report,  all 
twenty-six pages of it, was not ready until four forty-five. 
“I’m  tired  to  death,”  the  marquis  said,  “and  that’s  perfectly  obvious  in  this  note,  which 
toward  the  end  lacks  clarity.  I’m  less  satisfied  with  this  than  I’ve  ever  been,  really,  with 
anything in my life. See here, my friend,” he added, “go take a few hours of rest. And because I 
worry about your being kidnapped, I will come with you and lock you in your room.” 
The  next day,  the  marquis brought  Julien  to  an  isolated  country  house, rather far from 
Paris.  There  were  strange  people  in  residence;  Julien  took  them  for  priests.  He  was  given  a 
passport, under a fictitious name, which indicated the true destination of his trip, something 
he had always pretended not to know. He climbed into a carriage, alone. 
The  marquis  was  not  worried  about  his  memory.  Julien  had  several  times  recited  the 
secret note. What did worry Monsieur de La Mole was fear of Julien’s being intercepted. 
“Never stop looking like a fop, traveling to kill time,” he told Julien, just as the younger 
man was leaving. His voice was friendly. “There may have been more than one false friend at 
our meeting, last night.” 
Traveling  was  rapid  and  extremely  dismal.  Julien  was  barely  out  of  the  marquis’s  sight 
when  he’d  forgotten  the  secret  note,  and  his  mission,  only  daydreaming  about  Mathilde’s 
contempt. 
In a village not far distant from Metz,8 the postmaster9 came to tell him there were no 
horses available. It was ten o’clock at night. Much vexed, Julien requested supper. He walked 
along, in front of the post house, and gradually, without being seen, got into the stables. There 
was not a horse in sight. 
However, Julien told himself, the postmaster had seemed strange. “He was studying me 
with his vulgar eyes.” 
He had begun, as you see, not to fully believe everything he’d been told. 
He thought about escaping, after supper. In order to learn something about the place, he 
left  his  room  and  went  down  to  warm  himself  at  the  kitchen  fire.  How  happy  he  was  to 
discover, there, Signor Géronimo, the famous singer! 
Settled in an easy chair, which he’d brought up to the fire, the Neapolitan was groaning 
louder, and talking more, all by himself, than the twenty German peasants who stood around, 
gaping at him. 
“These  people  here  are  ruining  me,”  he  declared  to  Julien.  “I’ve  promised  to  sing 
tomorrow, in Mayence.10 Seven sovereign princes have hurried to hear me. But let’s go for a 
walk,” he added, with a knowing look. 
When  they  were  a  hundred  paces  down  the  street,  and  beyond  any  chance  of  being 
overheard: 
“Do you know what this is all about?” he asked Julien. “Our postmaster is a scoundrel. I 
came out and walked around, earlier, and gave twenty pence to a young rascal who told me 
the  whole  story.  There  are  more  than  a  dozen  horses,  in  a  stable  at  the  other  side of  town. 
They’re trying to slow down some courier.” 
                                                             
8 Town in Lorraine, on the Moselle River near the German border. 
9 The post in question is a relay stop, where coaches could changes horses and passengers could stop for a 
meal or a night’s rest. 
10 Mainz, important German city at the confluence of the Rhine and the Main Rivers. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
“Do you think so?” Julien said innocently. 
Uncovering the fraud did not solve their problem. They had to be able to leave. And this, 
Géronimo and his friend could not arrange. “We’ll wait  till daylight,” the singer finally said. 
“They don’t trust us. Maybe it’s you or me they’re after. Tomorrow morning we’ll order a good 
meal. While they’re fixing it, we’ll go for a little walk, we’ll rent horses, and we’ll go on to the 
next mail-coach stop.” 
“And your baggage?” said Julien, who was wondering if perhaps Géronimo himself could 
have been sent to intercept him. They had to eat and go to bed. Julien was still in his first sleep 
when he was wakened, with a start, by the voices of two men who were talking, right in his 
room, without even pretending to be quiet. 
He recognized the postmaster, equipped with a muffled lantern. Its light was directed at 
his traveling trunk, which had been brought up to his room. Standing next to the postmaster 
was  a  man,  calmly  rummaging  through  the  opened  trunk.  Julien  could  only  make  out  the 
sleeves of his suit, which were black and exceedingly tight. 
“It’s  a  cassock,”  he  told  himself,  and  quietly  picked  up  the  pistols  he’d  set  under  his 
“Don’t worry about him waking up, Father,” said the postmaster. “I gave him the wine you 
pillow. 
yourself prepared.” 
“There’s  not  a  trace  of  any  papers,”  said  the  priest.  “A  lot  of  linen,  perfume,  soap, 
nonsense  like  that.  He’s  a  young  man  of  our  time,  only  concerned  with  his  pleasures.  The 
courier must be the other one, putting on that Italian accent.” 
They came closer to Julien, so they could look in the pockets of his traveling suit. He was 
powerfully tempted to kill them, as burglars. There could not be any serious consequences. He 
felt very attracted to the idea.. .. “But what a fool I’d be,” he told himself. “I’d compromise my 
mission.”  After  looking  through  Julien’s  pockets:  “This  is  no  diplomat,”  the  priest  said.  He 
moved  away,  and  it  was  an  excellent  thing  that  he  did.  “If  they  touch  me,  here  in  this  bed, 
they’ll be sorry indeed!” Julien said to himself. “They might be coming to stab me, and I’m not 
about to give them that opportunity.” 
The priest turned his head, and Julien half opened his eyes. What an astonishing sight! It 
was Father Castaneda! And indeed, though the two men had tried to keep their voices down, 
he had thought from the first that he recognized one of the voices. Julien experienced a fierce 
desire to rid the earth of one of its most cowardly scoundrels. 
“But my mission,” he told himself. 
The priest and his acolyte left. A quarter of an hour later, Julien pretended to wake up. He 
cried out, waking the whole house. 
“I’ve been poisoned!” he called. “I’m in terrible pain!” He wanted some pretext to go to 
Géronimo’s assistance. He found him half suffocated by the opium the postmaster had put in 
his wine. 
Fearing  some  trick  of  this  sort,  Julien  had  drunk  only  the  chocolate  he’d  brought  from 
Paris.  He  was  barely  able  to  sufficiently  waken  Géronimo,  so  they  could  discuss  whether  to 
stay or to leave. 
“Give me the whole kingdom of Naples,” said the singer, “but right now I cannot give up 
the delights of sleep.” 
“But the seven sovereign princes!” 
“Let them wait.” 
Julien left by himself, and without any further incident came to the great personage he 
was to see. He wasted an entire morning, soliciting an audience, and in vain. Luckily, at about 
four  o’clock  the  duke  wanted  a  breath  of  fresh  air.  Julien  saw  him  leaving,  and  on  foot;  he 
 
Chapter TwentyCThree: The Clergy, Their Woodlands, And Freedom 
 
immediately went after him and asked for alms. When he was two  steps away, he drew the 
Marquis de La Mole’s watch and carefully displayed it. “Follow me, but not too closely,” said 
the duke, not looking at him. 
Three-quarters of a mile farther along, the duke walked briskly into a small coffeehouse. 
In one of the rooms of this fourth-rate establishment, Julien was privileged to recite for the 
duke his four pages. When he had finished: “Start again, and go more slowly,” he was told. 
The duke took his notes. Then: 
“Go to the next post stop,  on foot. Leave everything there, including  your trunk. Go to 
Strasbourg, as best you can, and on the twenty-second of the month (it was then the tenth) 
return here, to this same coffeehouse, at twelve-thirty. Don’t leave for half an hour. Be silent!” 
These were the only words Julien heard. They were enough to imbue him with the highest 
admiration. “This is how to do business,” he thought. “What would this great statesman say, 
had he heard those wild magpies chattering, three days ago?” 
It took Julien two days to get to Strasbourg. Having no business to conduct there, he took 
a leisurely route. “If that devil, Father Castaneda, recognized me, he’s not a man to easily give 
me up...And how happy he’d be to mock me, and to ruin my mission.” 
Happily,  Father  Castaneda,  the  Congregation  of  the  Holy  Virgin’s  police  chief  for  the 
entire  northern  frontier,  had  not  recognized  him.  And  the  Strasbourg  Jesuits,  though 
wonderfully zealous, never  dreamed of keeping watch on Julien, who  in his blue frock coat, 
and wearing his honored medal, seemed most like a young officer, totally self-concerned. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Chapter Twenty-Four: Strasbourg 
Spell-binding charmer! You have all love’s energy, all its sweeping sorrow. Only its enchanting pleasures, its 
sweet  joys,  are  beyond  your  sphere.  But  I  could  not  say,  watching  her  sleep:  “She’s  all  mine,  her  angelic 
beauty, her lovely weaknesses! There she is, completely in my power, exactly as Heaven in its gracious mercy 
made her, to bewitch a man’s heart.” 
―Schiller 
Obliged  to  spend  a  week  in  Strasbourg,  Julien  tried  to  distract  himself  with  notions  of 
military glory and patriotic devotion. Was he in love? He knew nothing: all he found, in his 
tormented heart, was Mathilde, absolute mistress of both his happiness and his imagination. 
All  the  energy  of  his  character  was  required  to  keep  from  falling  into  despair.  Thinking  of 
anything that had no connection to Mademoiselle de La Mole was beyond his powers. Once, 
his  ambition,  and  the  lesser  triumphs  of  vanity,  had  distracted  him  from  feelings  like  those 
Madame  de  Rênal  had  inspired  in  him.  Mathilde  had  absorbed  everything;  wherever  he 
looked, in his future, he saw only her. 
And everywhere, in that future, he saw failure. This young person who, at Verrières, had 
been so full of presumption, so arrogant, had succumbed to ridiculously overzealous modesty. 
Three  days  earlier,  he  would  have  been  delighted  to  kill  Father  Castaneda.  But  if,  in 
Strasbourg,  a  child  had  quarreled  with  him,  he  would  have  taken  the  child’s  side.  Thinking 
back to his adversaries, the enemies he had encountered all through his life, in each and every 
instance he judged himself, Julien, to have been in the wrong. His implacable enemy, now, was 
precisely that powerful imagination, once so interminably busy, painting for him a future full 
of brilliant successes. 
The absolute solitude of a traveler’s life added to the reign of his dark imagination. What 
a treasure a friend would have been! “But,” Julien asked himself, “is there any heart that beats 
for me? And if I should find a friend, wouldn’t honor oblige me to keep eternally silent?” 
He was on horseback, riding sadly around the countryside near Kehl, a town on the banks 
of  the  Rhine,  immortalized  by  the  hard-fought  victories  of  Desaix  and  Gouvion  Saint-Cyr,1 
making  their  way  over  the  river  under  heavy  fire.  A  German  peasant  showed  him  the  little 
streams,  the  roads,  the  small  islands  in  the  Rhine,  made  famous  by  these  great  generals’ 
courage.  Leading  his  horse  with  his  left  hand,  Julien  had  spread  open,  with  his  right,  the 
superb  battlefield  map  adorning  Marshall  Saint-Cyr’s  Memoirs.  Then  he  lifted  his  head, 
startled by a cheerful exclamation. 
It was Prince Korasoff, his London friend, who some months earlier had revealed to Julien 
the basic principles of high foppishness. Faithful to this noble art, Korasoff, who no more than 
an hour ago had set foot in Kehl2, riding from Strasbourg, and who had never in his life read a 
line about the siege of 1796, set himself to explaining everything about it. The German peasant 
stared at them, astonished, for he knew enough French to make out the enormous blunders 
the prince was falling into. Julien’s mind was far away. He was watching the handsome young 
nobleman, amazed; he was admiring the grace with which he mounted his horse. 
                                                             
1 Louis-Charles-Antoine des Aix, nobleman who joined the revolutionary armies―and so altered the spelling 
of his name―made his reputation in Germany, performed impressively in Egypt, and was killed in the great 
French victory at Marengo (1800), a victory that some say was his, though Bonaparte took credit for it. Louis 
Jean-Baptiste de Gouvion Saint-Cyr, another nobleman who joined the Revolution, rallied to the Bourbons in 
1814, briefly served Louis XVIII as minister of war. The two of them led a siege of Kehl in 1796. 
2 Small town on the German side of the Rhine, just across from Strasbourg. 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Four: Strasbourg 
“What  a  happy  nature!”  he  told  himself.  “How  well  his  riding  clothes  fit  him;  how 
elegantly his hair has been cut. Oh, had I looked like him, perhaps she wouldn’t have taken 
such a dislike to me, after three days of loving me.” 
When the prince had finished off the siege of 1796: “You’re looking like a Trappist monk,” 
he said to Julien. “The principles I gave you, in London, should not be applied so rigorously. To 
seem sorrowful is perhaps  not quite in good taste: you’re supposed to seem bored. If you’re 
sad, there’s something deficient about you, something you haven’t yet conquered. 
“It’s a demonstration of inferiority. If you really are bored, on the other hand, this sort of 
thing would show that whoever’s been trying hard to please you is your inferior. Understand 
me, my dear friend: showing contempt is a serious business.” 
Julien tossed a gold coin to the peasant, who had been listening, his mouth hanging open. 
“Good,” said the prince. “Now that was graceful―a noble disdain! Very good!” And he set 
his horse to galloping. Julien followed him, overwhelmed by dull, stupefied admiration. 
“Ah, had I been like him, she wouldn’t have preferred de Croisenois!” The more shocked 
he was by the prince’s absurdities, the more he despised himself for not admiring them, and 
the more miserable he judged himself for not sharing them. Self-loathing can go no further. 
The prince was aware of Julien’s genuine misery. “What’s all this, my friend,” he said, as 
they rode back to Strasbourg. “Have you lost your money, or perhaps you’ve fallen in love with 
some little actress?” 
Russians imitate French manners, but they’re always fifty years behind. Right now, they’ve 
reached the era of Louis XV.3 
This fooling with love brought tears to Julien’s eyes. “Why shouldn’t I turn to this friendly 
fellow for advice?” he suddenly asked himself. 
“Yes,  yes,  old  boy,”  the  prince  said.  “You’ll  see,  when  we’re  back  in  Strasbourg,  that  I 
myself am madly in love, and decidedly rejected. A charming woman, who lives in a nearby 
city, has dropped me, after three days of passion, and this reversal is killing me.” 
Julien  described  for  the  prince,  using  fictitious  names,  both  Mathilde’s  actions  and  her 
character. 
“Don’t bother going on,” said Korasoff. “To give you proper confidence in your physician, 
I’ll finish your intimate tale myself. Either the young woman’s husband revels in an immense 
fortune, or, much more likely, she herself belongs to your country’s highest class. She really 
must have something to be proud of.” 
Julien nodded; he no longer had the courage to speak. 
“Very good,” said the prince. “Here are three rather bitter pills, which you’re going to have 
to take, and without delay: 
“First, make sure, every single day, that you see Madame. .. what’s her name?” 
“Madame de Dubois.”4 
“What a name!” said the prince, roaring with laughter. “But, forgive me: for you, it must 
be sublime. But you have to see Madame de Dubois every day; above all, don’t let her think 
you’re being cold or angry. Remember the great principle of this century: be the opposite of 
what you’re expected to be. Let her see you exactly as you were a week before she honored you 
with her favors.” 
“Ah!  Then  I  was  calm,”  Julien  exclaimed  despairingly.  “I  thought  I  was  being  sorry  for 
her....” 
                                                             
3 Certainly the great age of French libertinage, but the mode of rich men keeping actresses as their mistresses 
had by no means died out in 1830. 
4 What a name, indeed; the combination of the aristocratic “de” with the quintessentially bourgeois “Dubois” 
is absurd and patently fictitious, hence the Russian prince’s laughter. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
“The  moth  burns  itself  on  the  candle,”  the  prince  went  on,  “a  metaphor  as  old  as  the 
world. 
“So: first, you’ll see her every day. 
“Second: you’ll pursue some lady in high society, but not displaying any sign of passion―
do you follow me? I won’t conceal it from you: your role will be a difficult one. You’ll be acting 
in a comedy, and if they guess you’re only acting, you’re done for.” 
“She’s so smart, and I’m not! I’m done for,” said Julien, sorrowfully. 
“No,  it’s  simply  that  you’re  more  in  love  than  I’d  thought.  Madame  de  Dubois  is 
profoundly concerned with herself, like all the women blessed by heaven either with an excess 
of nobility, or an excess of money. She thinks about herself instead of thinking about you, and 
so she knows nothing about you. During the two or three small fits of love she’s granted you, 
she made a huge imaginative effort to see in you the hero she’s always dreamed of, not you as 
you actually are.... 
“Good Lord, these are such utterly basic matters, my dear Sorel. Are you no more than a 
schoolboy?... 
“By God! Let’s go in this shop. Look at that charming black tie. You’d think it was from 
John Anderson of Burlington Street. Make me happy: take it, and then throw just as far away 
as you can that horrible bit of black rope you’ve got around your neck. 
“Carry on,” said the prince, as they left Strasbourg’s very best shop for men’s accessories. 
“Now, with whom does your Madame de Dubois associate? My Lord, what a name! Don’t be 
annoyed at me, my dear Sorel: it’s stronger than I am.. .. Just whom will you pursue?” 
“A magnificent prude,” said Julien, “daughter of an immensely rich provincial merchant. 
She has the loveliest eyes in the world, which I find infinitely delightful; she surely is of the 
highest rank in France; but even with such social standing, she blushes almost to distraction if 
anyone  tries  to  talk  to  her  about  business  and  shopkeeping.  Her  bad  luck,  but  her  father 
happened to be one of the best-known merchants in Strasbourg.” 
“And so,” said the prince, laughing, “if there’s talk about business, you’ll be sure this lovely 
creature is thinking about herself, and not you. This is divine and highly useful absurdity: it 
will  keep  you  from even the tiniest flicker of insanity when you’re looking into those lovely 
eyes. Victory will be yours.” 
Julien had been thinking of Marshall Fervaques’s widow, who often came to visit the de La 
Moles. She was a beautiful foreigner who’d been married to the marshall just a year before his 
death. Her only goal in life appeared to be erasing any awareness of herself as a businessman’s 
daughter; to create a name for herself, in Paris, she’d become a leader of the virtue party. 
Julien sincerely admired the prince: what he wouldn’t have given to possess the man’s wit! 
The two friends chatted on, and Korasoff was delighted: no Frenchman had ever listened to 
him for so long. “So I’ve finally succeeding in being heard,” he told himself, utterly enchanted, 
“by giving lessons to my teachers!” 
“We’re agreed, then,” he repeated to Julien for the tenth time. “Not a flicker of passion, 
when you’re in Madame de Dubois’s presence and talking to this young beauty, daughter of a 
stocking salesman in Strasbourg.  On the other hand, let your passion absolutely burn when 
you  write  to  her.  Reading  a  well-written  love  letter  is  a  prude’s  greatest  delight;  it’s  an 
interlude of relaxation. She’s no longer acting in her comedy; she can allow herself to listen to 
her heart. Accordingly, two letters a day.” 
“Never, never!” said Julien, discouraged. “I’d rather be pounded to death in a mortar than 
write three sentences. I’m a corpse, my dear friend: don’t expect anything from me. Let me die 
out on the street.” 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Four: Strasbourg 
“And why are you talking about writing sentences? I carry in my luggage six manuscripts 
of love letters. They’re for all kinds of women; I’ve got plenty for the nobly virtuous sort. Didn’t 
Kalisky pay court, at Richmond5―you know the place, it’s not ten miles from London―and to 
the prettiest Quakeress in all of England?” 
By the time he left his friend, at ten in the morning, Julien felt less miserable. 
Next day, the prince summoned a copyist, and two days later Julien had fifty-three love 
letters,  neatly  numbered,  constructed  to  appeal  to  the  most  sublime,  the  most  dismal,  of 
virtuous women. 
“I  haven’t  got  fifty-four,”  said  the  prince,  “because  Kalisky  was  turned  down.  But  you 
won’t be worrying about being misused by the stocking seller’s daughter, since all you’re after 
is Madame de Dubois’s heart.” 
They went riding every day; the prince was extraordinarily fond of Julien. Not  knowing 
how to demonstrate his sudden friendship, he ended by offering Julien a cousin’s  hand, she 
being a rich heiress in Moscow. “And once you’re married,” he added, “my influence, and the 
medal you’re wearing, will make you a colonel in less than two years.” 
“But I didn’t get this from Napoleon; that makes a difference.” 
“Why?”  said  the  prince.  “He  created  that  medal,  didn’t  he?  And  it  remains  the  highest 
decoration in all Europe.” 
Julien  was  almost  ready  to  accept  the  offer,  but  called  to  mind  his  duty  to  the  great 
nobleman.  When  he  left  Korasoff,  he  promised  to  write.  The  response  to  his  secret  note 
arrived, and he hurried toward Paris. But barely two days later, the thought of leaving France, 
and  Mathilde,  seemed  to  him  more  painful  than  death  itself.  “I  won’t  marry  the  millions 
Korasoff offered,” he said to himself. “But I will take his advice. 
“After  all,  seduction’s  the  Russian’s  profession.  He  hasn’t  thought  about  anything  else 
since he was fifteen, and he’s thirty by now. It can’t be said he’s stupid: he’s subtle, he’s crafty. 
You  can’t  expect  raptures,  or  poetry,  from  such  a  man.  He’s  really  a  pimp―which  is  yet 
another reason he can’t afford to be wrong. 
“It’s got to be done. I’ll pursue Madame de Fervaques. 
“She’ll probably be something of a bore, but I’ll keep looking into her really lovely eyes, 
which so closely resemble those I love best in the world. 
“She’s a foreigner: that will be something new to consider. 
“I’m crazy, I’m drowning, I have no choice but to take my friend’s advice and not expect 
to know what I’m doing, left to myself.” 
                                                             
5 The site of a summer residence of the English royal family, known for its gardens along the Thames. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Chapter Twenty-Five: The Mistress of Virtue 
But if I sought pleasure with such prudence and care, for me it wouldn’t be pleasure. 
―Lope De Vega1 
He’d barely gotten back to Paris, presented his dispatches to Monsieur de La Mole, who 
appeared  greatly  distressed  by  them,  and  left  the  marquis  in  his  office,  than  our  hero  went 
hurrying  to  see  Count  Altamira.  In  addition  to  having  being  sentenced  to  death,  this 
handsome foreigner was also a man of great sobriety, and lucky enough to be deeply devout. 
These two assets, and more than anything else his high birth, completely suited Madame de 
Fervaques, who saw a good deal of him. 
Julien  confessed,  most  soberly,  that  he  was  deeply  in  love  with  the  lady.  “Hers  is  the 
purest kind of virtue, and the noblest,” Altamira responded, “though rather Jesuitical and a bit 
grandiloquent. There are days when I understand each and every word she says, but I don’t 
understand  a  single  sentence  in  its  entirety.  She  often  makes  me  think  I  don’t  understand 
French  as  well  as  they  say  I  do.  Knowing  her  will  bring  your  name  forward;  she’ll  give  you 
weight in the world. But first, let’s go see Bustos,” the count added. “He’s tried paying court to 
her.” 
Don Diego Bustos let them explain the whole affair at some length, saying nothing, like a 
lawyer  in  consultation.  He  had  a  monk’s  fat  face,  with  a  thick  black  mustache,  and 
unmatchable sobriety―in other words, just like a perfect Italian conspirator. 
“I  understand,”  he  finally  told  Julien.  “Has  Madame  de  Fervaques  had  lovers,  or  hasn’t 
she? Accordingly, is there any hope of your succeeding? That is the question. This is a way of 
telling you that, as for myself, I failed. Now that I’m no longer angry, I try to rationalize it like 
this: she’s often irritable, and as I’ll explain in a moment, she can be quite spiteful. 
“I don’t think her bilious temper is a sign of high intelligence, which can put a passionate 
varnish on everything. I think, on the contrary, she owes her unusual beauty, and  her fresh 
complexion, to a phlegmatic, calm Dutch temperament.” 
Julien grew impatient with the Spaniard’s slow, stolid speech. From time to time, in spite 
of himself, small monosyllabic sounds escaped him. 
“Do you wish to hear me?” Don Diego Bustos said to him solemnly. 
“Forgive me this furia francese, this French frenzy. I am all ears,” said Julien. 
“Madame  de  Fervaques,  as  I  have  said,  is  strongly  inclined  to  hatred.  She  pursues, 
unpityingly, people she’s never seen―lawyers, and poor devils like Charles Collé,2 literary men 
who’ve written songs―you know. 
“J’ai la marotte 
D’aimer Marote,etc. 
“I’m in the habit 
Of loving Rabbit...” 
 
And then Julien had to listen, as Don Diego went through the entire song. The Spanish 
love to sing in French. 
This  divine  song  had  never  been  heard  with  such  impatience.  And  when  he’d  finished: 
“Madame de Fervaques,” said Don Diego, “had the author of another song dismissed from his 
post―it begins ‘Un jour l’amour au cabaret,’ ‘One day a lover was half-seas over.’” 
                                                             
1 Spanish poet and playwright (1562C1635). 
2 A writer of popular songs in the eighteenth century. 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Five: The Mistress of Virtue 
Julien shuddered: Bustos might want to sing this one, too. But Don Diego was satisfied 
with analysis. In fact, it was blasphemous and rather indecent. 
“When  Madame  de  Fervaques  got  angry  about  this  song,”  Don  Diego  went  on,  “I  felt 
obliged to tell her that a woman of her standing should never read all the stupidities put into 
print. Whatever progress piety and sobriety may make, in France there will always be barroom 
literature. When she had this writer, a poor devil on half pay, thrown out of his post, worth 
eighteen  hundred  francs:  ’Watch  out,’  I  told  her.  ‘You’ve  attacked  this  rhymester  with  your 
weapons; he can answer you with his. He’ll write a song about virtue. The gilt drawing rooms 
will support you; those who relish laughter will be repeating his epigrams.’ Do you know, sir, 
what she answered? ‘In the service of the Lord, the whole of Paris can watch me proceed to my 
martyrdom: it would be a new sort of spectacle for France. The people would learn to respect 
those of higher standing. It would be the most beautiful day of my life.’ Her eyes had never 
been lovelier.” 
“And she has superb eyes,” exclaimed Julien. 
“I  see  you  are  amorously  inclined...So,”  Don  Diego  resumed  gravely,  “she’s  not  the 
constitutionally bilious type, simply swept into vengeance. Yet if, all the same, she likes doing 
harm,  it’s  because  she’s  unhappy.  I  suspect  some  inner  misery.  Might  she  be  a  moral  prude 
who’s weary of her profession?” 
Silently, and for a long minute, the Spaniard looked at him. 
“That’s  the  whole  question,”  he  added  soberly,  “and  there’s  where  you  can  find  some 
hope. I have done a great deal of reflecting on those two years, when I was very humbly in her 
service. Your whole future, sir lover, hangs on this basic problem: Is she a prude who’s tired of 
being prudish, and nasty because she’s miserable?” 
“Or else,” said Altamira, finally breaking his profound silence, “could it be what I’ve told 
you  twenty  times?  French  female  vanity,  in  a  word.  It’s  the  memory  of  her  father,  the 
celebrated  drapery  merchant,  which  makes  a  naturally  cheerless,  dried-out  constitution 
descend  into  misery.  The  only  happiness  she  can  find  would  be  to  live  in  Toledo,  and  be 
tormented, day after day, by a confessor who shows her the gaping doors of hell.” 
As Julien was leaving: “Altamira tells me you’re one of us,” Don Diego told him, as ever 
somber. “One day you’ll help us win back our freedom, so I’ve tried to help you in this little 
diversion. It would be good for you to be familiar with Madame de Fervaques’s style: here are 
four letters written in her hand.” 
“I’ll have them copied,” exclaimed Julien, “and then return them.” 
“And you’ll never tell anyone a word of what we’ve been saying?” 
“Never, on my honor,” exclaimed Julien. 
“May  God  come  to  your  aid!”  the  Spaniard  added,  as  he  silently  escorted  Altamira  and 
Julien to the stairs. 
The  scene  had  somewhat  cheered  our  hero:  he  was  close  to  smiling.  “And  here’s  pious 
Altamira,” he said to himself, “helping me along the road to adultery.” 
While Don Diego had been droning soberly on, Julien was listening to the house clock, 
The time for dinner grew nearer; he was going to see Mathilde again! He went home and 
striking the hours. 
dressed with considerable care. 
“Stupidity  number  one,”  he  told  himself,  as  he  went  down  the  stairs.  “The  prince’s 
instructions must be followed to the letter.” 
He went back up to his room and put on the simplest travel clothes he owned. 
“And now,” he thought, “the next question is how to look at her.” It was only five-thirty; 
dinner was at six. He thought he’d go to the drawing room; he found it empty. The sight of the 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
blue sofa moved him almost to tears; soon his cheeks were burning. “This idiotic sensitivity 
must be controlled,” he told himself angrily. “It’s betraying me.” He picked up a newspaper, to 
help him  look more assured, and walked three or four times from the  drawing room to the 
garden. 
Only trembling, and completely hiding himself behind an oak tree, did he dare raise his 
eyes  toward  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole’s  window.  The  shutters  were  very  tightly  closed;  he 
thought he might collapse, and stood for a long time, leaning against the oak. Then, walking 
unsteadily, he went to look at the gardener’s ladder. 
The iron link, which he’d forced open, alas! under very different circumstances, had not 
been repaired. Carried away by a surge of madness, Julien pressed it to his lips. 
After  wandering  for  some  time,  between  the  drawing  room  and  the  garden,  Julien  felt 
unbearably weary: this was an initial success of which he was very aware. “My glances will be 
half dead and won’t give me away!” Gradually, the guests appeared in the drawing room: each 
time the door opened, a deadly anxiety shot through Julien’s heart. 
They went into the dining room and seated themselves. At last, Mademoiselle de La Mole 
appeared,  faithful  as  ever  to  her  habit  of  keeping  people  waiting.  She  blushed  quite  deeply, 
seeing Julien: she had not been told he’d come back. Following Prince Korasoff’s suggestion, 
Julien looked only at her hands. They were trembling. Although this discovery bothered him 
more than he could have said, he was still pleased to seem simply fatigued. 
Monsieur de La Mole spoke very highly of him. The marquise spoke to him, immediately 
thereafter, remarking, pleasantly, that he looked tired. Julien kept saying to himself: “I can’t let 
myself stare at Mademoiselle de La Mole, though I mustn’t seem to be avoiding her glance. I 
need to really look just as I did a week before my misfortune....” He had reason to believe he’d 
been successful, and went into the drawing room after dinner. Attentive for the first time to 
the mistress of the house, he devoted himself to speaking to the other men and to keeping the 
conversation moving along. 
His  politeness  was  rewarded:  at  eight  o’clock,  Madame  de  Fervaques  was  announced. 
Julien  slipped  away  and  soon  returned,  dressed  with  the  greatest  care.  Madame  de  La  Mole 
was  profoundly  grateful,  observing  that  he’d  shown  her  guest  such  respect,  and,  wishing  to 
testify to her pleasure, began to speak to Madame de Fervaques about his trip. Julien took a 
position near the marshall’s widow, making sure that, from where he was, it was impossible for 
Mathilde  to  see  his  eyes.  So  situated,  and  obeying  all  the  rules  of  the  game,  Madame  de 
Fervaques  was  able  to  furnish  him  with  a source  of  dazzled  admiration.  He  expressed  these 
sentiments in a speech, drawn from the opening paragraph of the first of the fifty-three letters, 
generously presented to him by Prince Korasoff. 
The  marshall’s  widow  had  declared  her  intention  of  going  to  the  opera  buffa.  Julien 
hurried over, and found the Chevalier de Beauvoisis, who conducted him to a box set aside for 
the king’s gentlemen-in-waiting, which was next to Madame de Fervaques’s private box. Julien 
never took his eyes off her. “I need,” he said to himself, when he left, “to begin a siege journal; 
otherwise I’ll forget my onslaughts.” He compelled himself to write two or three pages on this 
boring  topic,  and  thus  very  nearly  succeeded―what  a  wonderful  thing!―in  not  thinking  of 
Mademoiselle de La Mole. 
Mathilde  had  almost  forgotten  him  while  he  was  away  on  his  trip.  “He’s  nothing  but  a 
commoner, after all,” she thought. “His name will always remind me of the greatest mistake of 
my life. I need to follow, most faithfully, all those popular notions of wisdom, restraint, and 
honor: a woman has everything to lose, forgetting them.” She finally showed herself ready to 
conclude the arrangements with the Marquis de Croisenois, drafted and ready for a very long 
time. He was wildly happy; it would have thoroughly astonished him, had he been informed 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Five: The Mistress of Virtue 
that what underlay Mademoiselle de La Mole’s changed attitude, which made him so proud, 
was resignation. 
Seeing Julien had altered all her ideas. “Really, he’s my husband,” she said to herself. “If I 
make  a  good-faith  return  to  believing  in  wisdom  and  honor,  obviously  it’s  him  I  ought  to 
marry.” 
She expected Julien to come pleading to her, she expected him to act miserable; she had 
her responses all prepared, because he would surely try to say something to her, as they left 
the table after dinner. He did nothing of the sort. He stayed steadily where he was, not even 
glancing  toward  the  garden―God  only  knows  with  what  painful  effort!  It  would  be  better, 
having our explanations quickly said and done, thought Mademoiselle de La Mole. She went 
into  the  garden,  alone.  Julien  did  not  follow  her.  Mathilde  set  herself  to  walking  near  the 
drawing room windows. She saw him deeply occupied, describing for Madame de Fervaques’s 
benefit the old ruined ch09teaux, crowning the hills along the banks of the Rhine and lending 
them so much character. He was beginning to do not too badly, developing the sentimental, 
picturesque phrases that in certain drawing rooms are called spirited, even witty. 
Prince Korasoff would have been very proud of him, had he happened to be in Paris: the 
evening had gone precisely as he’d predicted. 
He would also have approved of how Julien conducted himself in the days that followed. 
An  intrigue  among  the  members  of  the  hidden  government-behind-the-government 
would soon lead to the award of a number of supreme medals. Madame de Fervaques insisted 
that her great-uncle receive one. The Marquis de La  Mole had made the same claim for his 
father-in-law;  they  began  to  work  together,  and  the  marshall’s  widow  came  to  the  house 
virtually every day. It was she who told Julien that the marquis was to join the government and 
become  a  minister:  the  marquis  had  proposed,  to  the  powers  behind  the  throne,  a  highly 
ingenious plan for eliminating the Constitution, without any fuss, in another three years. 
If Monsieur de La Mole became a minister, it might be  possible for Julien to  become a 
bishop, but for him all these large concerns could be glimpsed only as if through a veil. His 
mind  mostly  perceived  them  vaguely,  at  best,  and  as  it  were  from  a  distance.  His  horrible 
misery, which had turned him into a maniac, made him see all aspects of life in terms of their 
connection  to  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole.  He  had  estimated  that,  after  five  or  six  years  of 
trying, he would get her to love him again. 
His  cold,  distant  mind,  as  we  have  seen,  had  disintegrated  into  a  state  of  utter 
irrationality. Of all the qualities that had distinguished him, once, only a modicum of firmness 
remained. Totally bound, in body, to the plan dictated by Prince Korasoff, he placed himself, 
every night, carefully close to Madame de Fervaques’s armchair, but he could not find a single 
word to say to her. 
The  exertions  he  inflicted  on  himself,  trying  to  make  Mathilde  think  he’d  been  cured, 
absorbed all the strength his soul possessed: he fixed himself near Madame de Fervaques like 
someone  barely  alive.  Even  his  eyes―as  eyes  can,  under  severe  physical  strain―had  lost  all 
their fire. 
Since  Madame  de  La  Mole’s  opinions  neither  were,  nor  ever  had  been,  anything  more 
than a direct reflection of her husband’s―he who was likely to make her a duchess―for the 
past few days she had been praising Julien to the skies. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Chapter Twenty-Six: Love of A Moral Sort 
There also was of course in Adeline 
That calm patrician polish in the address, 
Which ne’er can pass the equinoctial line 
Of anything which Nature would express: 
Just as a Mandarin finds nothing fine, 
At least his manner suffers not to guess 
That anything he views can greatly please. 
―Byron, Don Juan 
“There’s something a bit insane about this whole family’s perspective,” thought Madame 
de  Fervaques.  “They’re  infatuated  with  their  little  priest,  who  understands  nothing  except 
listening―with, it’s true, rather beautiful eyes.” 
For his part, Julien found the lady’s behavior almost a perfect example of patrician calm, 
which  radiates  an  exact  politeness  and,  even  more,  the  impossibility  of  vibrant  emotion.  A 
spontaneous movement, a lack of self-control, would have scandalized Madame de Fervaques 
almost as much as a failure to condescend to one’s inferiors. The least sign of sensitivity would 
have been, in her eyes, like a form of moral drunkenness, which ought to make one blush, and 
would be harmful indeed to what a person of high standing owed herself. Her great happiness 
was to talk about the king’s most recent hunt; her favorite book was Memoirs of the Duke de 
Saint-Simon,1 especially the genealogical parts. 
Julien understood the exact spot where, because of the lighting arrangements, Madame 
de  Fervaques’s  sort  of  beauty  shone  the  most  brilliantly.  He  would  post  himself  there,  in 
advance, but taking considerable pains to face so he could not see Mathilde. Stunned by his 
persistence  in  hiding  from  her,  she  abandoned  the  blue  sofa,  one  day,  and  took  her 
needlework  to  a  small  table  near  the  armchair  beside  which  he  was  posted.  Julien  saw  how 
near she’d come, looking out from under Madame de Fervaques’s hat. Seeing those eyes, which 
held the key to his fate, was initially frightening. But then he wrenched himself out of his usual 
apathy and spoke extremely well. 
He was speaking to Madame de Fervaques, but his only aim was to affect Mathilde’s soul. 
He grew so animated that his conversational partner could no longer understand what he was 
saying. 
That  was  a  positive  development.  If  Julien  had  been  able  to  think  of  rounding  off  his 
success, employing a few quotations from German mysticism, or from high Jesuitical theology, 
he would have elevated himself, in the lady’s eyes, to the ranks of those superior men who, she 
considered, were called upon to regenerate the era. 
“Since he’s displaying such bad taste,” Mademoiselle de La Mole said to herself, “spending 
so much time talking―and with such vigor―to Madame de Fervaques, I won’t listen to him 
anymore.” And she didn’t take in a word he said for the rest of the evening, although the task 
was not an easy one. 
At midnight, when Mathilde was carrying her mother’s candle-holder, while escorting her 
to her room, Madame de La Mole paused, on the staircase, and delivered herself of a full-scale 
panegyric  on  Julien’s  high  merits.  This  put  Mathilde  in  a  foul  mood,  and  she  was  unable  to 
sleep. One idea alone calmed her: “He for whom I feel such contempt can still seem a man of 
high merit, in Madame de Fervaques’s eyes.” 
                                                             
1 The famous memorialist of the court of Louis XIV and the Regency, the Duke de Saint-Simon (1675C1755) 
was greatly preoccupied with questions of rank, etiquette, and genealogy. 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Six: Love of A Moral Sort 
But Julien, who had now taken action, was less miserable. Back in his room, he happened 
to glance at the leather binder Prince Korasoff had given him to hold his gift of fifty-three love 
letters. Julien saw the prince’s annotation, below the first letter: “to be sent a week after you 
first meet her.” 
“I’m  late!”  he  exclaimed  to  himself.  “It’s  been  a  very  long  time  since  I  met  Madame  de 
Fervaques.”  He  quickly  set  to  copying  the  first  letter:  it  was  a  sermon,  full  of  virtuous 
observations, and incredibly boring. He was lucky enough to fall asleep, by the second page. 
Some hours later, he was awakened by bright sunshine. One of the most painful moments 
in his life occurred, every morning, when he woke and was once again aware of his misery. But 
on this day, he completed his copy of the letter, laughing. “Is it really possible,” he was saying 
to  himself,  “that  a  young  man  truly  exists,  capable  of  writing  like  this!”  He  noted  several 
sentences that ran a full nine lines each. At the close of the original, he saw a note, in pencil: 
These letters must be delivered by you: on horseback, wearing a black tie and a blue frock 
coat. You are to hand the letter to the porter, looking as if you felt guilty of something; your 
eyes must be full of profound melancholy. If some maid servant notices you, wipe your eyes, 
rather furtively. Say a few words to the servant. 
Julien faithfully followed his orders. 
“This  is  all  very  bold  of  me,”  Julien  thought  as  he  was  leaving  Madame  de  Fervaques’s 
mansion,  “but  all  the  worse  for  Korasoff.  Imagine  daring  to  write  love  letters  to  such  a 
celebrated prude! I’ll be treated with the utmost contempt, and nothing could please me more. 
And, really, this is the only kind of comedy I care for. Yes: To cover this disgusting creature I 
call me in ridicule, that will please me. If I took myself seriously, I’d commit a crime, just for 
the distraction.” 
For  the  past  month,  Julien’s  most  satisfying  moments  had  been  when  he  brought  his 
horse back to the stable. Korasoff had forbidden him, in the most explicit terms, from using 
any pretext whatever to look at the mistress who’d rejected him. But the clatter of this horse’s 
hooves, a sound that she knew so well, and the way Julien rapped his whip  on the door, to 
summon a stable hand, sometimes brought Mathilde to stand behind her window curtain. The 
chiffon was so thin he could see right through it. If he held himself just so, he could see her, 
from underneath his riding hat, without having to meet her eyes. “Which means,” he assured 
himself, “that she can’t see my eyes, either, so this doesn’t constitute looking.” 
Madame de Fervaques’s demeanor that night betrayed no sign that, earlier in the day, she 
had  received  the  philosophical-mystical-religious  dissertation  he’d  handed,  with  such  utter 
melancholy,  to  her  porter.  Chance  had  shown  Julien,  the  night  before,  how  he  might  make 
himself eloquent: he arranged his chair so he could see Mathilde’s eyes. And she, for her part, 
rose  from  the  blue  sofa  only  moments  after  Madame  de  Fervaques’s  arrival:  it  was  open 
desertion  of  her  usual  evening  company.  Monsieur  de  Croisenois  seemed  disturbed  by  this 
latest whim; his obvious sorrow eased Julien’s misery of its most painful agonies. 
Such unexpected occurrences made him speak like an angel. And since vanity worms its 
way, even into hearts serving as temples of the most solemn virtue: “Madame de La Mole was 
right,” Madame de Fervaques said to herself as she stepped back into her carriage. “That young 
priest is a man of distinction. It must be that, at first, being in my presence intimidated him. 
And it is true that everyone I meet in that house tends to be frivolous. The only virtue I find 
there is the sort that age brings with it, and which the frosts of growing old have immensely 
assisted. This young man, surely, knows the difference. He writes well, but I strongly suspect 
that the request he made in his letter, that I give him my advice, must really be founded in 
feelings of which he is himself not fully aware. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
“All the same, how often conversions begin this way! What makes me expect good things 
from this one is how differently he writes, compared to the other young men whose letters I’ve 
come  upon.  It’s  impossible  not  to  see  spirituality,  and  deep  seriousness  and  profound 
conviction,  in  this  young  ecclesiastic’s  prose.  He  will  become  a  master  of  sweet  virtue,  like 
Massillon himself.” 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Seven: The Church’s Best Jobs 
Chapter Twenty-Seven: The Church’s Best Jobs 
Service? Talent? Merit? Bah! 
Belong to a clique. 
―Fénelon, Télémaque1 
And so the notion of a bishopric was joined, for the first time, with ideas about Julien, in 
the mind of a woman who, sooner or later, would be bestowing the most powerful, the most 
lucrative posts in the French Church. This honor would scarcely have concerned Julien: just 
then, his mind was not capable of reaching toward anything but his current misery. All things 
intensified it: the view from his room, for example, had become unendurable. When he walked 
upstairs with his candle at night, every piece of furniture, every trifling ornament, seemed to 
him to become vocal and proclaim some new detail of his affliction. 
“Today,”  he  told  himself,  returning  to  his  room  with  a  liveliness  he’d  not  felt  in  a  long 
time,  “I’ve  got  some  compulsory  labor.  Let’s  hope  the  second  letter  will  be  as  boring  as  the 
first.” 
It was worse. The stuff he was copying struck him as so absurd that he began reproducing 
it line by line, without any regard to sense. 
“This  is  even  more  bombastic,”  he  said  to  himself,  “than  the  official  documents  of  the 
Munster Treaty, which my diplomacy professor made me copy out in London.” 
And then, for the first time, he thought of Madame de Fervaques’s letters, the originals of 
which he’d forgotten to return to that sober Spaniard, Don Diego Bustos. He hunted them up; 
they were in fact virtually as obscure and rambling as those of the young Russian nobleman. 
They possessed a perfect vagueness, wishing to say everything, and saying nothing. “This is the 
Aeolian  harp  of  style,”  Julien  thought.  “Set  among  the  highest  thoughts  of  nothingness,  of 
death, of infinity, etc., the only real thing I see is a horrible fear of appearing ridiculous.” 
The monologue we have just summarized was repeated over and over, for the following 
two  weeks.  Falling  asleep  while  copying  a  kind  of  commentary  on  the  Apocalypse;  the  next 
day, going to deliver a letter, with the prescribed melancholic mien; bringing his horse back to 
the  stable,  and  hoping  to  catch  a  glimpse  of  Mathilde’s  dress;  attending  the  opera,  that 
evening,  when  Madame  de  Fervaques  did  not  visit  the  de  La  Mole  house:  these  events 
comprised  the  monotonous  moments  of  Julien’s  life.  Things  were  more  interesting  when 
Madame de Fervaques visited Madame de La Mole: he could catch glimpses of Mathilde’s eyes, 
under  cover  of  the  brim  of  Madame  de  Fervaques’s  hat,  and  then  he  spoke  eloquently.  His 
picturesque and sentimental language began to take on more striking and more elegant forms. 
He realized that, to Mathilde, he was speaking absurdities, but he was anxious to impress 
her  with  the  elegance  of  his  diction.  “The  more  falsehoods  I  speak,  the  more  pleased  she 
should be,” Julien thought. And then, with frightful boldness, he heightened and exaggerated 
certain  aspects  of  physical  nature.  It  had  not  taken  him  long  to  understand  that,  to  keep 
Madame  de  Fervaques  from  thinking  him  vulgar,  it  was  necessary  above  all  other  things  to 
                                                             
1 Fran04ois de Salignac de la Mothe-Fénelon (1651C1715) was a clergyman and writer of mystical tendencies 
who took a great interest in education. A protégé of Madame de Maintenon, Fénelon in 1699 wrote Télémaque 
as  an  instructive  parable  for  the  Duke  de  Bourgogne,  grandson  of  Louis  XIV  and  heir  presumptive  to  the 
throne; he would predecease the old king, and his son would become Louis XV at the age of five. Télémaque, 
or Telemachus, was the son of Odysseus; in Fénelon’s tale, he makes a voyage in search of his long-lost father 
in the company of his tutor, Mentor. The lessons young Telemachus learns from his travels and from Mentor 
are  intended  as  a  model  of  governance  and  conduct  for  the  future  king.  Télémaque  was  intended  and 
understood as a critique of the reign of Louis XIV, and Fénelon was banished from court in 1699. The quote 
given cannot be found or imagined in Fénélon’s work. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
avoid  simple,  rational  ideas.  He  maintained  that  standard,  shortening  the  amplifications  he 
would give to these notions, depending on the successful or the indifferent reactions he could 
observe in the great ladies he was trying to please. 
On  the  whole,  his  life  was  less  horrible  than  when  he  had  passed  his  days  in  purely 
passive misery. 
“But,” he said to himself one night, “here I am, copying out the fifteenth of these awful 
disquisitions.  The  first  fourteen  have  been  faithfully  delivered  to  Madame  de  Fervaques’s 
doorman. I’ll achieve the high honor of filling all the storage slots in her desk. And still, she 
treats me exactly as if I had never written a word! Where will all of this end? Is my persistence 
as boring to her as it is to me? It must be said, surely, that this Russian, Korasoff’s friend, was a 
dreadful man in his day: there has never been anyone more deadly dull.” 
Like  all  mediocre  men,  placed  by  chance  amid  the  maneuvers  of  some  great  general, 
Julien understood nothing of the young Russian’s attack on the lovely English Quakeress. The 
only purpose of the first forty letters had been to excuse his boldness in daring to writing at all. 
It  had  been  necessary  to  create,  in  this  sweet  young  woman  (who  may  well  have  become 
infinitely  bored),  the  habit  of  receiving  letters  just  a  little  less  insipid,  perhaps,  than  her 
everyday existence. 
One  morning,  a  letter  came  for  Julien.  He  recognized  Madame  de  Fervaques’s  coat  of 
arms, and broke the seal with a speed that, only a few days earlier, would have seemed to him 
impossible. It was simply an invitation to dinner. On such points, where he ought to have been 
clear  and  direct,  the  young  Russian  had  been  as  casual  as  Claude  Dorat,  legendarily  remiss: 
Julien was unable to calculate exactly what moral stance he was supposed to assume at this 
dinner. 
The  drawing  room  was  the  ultimate  in  magnificence,  gilded  like  the  great  Galleries  of 
Diana,  at  the  Tuileries,  and  with  large,  descriptive  oil  paintings  hung  on  the  paneled  walls. 
These canvases bore oddly placed clear spots. Julien learned, later, that the lady of the house, 
thinking the paintings a bit indecent, had had certain portions blotted out. “This moral age!” 
he thought. 
He noted the presence of three people who had helped prepare the secret note. One of 
them, the Bishop of ―――, Madame de Fervaques’s uncle, was in charge of placing priests in 
parishes and, it was said, would deny his niece nothing. “What an immense step I’ve taken,” 
Julien  said  to  himself,  with  a  melancholy  smile,  “and  how  little  it  means  to  me!  Here  I  am, 
dining with the famous Bishop of ―――.” 
The dinner was mediocre; the conversation irritating. “It’s a bad book’s table of contents,” 
Julien thought. “They proudly tackle all the important themes of human thought. But after you 
listen for three minutes, you have to ask yourself which stands out more clearly, the speaker’s 
sheer bombast or his abominable ignorance.” 
The  reader  has  surely  forgotten  that  minor  man  of  letters,  Tanbeau  by  name,  the 
academician’s  nephew,  and  a  professor-to-be:  he  seemed  actively  employed,  here,  in  vulgar 
slander aimed at the de La Mole drawing room. 
It was this little fellow who first gave Julien the idea that, in spite of not having answered 
his  letters,  Madame  de  Fervaques  might  well  look  favorably  on  the  sentiment  that  had  led 
them  to  be  written.  Monsieur  Tanbeau’s  black  heart  was  torn  apart,  contemplating  Julien’s 
success. “But  on the other hand,” the diminutive future professor said to himself, “neither a 
worthy  man  nor  a  fool  can  manage  to  be  in  two  places  at  the  same  time.  If  Sorel  should 
become the sublime Fervaques’s lover, she’ll get him well placed in the Church, and then I’ll be 
rid of him in the de La Mole drawing room.” 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Eight: Manon Lescaut289F 
Father Pirard, too, delivered himself of long sermons, admonishing Julien for his success 
at this dinner. There was sectarian jealousy, as between the austere Jansenist and the Jesuitical 
drawing room, reactionary and monarchical, of Marshall de Fervaques’s virtuous widow. 
Chapter Twenty-Eight: Manon Lescaut2 
Now, once he was thoroughly convinced of the priest’s ignorant stupidity, he usually managed quite well by 
calling black whatever was white, and white whatever was black. 
―Lichtenberg 3 
His  Russian  instructions  prescribed,  imperiously,  that  the  woman  to  whom  he  was 
writing should never be conversationally contradicted. Under no pretext whatever was he to 
set aside his role of ecstatic admirer. Every one of the letters began with this assumption. 
One evening, at the opera, in Madame de Fervaques’s box, Julien was praising to the skies 
the  ballet  Manon  Lescaut.4  His  only  reason  for  such  praise  was  that  he  himself  thought  it 
trivial. 
Madame de Fervaques observed that the ballet was much inferior to the novel of the same 
name, by Abbé Prévost, on which it was based. 
“Ha!” thought Julien, surprised and amused. “A woman of such soaring virtue praising a 
novel!”  Madame  de  Fervaques  regularly  testified,  two  or  three  times  a  week,  to  her  utter 
contempt  for  writers  who,  by  means  of  such  low  works,5  sought  to  corrupt  young  people―
alas, only too inclined to sensual error. 
“Among  the  books  in  this  immoral  and  dangerous  category,”  Madame  de  Fervaques 
continued, “it is said that Manon Lescaut occupies a very high place. The weaknesses and well-
deserved anguish of an assuredly guilty heart, it is said, are there drawn with a truthfulness 
that  attains  to  profundity―which  did  not  keep  your  Bonaparte  from  proclaiming,  at  Saint-
Helena, that it was a novel written for servants.” 
This observation restored full vigor to Julien’s soul. “Someone has been trying to ruin me 
with  Madame  de  Fervaques.  She’s  been  told  of  my  enthusiasm  for  Napoleon.  It  annoys  her 
enough so she’s willing to give in and show me her annoyance.” The realization amused him, 
all night long, and made him entertaining. As he was taking leave of her, in the opera lobby: 
“Remember, sir,” she told him, “that people who love me cannot also love Bonaparte. The most 
I can allow is that they accept him as a necessity imposed by Providence. In any case, the man 
lacked a soul sufficiently flexible for appreciating artistic masterpieces.” 
“People  who  love  me!”  Julien  was  repeating.  “Either  that  means  nothing,  or  it  means 
everything.  Here  are  the  secrets  of  language,  unavailable  to  us  poor  provincials.”  And  as  he 
copied  out  an  immense  letter,  meant  for  the  marshall’s  widow,  he  spent  much  of  the  time 
thinking about Madame de Rênal. 
“How does it happen,” Madame de Fervaques asked him the next day, with an assumed 
indifference he thought unconvincing, “that you mention ‘London’ and ‘Richmond’ in a letter 
you wrote me, I suspect, after leaving the opera?” 
                                                             
2 The tragic heroine of the abbé Prévost’s 1765 novel of the same name (see note for p. 297, l. 33). Manon Lescaut 
tells the story of the doomed love of the prostitute Manon and the Chevalier des Grieux. 
3 Georg Christoph Lichtenberg (1743C99), a German physicist and author of sharp satires of metaphysical and 
Romantic writings he found excessive. 
4 A ballet-opera by Halévy and Scribe that debuted in 1830. 
5 In the early nineteenth century, novels were still considered immoral and artistically inferior by political and 
literary conservatives. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Julien  was  deeply  embarrassed.  He  had  been  copying  line  by  line,  without  paying 
attention  to  what  he  was  writing,  and  apparently  had  forgotten  to  substitute  “Paris”  and 
“Saint-Cloud” for the original’s “London” and “Richmond.” He began an explanation, and then 
another, but could not finish either; he felt like laughing wildly. At last, hunting for something 
to say, he arrived at this idea: “Exalted by so sublime a discussion, dealing with the greatest 
concerns  of  the  human  soul,  my  own  soul,  while  I  was  writing  to  you,  might  have  suffered 
some distraction.” 
“I’m  making  an  impression,”  he  told  himself,  “so  for  the  rest  of  the  night  I  can  spare 
myself any more boredom.” He hurriedly left the de Fervaques mansion. Later, looking at the 
letter he’d been copying, the night before, he quickly spotted the fatal place where the young 
Russian spoke of London and Richmond. Rereading the letter, Julien was astonished to find it 
almost tender. 
It  was  the  contrast  between  the  surface  frivolity  of  his  conversation,  and  the  letters’ 
profound, almost apocalyptic sublimity, that made him stand out. The length of his sentences, 
above  all,  pleased  the  marshall’s  widow:  this  was  not  the  hopping  and  jumping  style  made 
fashionable  by  Voltaire,  that  terribly  immoral  man!  Although  our  hero  did  everything  he 
could,  striving  to  eliminate  any  good  sense  from  his  conversation,  it  still  struck  notes  of 
antimonarchism and impiety, nor did that escape Madame de Fervaques’s notice. Surrounded 
as she was by eminently moral people, who often passed an entire evening without having a 
single  idea,  the  lady  was  deeply  impressed  by  something  that  seemed  novel,  though  at  the 
same  time  she  considered  it  her  duty  to  herself  to  be  offended.  She  termed  these  radical 
notions a lack of judgment, bearing the stamp of the era’s frivolity. 
But frequenting drawing rooms like hers is only useful when there’s something you want 
to ask for. The boredom of that meaningless life, as Julien was living it, is surely shared by the 
reader. These are the barren moors and heaths of our journey. 
During the time carved out of Julien’s life by Madame de Fervaques, Mademoiselle de La 
Mole had to try not thinking of him. There was a violent struggle in her soul: sometimes she 
was  proud  of  despising  someone  so  woebegone,  but  in  spite  of  herself  she  found  his 
conversation  captivating.  What  especially  amazed  her  was  its  perfect  falsity:  every  word  he 
said to Madame de Fervaques was either a lie or, at least, a horrific camouflaging of his real 
thought, with which, on virtually every subject imaginable, Mathilde was completely familiar. 
She found this Machiavellianism striking. “What depth!” she told herself. “How different from 
the grandiloquent simpletons, or the vulgar rascals who, like Monsieur Tanbeau, use exactly 
the same language!” 
Nevertheless, Julien experienced some frightful days. His daily appearances in Madame de 
Fervaques’s drawing room were dedicated to duties of the most painful sort. His role-playing 
labors  sucked  all  the  strength  from  his  soul.  Often,  at  night,  walking  across  her  huge 
courtyard, only the force of willpower and rationality held him, but just barely, above the pit of 
despair. 
“I conquered despair at the seminary,” he told himself. “And yet what ghastly things lay in 
front of me, back then! I’d either make my fortune, or I wouldn’t, and in either case I expected 
to spend the rest of my life, most intimately, in company with those who seemed to me the 
most  untrustworthy  and  disgusting  in  the  world.  The  next  spring,  only  eleven  brief  months 
later, I may have been the happiest young person of this entire era.” 
But all too often, these fine arguments were useless, in the face of horrid realities. Every 
day, at lunch and at dinner, he saw Mathilde. After he’d composed uncountable numbers of 
letters  for  Monsieur  de  La  Mole,  he  thought  how  she  was  soon  to  marry  Monsieur  de 
 
 
Chapter Twenty-Nine: Boredom 
Croisenois. That pleasant  young man was  already appearing, twice a  day, at the de La Mole 
residence: the jealous eye of a rejected lover did not overlook a single one of his visits. 
When he’d seen Mademoiselle de La Mole treating her future husband particularly well, 
Julien would return to his room, unable to keep from loving glances at his pistols. 
“Ah!  How  much  smarter  it would  be,”  he  said  to  himself,  “to  cut  the  identifying  marks 
from my clothes and go to some lonely forest, thirty miles from Paris, and end this wretched 
life!  No  one  would  know  me,  there;  my  death  would  be  a  secret  for  two  weeks―and  who 
would ever think of me, after two weeks!” 
This  was  eminently  good  thinking.  Yet  the  next  day,  a  glimpse  of  Mathilde’s  arm, 
displayed between the sleeve of her dress and her glove, was all it took to plunge our young 
philosopher  into  cruel  recollection,  which  all  the  same  linked  him,  once  again,  to  life.  “All 
right!” he then said to himself. “I’ll pursue this Russian diplomacy till it finishes. How will it 
end? 
“As far as Madame de Fervaques is concerned, once I’ve copied out the fifty-third letter, I 
certainly won’t be writing any more. 
“As for Mathilde, these six weeks of exceedingly painful comedy will produce no change 
in  her  anger,  or  else  they’ll  bring  me  a  moment  of  reconciliation.  Good  Lord!  I’d  die  of 
happiness!” And then he had to stop thinking. 
After a long reverie, once more he was able to pick up the thread of his thought: “So,” he 
told  himself,  “I’ll  win  one  day  of  happiness,  after  which  her  harshness  will  start  all  over, 
founded as it is, alas! in how little ability I have to please her, and then I’ll have nothing to turn 
to, I’ll be destroyed, perhaps forever.... 
“With a character like hers, how could she give me guarantees? Alas, the only answer is 
that I wouldn’t be worth it. My manners will still lack proper elegance, my speech will still be 
heavy and monotonous. My God! Why am I me?” 
Chapter Twenty-Nine: Boredom 
Sacrificing yourself to your passions, fine. But to nonexistent passions? O sad nineteenth century! 
―Girodet 6 
Having read the first of Julien’s long letters without pleasure, Madame de Fervaques now 
began to find them interesting. But there was something making her unhappy: “What a shame 
that Monsieur Sorel is not determined to be a priest! He could then be admitted to a certain 
intimacy.  But  wearing  that medal,  and  with  his  virtually  bourgeois  clothing,  cruel  questions 
might be asked―and how could they be answered?” Her mind did not carry that question any 
further.  “Some  wicked  friend  might  imagine  things,  and  even  spread  a  rumor  that  he  was  a 
minor relation, from my father’s family, a businessman who got the medal for service in the 
National Guard.” 
Until  she’d  met  Julien,  Madame  de  Fervaques’s  greatest  pleasure  had  been  to  write 
Marshall Fervaques’s widow next to her name. But after Julien’s appearance, a social climber’s 
vanity, morbid and quick to take offense, struggled with growing interest. 
“It  would  be  easy  enough,”  she  told  herself,  “to  have  him  made  vicar-general  of  some 
diocese  near  Paris!  But  plain  Monsieur  Sorel,  still  employed  as  Monsieur  de  La  Mole’s  little 
secretary! That is distressing.” 
                                                             
6 Anne-Louis Girodet de Roucy, known as Girodet-Trioson (1767C1824), is more famous for his painting than 
his writing. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Her soul, afraid of everything, was for the first time stirred by something foreign to her 
social  ambitions  and  social  superiority.  The  old  porter  noticed  that,  when  he  brought  her  a 
letter from this handsome young man, whose demeanor was so sorrowful, he was sure to see 
the  disappearance  of  that  distracted,  discontented  air  with  which  his  mistress  always,  and 
most carefully, greeted her servants. 
The weariness of  living a life completely  dependent on public performance, without, at 
bottom,  taking  any  real  joy  in  such  success,  had  become  so  intolerable,  since  she’d  begun 
thinking about Julien, that it was enough to keep her chambermaids from being mistreated, 
the  entire  day,  if  she’d  spent  a  single  hour,  the  night  before,  with  this  odd  young  man.  His 
standing,  constantly  increasing,  withstood  some  extremely  well-written  anonymous  letters. 
Little Monsieur Tanbeau worked hard, and in vain, supplying Messieurs de Luz, de Croisenois, 
and de Caylus with two or three very clever slanders, which these gentlemen took pleasure in 
amplifying, though not so wildly as to cast doubt on the reliability of their accusations. The 
marshall’s widow, whose mind was not capable of withstanding such vulgar onslaughts, would 
tell Mathilde her doubts, and was always reassured. 
One  day,  after  having  three  times  asked  whether  any  letters  had  come,  Madame  de 
Fervaques  suddenly  decided  to  reply  to  Julien.  This  victory  was  attributable  to  boredom.  By 
the  second  word,  the  marshall’s  widow  was  almost  brought  to  a  halt  by  the  indelicacy  of 
having  to  write,  in  her  own  hand,  an  address  so  vulgar  as  To  Monsieur  Sorel,  in  care  of  the 
Marquis de La Mole. 
“It  will  be  necessary,”  she  said  to  Julien  that  evening,  very  wryly,  “for  you  to  bring  me 
some envelopes bearing your address.” 
“And  thus,”  thought  Julien,  “I’ve  been  made  a  footman-lover,”  and  he  bowed,  taking  a 
certain pleasure in making himself look like old Arsène, the marquis’s manservant. 
He brought the envelopes that same evening, and the next day, very early indeed, he had 
a third letter from her. He read five or six lines at the beginning, and two or three toward the 
end. She’d written four pages, in an extremely small hand, squeezed very tight. 
Gradually, they got into the sweet habit of writing almost every day. Julien replied with 
exact copies of the Russian letters and, this being an advantage of grandiloquence, Madame de 
Fervaques was not at all surprised that his responses did not in any way match her letters. 
How tiny Tanbeau’s pride would have suffered, having constituted himself an unpaid spy 
on Julien’s proceedings, had he learned that all her unopened letters were tossed, at random, 
into the drawer of Julien’s desk. 
One morning, her porter came to him, in the library, bringing a letter from Madame de 
Fervaques. Mathilde recognized the man, saw the letter, and noted the address, as written in 
Julien’s hand. She came into the library just as the porter left; the letter was still on the edge of 
the table; Julien, busily writing, had not yet put it in his desk drawer. 
“Now  this  I  cannot  endure,”  cried  Mathilde,  seizing  the  letter.  “You’re  completely 
forgetting me―I, who am your wife. Your behavior is frightful, monsieur.” 
At these words, her pride, stunned by the dreadful indelicacy of her behavior, choked her. 
She dissolved in tears, and soon it seemed to Julien as if she had ceased to breathe. 
Astonished, confused, Julien had very little notion just how excellent, how fortunate, this 
scene was for him. He helped Mathilde to a chair; she virtually surrendered herself to his arms. 
His  first  reaction  to  this  was  extraordinary  joy.  His  second  was  a  thought  derived  from 
Korasoff: “Just one word, and I may be utterly ruined.” 
His arms grew rigid, so painfully difficult was the effort imposed by diplomacy. “I must 
not  even  let  myself  press  this  soft,  lovely  body  to  my  heart,  or  she  will  scorn  me,  she  will 
mistreat me. What a horrible person!” 
 
 
Chapter Thirty: a Box at the Opera 
And as he cursed Mathilde’s character, he loved her a hundred times more. It seemed to 
him he had a queen in his arms. 
Julien’s impassive coldness redoubled the prideful sickness tearing at Mademoiselle de La 
Mole’s heart. She did not possess the calm to try to see from his eyes how, at that moment, he 
actually felt about her. She could not bring herself to look at him, so afraid was she of seeing 
him scornful. 
Seated  on  the  library  couch,  unmoving,  her  head  turned  away  from  Julien,  she  was 
gripped by the sharpest sorrow pride and love can make a human heart feel. What horrible 
behavior she had fallen into! 
“He’s aloof, unfortunate creature that I am! To see the most indecent advances repulsed! 
And repulsed by one of my father’s servants.” 
“This is what I will not endure,” she said loudly. 
And, furious, she pulled open the drawer of Julien’s writing desk, only two feet away. She 
stood  as  if  frozen  in  horror,  seeing  eight  or  ten  unopened  letters,  exactly  like  the  one  the 
porter had just delivered. She recognized Julien’s handwriting, more or less disguised, on all of 
them. 
“So,” she cried, absolutely beside herself, “not only are you in her good graces, but you 
despise her just the same. You, a man who has nothing, you’re contemptuous of Marshall de 
Fervaques’s widow! 
“Ah, forgive me, my dear,” she continued, throwing herself to her knees, “despise me if 
you wish, but love me. I cannot live any longer, deprived of your love.” And she fell at his feet, 
in a faint. 
“And there’s the proud creature, at my feet!” Julien told himself. 
Chapter Thirty: a Box at the Opera 
As the blackest sky 
Foretells the heaviest tempest. 
―Byron, Don Juan 
In the middle of these immense fluctuations, Julien was more astonished than overjoyed. 
Mathilde’s insults had shown him just how wise Russian diplomacy was. “Say little, do little: 
this is, for me, the only road to salvation.” 
He lifted Mathilde and, not saying a word, set her back on the couch. Slowly, gradually, 
she fell into weeping. 
To help restore herself, she picked up Madame de Fervaques’s letters; she slowly opened 
them.  She  started,  nervously  and  markedly,  as  she  recognized  the  handwriting.  She  turned 
over all the pages, without reading them; most were six pages long. 
“At least answer me,” Mathilde said at last, in the most suppliant of voices, not yet daring 
to look at Julien. “You know very well how proud I am: it’s the sickness of my position, and 
even of my character. I admit it. So Madame de Fervaques has stolen your heart from me...Has 
she made the same sacrifices for you, as this fatal love swept me into doing?” 
A mournful silence was Julien’s only reply. “By what right,” he thought, “does she ask of 
me such a dishonorable indiscretion, unworthy of any honest man?” 
Mathilde tried to read the letters; her tear-filled eyes made that impossible. 
She had been miserable for a month, but her haughty heart was far from ready to admit it. 
Chance alone had led to this explosion. In an instant, jealousy and love had swept away pride. 
She was seated on the couch, very near him. He saw her hair and her alabaster neck. In that 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
moment he forgot everything he was supposed to do: he put his arms around her waist and 
pressed her against his chest. 
Slowly, she turned her head toward him. He was surprised by the extraordinary sorrow in 
her eyes; he could scarcely recognize her. 
Julien  felt  his  strength  leaving  him,  so  mortally  painful  was  the  courageous  act  he 
imposed on himself. 
“Soon,” he said to himself, “these eyes will express nothing but cold disdain, if I let the 
happiness  of  loving  her  carry  me  away.”  Meanwhile,  her  voice  weak,  and  in  words  she  was 
barely able to articulate, in this moment of reassurance she repeated her regret for everything 
her excessive pride had led her to do. 
“I, too, am proud,” Julien told her, his voice muffled, his face exhibiting the signs of utter 
prostration. 
Mathilde  turned  quickly  toward  him.  Hearing  his  voice  was  a  joy  for  which  she  had 
almost given up hope. At that moment, all she could remember of her arrogance were curses 
directed  at  it.  She  wished  she  could  think  of  some  extraordinary  behavior,  something  truly 
incredible,  to  show  him  how  much  she  adored  him  and,  simultaneously,  how  much  she 
detested herself. 
“It is probably because of your pride,” Julien went on, “that you briefly honored me. It is 
surely because of that courageous resolve, worthy of a  man, that right now you respect me. 
Perhaps I am in love with Madame de Fervaques....” 
Mathilde  shook;  her  eyes  suddenly  looked  very  strange.  She  had  heard  her  sentence 
pronounced. None of this escaped Julien; he felt his courage ebbing. 
“Ah,” he said to himself, hearing the empty words his mouth had pronounced, as if he had 
been emitting strange noises, “if I could cover those pale cheeks with kisses, and you never felt 
them!” 
“I may be in love with Madame de Fervaques,” he continued...and his voice grew steadily 
weaker, “but then, I have as yet no decisive proof of her interest in me.” 
Mathilde looked at him. He did not waver―at least, he hoped his face had not betrayed 
him. He felt love penetrating to the most intimate depths of his heart. He had never so adored 
her;  he  was  almost  as  crazed  as  Mathilde.  Had  she  found  the  calm,  and  the  courage,  to 
maneuver her way through the situation, he would have fallen at her feet, disavowing all this 
empty  comedy.  He  had  just  enough  strength  to  go  on  talking.  “Ah,  Korasoff!”  he  exclaimed 
inwardly,  “why  aren’t  you  here!  How  desperately  I  need  a  word  to  guide  me!”  As  he  was 
thinking this, his voice was saying: 
“Lacking  any  other  sentiment,  gratitude  would  be  sufficient  to  tie  me  to  Madame  de 
Fervaques. She has been indulgent; she has comforted me when people have been scornful. I 
cannot put unlimited faith in certain appearances, doubtless extremely flattering, but perhaps, 
just as likely, of no great durability.” 
“Oh, Good Lord!” cried Mathilde. 
“So!  What  guarantee  can  I  expect  from  you?”  Julien  resumed,  his  voice  now  firm  and 
lively,  apparently  abandoning,  for  a  moment,  the  cautious  forms  of  diplomacy.  “What 
guarantee? What God will tell me that the stance you appear to be taking toward me, right 
now, will last more than two days?” 
“The intensity of my love and of my misery, if you no longer love me,” she said, taking his 
hands and turning toward him. 
The sudden movement had slightly displaced her neck scarf: Julien could see her lovely 
shoulders. Her faintly disordered hair brought back delicious memories. 
 
 
Chapter Thirty: a Box at the Opera 
He was going to yield. “One careless word,” he told himself, “and I go back to that long 
sequence  of  days  spent  in  despair.”  Madame  de  Rênal  found  reasons  to  do  what  her  heart 
dictated.  This  young  girl  of  the  highest  society  let  her  heart  be  moved  only  when,  for  good 
reasons, she felt she ought to be moved. 
He glimpsed this truth, in the twinkling of an eye, and in another instant rediscovered his 
courage. 
He  withdrew  the  hands  Mathilde  had  been  pressing  in  hers,  and  with  marked  respect 
moved  a  bit  away  from  her.  A  man’s  courage  can  go  no  further.  Then  he  busied  himself, 
gathering  up  all  of  Madame  de  Fervaques’s  letters,  which  had  been  scattered  on  the  couch, 
doing  all  this  with  a  politeness  quite  extraordinary―and,  as  he  then  added,  a  politeness 
savagely cruel: 
“If Mademoiselle de La Mole will be so good as to permit me to reflect on these matters.” 
He moved quickly away and left the library. She heard him closing all the doors, one after the 
other. 
“The monster isn’t a bit disturbed,” she said to herself.... 
“But what am I saying: monster! He’s wise, cautious, good. It’s I who am wrong, wronger 
than anyone could possibly imagine.” 
This  view  of  things  lasted.  That  day,  Mathilde  was  almost  happy,  because  she  was 
completely  in  love.  You  might  have  said  this  was  a  heart  that  had  never  been  moved  by 
pride―and by what pride! 
She  shivered  with  horror  when,  in  the  dining  room  that  night,  a  servant  announced 
Madame de Fervaques: the very sound of the man’s voice seemed to her sinister. She could not 
endure  seeing  the  marshall’s  widow,  and  hurriedly  left.  Julien,  not  particularly  proud  of  his 
painful victory, had been afraid his own appearance might betray him, and had not dined with 
the family. 
His love and his happiness grew rapidly, the more distant became the time of the battle; 
he had already begun to criticize himself. “How could I have resisted her?” he asked himself. 
“What if she won’t ever love me anymore? One instant can change that haughty heart, and it 
must be plain that I treated her abominably.” 
That evening, he felt he absolutely had to appear in Madame de Fervaques’s box at the 
opera. She had expressly invited him, and Mathilde would certainly learn if he’d been there or 
if,  impolitely,  he  had  stayed  away.  It  was  persuasive  reasoning,  but  he  did  not  have  the 
strength,  when  the  hour  came  and  the  drawing  rooms  were  opening  their  doors,  to  plunge 
into society. Just by talking, he’d lose half his happiness. 
Ten o’clock sounded: he absolutely had to be there. 
Luckily, he found Madame de Fervaques’s box full of women, and was relegated to a place 
near  the  door,  completely  obscured  by  the  ladies’  hats.  This  position  saved  him  from 
embarrassment: the divine sounds of Caroline’s despair, in Il Matrimonio segreto,7 made him 
dissolve in tears. Madame de Fervaques saw the tears; they were in such sharp contrast to his 
usual  masculine  steadiness  that  the  heart  of  this  great  lady,  so  long  steeped  in  all  the  most 
corroding effects of social-climber pride, was moved. What little remained in her of a woman’s 
heart led her to speak to him. At that moment, she wanted the pleasure of hearing his voice. 
“Have  you  seen  the  de  La  Mole  ladies?”  she  asked  him.  “They’re  on  the  third  level, 
tonight.” Julien immediately bent forward, leaning rather impolitely on the front of the box. 
He saw Mathilde; her eyes were shining with tears. 
“But it isn’t their night for the opera,” Julien thought. “What eagerness!” 
                                                             
7 Opera by Domenico Cimarosa (see note for p. 341, l. 3); Stendhal’s favorite opera. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Mathilde had talked her mother into coming, in spite of the unsuitability of the box that 
an  amiable  patron  had  been  urged  to  offer  them.  She  wanted  to  see  if  Julien  would  indeed 
spend the evening with Madame de Fervaques. 
Chapter Thirty-One: Make her afraid 
So there’s your civilization’s fine miracle! You’ve turned love into something ordinary. 
―Barnave 
Julien hurried off to Madame de La Mole’s box. The first thing he saw was Mathilde’s tear-
filled eyes. She wept without restraint: the other people in the box were of no consequence, 
being  only  the  woman  who  had  lent  them  the  box  and  some  others  the  woman  knew. 
Mathilde  set  her  hand  on  Julien’s;  she  had  apparently  lost  all  fear  of  her  mother.  Nearly 
suffocated by her tears, she said only one word to him: “Guarantees!” 
“At  least,  let  me  say  nothing  to  her,”  Julien  told  himself,  deeply  moved,  and  hiding  his 
eyes, as well as he could, behind his hand, as if to shield them from the glare of the chandelier, 
which, on the third level, shone directly into the box. “If I speak, she can’t help but know how 
strongly I feel. The sound of my voice would betray me. And, once again, everything would be 
ruined.” 
His struggles were more painful than they had been that morning; his heart had had time 
to be roused. He was afraid of seeing Mathilde’s vanity awakened. Drunk with love and sensual 
ecstasy, he forced himself to say nothing. 
As  far  as  I’m concerned,  reader,  this  is  one  of  the  finest  traits  of  his  character.  Anyone 
capable  of  compelling  himself  to  make  such  an  effort  can  go  far―  si  fata  sinat,  if  the  fates 
grant it. 
Mademoiselle de La Mole insisted on taking Julien back with them. Luckily, it was raining 
hard. But the marquise put  him across from her, spoke  to him without stopping, and made 
sure he could not say a word to her daughter. It might have seemed she was showing concern 
for Julien’s happiness, but no longer fearful he would ruin everything by showing how deeply 
he’d been moved, he readily surrendered himself. 
Do I dare say that, returning to his room, Julien threw himself on his knees and covered 
Prince Korasoff’s gift of love letters with kisses? 
“Oh, great man! How could I have doubted you?” he silently exclaimed, in his madness. 
Gradually, his calm came back. He compared himself to a general who had just half won a 
great battle. “My advantage is clear, it’s immense,” he said to himself. “But what will happen 
tomorrow? One moment can destroy everything.” 
With  a  passionate  gesture,  he  opened  Montholon’s  Memories  of  Napoleon  on  Saint-
Helena,8 and for two long hours forced himself to read: only his eyes were really reading, but 
that made no difference, he kept them at it. All during this strange sort of reading, both his 
head and his heart, climbing as high as they could go, worked without his being at all aware. 
“This woman’s heart is certainly different from Madame de Rênal’s,” he said to himself, but he 
let his mind go no further. 
“Make  her  afraid!”  he  suddenly  cried,  tossing  his  book  away.  “The  enemy  will  obey  me 
only if I make him afraid. And then there’ll be no more contempt shown me.” 
He paced up and down his little room, drunk with joy. Truthfully, there was more pride in 
this happiness than there was love. 
                                                             
8 As dictated to the Comte de Montholon, who published them in 1822C25. 
 
 
Chapter Thirty-One: Make her afraid 
“Make  her  afraid!”  he  kept  repeating  proudly,  and  he  had  reason  to  be  proud.  Even  in 
their  happiest  moments,  Madame  de  Rênal  had  always  doubted  that  his  love  equaled  hers. 
“I’m subduing a demon, here, which must be subdued.” 
He knew very well that, at eight the next morning, Mathilde would be at the library; he 
did not come until nine, burning with love, but his head in charge of his heart. Virtually every 
single  minute  he  repeated  to  himself:  “Always  compel  her  to  deal  with  this  immense 
uncertainty:  ’Does  he  love  me?’  Her  brilliant  social  position,  the  perpetual  flattery  from 
everyone she talks to, make her a bit over confident.” 
She was pale, calm; she was sitting on the couch, but seemed unable to move from that 
position. She held out her hand: 
“My love, I’ve offended you, I know I have. Might you be angry at me?...” 
Julien was not prepared for this plain, direct approach. He was about to betray himself. 
“You  want  guarantees,  my  dear,”  she  added,  after  a  silence  she  had  hoped  would  be 
broken. “That’s fair. Carry me off; let’s go to London...I’ll be ruined forever, dishonored....” She 
managed to take her hand from Julien’s and set it over her eyes. All her modesty, her sense of 
feminine virtue, flooded back into her heart...”All right, dishonor me,” she said at last, sighing. 
“That’s a guarantee.” 
“I  was  happy,  yesterday,”  Julien  thought,  “because  I  had  the  courage  to  be  hard  on 
myself.” After a short interval of silence, he took enough control of his heart to say, his voice 
exceedingly cold: 
“Once we’re en route to London, once you’ve been dishonored―as you phrase it―who’s 
to say you’ll still love me? Will my presence in the mail coach still seem important to you? I’m 
not  a  monster:  having  your  reputation  destroyed  would  be  nothing  more  than  another 
wretchedness.  Neither  your  rank,  nor  your  position  in  society,  creates  the  obstacle,  but―
unfortunately―your own character. Can you tell yourself: in a week, you’ll still love me?” 
(“Ah,  if  she  loves  me  for  a  week,  just  a  week,”  Julien  murmured  to  himself,  “I’ll  die  of 
happiness.  Who  cares  about  the  future?  Who  cares  about  life  or  death?  And  that  divine 
happiness could begin right at this moment, if I want it to. It all depends on me!”) 
Mathilde looked at him, thoughtfully. 
“So I’m completely unworthy of you,” she said, taking his hand once more. 
Julien embraced her, but duty’s iron hand immediately seized his heart. “If she sees how I 
adore her, I lose her.” Even before stepping away from her arms, he had resumed a man’s full 
and fitting dignity. 
That  day,  and  those  which  followed  it,  he  managed  to  conceal  his  immense  happiness. 
There were moments when he refused even the pleasure of holding her in his arms. 
At other moments, the delirium of happiness swept away all of caution’s counsels. 
There was an arbor of climbing honeysuckle, meant to hide the gardener’s ladder, near 
which he had taken to placing himself so he could stare from afar at the blinds in Mathilde’s 
window, and weep at her inconstancy. Close by, there was a huge oak, and its trunk had kept 
him from being seen by curious eyes. 
Walking  by  this  spot  with  Mathilde,  and  remembering  so  vividly  the  enormity  of  his 
miseries, the contrast of past despair and present felicity was too strong for him. Tears flooded 
into his eyes and, pressing his lips to his beloved’s hand: “Here is where I lived, thinking of 
you. Here I stood, looking at those blinds, waiting for hours at a time for the blessed moment 
when I could see your hand opening them....” 
His  weakness  was  total.  He  drew  his  portrait  in  true  colors,  none  of  them  merely 
imagined,  depicting  the  state  of  despair  he  had  endured.  A  few  quick  interjections  bore 
witness to his current happiness, which had brought an end to that horrible suffering.... 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
“Good Lord, what am I doing!” Julien said to himself, suddenly recovering his senses. “I’m 
lost.” 
His alarm was so intense that he imagined Mademoiselle de La Mole’s eyes showing, even 
now, less love for him. This was illusory, but Julien’s face rapidly turned color, and he became 
mortally  pale. His eyes lost their brilliance, for an instant, and a haughty expression,  with a 
trace of nastiness, immediately took the place of the truest, most abandoned look of love. 
“What’s wrong, my dear?” asked Mathilde, tenderly concerned. 
“I’m a liar,” Julien said irritably, “and I was lying to you. I reproach myself, and God knows 
I sufficiently respect you not to tell you lies. You love me, you’re devoted to me, and there’s no 
point to making up fine phrases just to please you.” 
“Good God! Are all those ravishing things you’ve been telling  me, the last ten minutes, 
just fine phrases?” 
“And  I  most  sternly  reproached  myself,  my  dear.  I  composed  them,  once,  for  a  woman 
who  loved  me,  who  also  bored  me...It’s  a  defect  in  my  character:  I  openly  accuse  myself. 
Forgive me.” 
Tears were running down Mathilde’s cheeks. 
“Every  time  something  startles  me,  I’m  inevitably  thrown  into  a  fantasy,”  Julien 
continued, “and my ghastly memory―which at the moment I execrate―offers me something 
from its stockpiles, and I take advantage of it.” 
“Have I just stumbled into doing something, all unawares, that displeases you?” Mathilde 
asked, with charming na07veté. 
“I remember, one day, walking by this honeysuckle, you picked a flower and Monsieur de 
Luz took it, and you let him have it. I was two steps away.” 
“Monsieur de Luz? That can’t be,” said Mathilde, with the haughtiness so natural to her. “I 
don’t do such things.” 
“I’m sure you did,” Julien replied, forcefully. 
“Well, then it’s true, my dear,” said Mathilde, sadly lowering her eyes. She’d been positive 
that, for many months, she’d not permitted Monsieur de Luz to do anything of the kind. 
Julien looked at her with inexpressible tenderness: “No,” he told himself. “She does not 
love me less .” 
She  laughingly  teased  him,  that  night,  for  his  interest  in  Madame  de  Fervaques:  “A 
bourgeois in love with a social climber! Those kinds of hearts may be the only ones my Julien 
can’t drive wild. She’s turned you into a real dandy,” she said, playing with his hair. 
While  Mathilde  had  so  totally  scorned  him,  Julien  had  become  one  of  the  best-dressed 
men  in  Paris.  But  he  still  had  an  advantage  over  men  of  that  sort:  once  he  was  dressed,  he 
thought no more about it. 
One thing irritated Mathilde. Julien continued to copy out the Russian letters and send 
them to the marshall’s widow. 
Chapter Thirty-Two: The Tiger 
Alas! Why these things, and not others? 
―Beaumarchais 9 
                                                             
9  Pierre-Auguste  Caron  de  Beaumarchais  (1732C99),  famous  wit,  financier,  and  literary  celebrity  of  the  late 
eighteenth  century.  Beaumarchais  was  best  known  as  the  author  of  two  hugely  successful  comedies,  The 
Barber  of  Seville  and  The  Marriage  of  Figaro.  The  second  was  for  a  time  banned  for  its  perceived 
antiauthoritarian sentiments, which shocked Louis XVI. The hero of these two plays, the witty and slightly 
 
 
Chapter Thirty-Two: The Tiger 
An English traveler tells how he lived on familiar terms with a tiger: he had raised it, and 
he stroked it, but on his table he always kept a fully loaded pistol. 
Julien surrendered himself to the heights of happiness only when Mathilde could not see 
the  expression  in  his  eyes. He  did  his  duty  with  dedication,  from  time  to  time  saying  harsh 
things to her. 
Any  time  Mathilde’s  gentle  sweetness,  which  he  watched,  astonished,  and  his  suddenly 
swelling  devotion  came  close  to  making  him  lose  control,  he  had  the  courage  to  brusquely 
turn away and leave her. 
It was the first time Mathilde had ever been in love. 
Life had always dragged along, for her, at a tortoiselike pace; now, it flew. 
But since her pride had to somehow manifest itself, she tried to fearlessly expose herself 
to all the risks her love could create. Julien was the cautious one, and only when risks were 
involved would she refuse to let him make the decisions. Submissive and even humble as she 
was with him, she was even haughtier with everyone who came near her, whether family or 
servants. 
In the evening, in the drawing room, surrounded by  sixty people, she would call Julien 
over to talk to him alone, and for extended periods. 
Little Tanbeau having come and seated himself beside her, one day, she asked him to go 
hunt for her, in the library, the book by Smollett10 in which he discusses the British Revolution 
of 1688. When he hesitated: “Don’t rush yourself,” she added, with an arrogantly insulting look 
that was balm to Julien’s soul. 
“Did you notice the little monster’s face?” he told her. 
“His uncle had ten or twelve years of service, in this drawing room; otherwise I’d get rid of 
him on the spot.” 
Her  conduct  toward  Messieurs  de  Croisenois,  de  Lutz,  etc.,  though  in  form  perfectly 
polite,  was  at  bottom  scarcely  less  provoking.  Mathilde  seriously  reproached  herself,  on 
account  of  the  amatory  confidences  she  had  once  made  to  Julien―even  more  so  because, 
though she did not dare tell him this, she had exaggerated the almost entirely innocent signs 
of interest of which these gentlemen had been the object. 
For all her good resolutions, her womanly pride kept her from ever saying to Julien: “It 
was  talking  to  you:  that’s  why  I  took  such  pleasure,  describing  my  weakness  in  not 
withdrawing, that once, when Monsieur de Croisenois put his hand on a marble table and it 
just barely brushed against mine.” 
Now these gentlemen could barely speak to her for a few moments when, suddenly, she 
simply had to ask Julien a question, and made that an excuse to keep him near her. 
She realized she was pregnant, and joyfully told this to Julien. 
“Can you doubt me, now? Isn’t this a guarantee? I am your wife forever.” 
This news profoundly astonished Julien. He was at the point of forgetting the principles of 
his behavior toward her. “How can I be willingly cold and rude to this poor young girl, who is 
ruining  herself  for  me?”  When  she  seemed  the  least  bit  indisposed,  even  on  days  when 
wisdom’s awful voice made itself heard, he no longer had the courage to address those cruel 
remarks to her―words so indispensable, as he had learned, for the preservation of their love. 
                                                                                                                                                                    
roguish Figaro, quickly became fixed in the French national imagination. Both plays inspired operas, better 
known to Anglophone audiences than the plays that inspired them. 
10 Tobias George Smollett (1721C71), versatile English writer known for his satirical novels and a multivolume 
History of England; he also translated Don Quixote. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
“I plan to write to my father,” Mathilde told him one day. “He’s been more than merely a 
father to me; he’s been a friend. How unworthy I would feel, both of you and of myself, if I 
tried to deceive him even for an instant.” 
“My God!” said Julien, terrified. “What are you doing?” 
“My duty,” she replied, her eyes shining with joy. 
She felt she was being nobler than her lover. 
“But he’ll dismiss me, most disgracefully!” 
“That’s his right: we need to respect it. I’ll give you my arm and we’ll leave by the front 
door, in full daylight.” 
immediately.” 
Stunned, Julien begged her to wait a week. 
“I  can’t,”  she  answered.  “Honor  calls.  I  have  seen  my  duty  and  I  must  observe  it―and 
“Very  well!  I  order  you  to  wait,”  Julien  finally  said.  “Your  honor  is  protected:  I’m  your 
husband.  This  truly  major  step  will  change  everything,  for  both  of  us.  I  too  am  within  my 
rights. Today is Tuesday; next Tuesday will be the Duke de Retz’s day to receive visitors.11 That 
evening, when Monsieur de La Mole returns, the porter will hand him the fatal letter...All he 
thinks about is making you a duchess: I know it. Think how miserable he’ll be!” 
“Do you mean: think what vengeance he’ll take?” 
“I  am  capable  of  commiserating  with  my  benefactor,  and  being  deeply  sorrowful  at 
hurting him. But I neither am, nor will I ever be, afraid of anyone.” 
Mathilde yielded. This was the first time, since she had told him of her new state, that he 
had spoken to her authoritatively. He had never loved her so deeply. The tender part of his 
heart  accepted  her  present  condition,  most  happily,  as  good  reason  not  to  speak  to  her 
harshly. But her confession to Monsieur de La Mole made him exceedingly nervous. Would he 
be  separated  from  Mathilde?  And  no  matter  what  sadness  his  departure  might  cause  her, 
would she still think of him, a month afterward? 
His dread was almost as severe as the thoroughly justified reproaches the marquis might 
direct at him. 
That evening,  he confessed to Mathilde how concerned  he was,  on this second score―
and then, swept on by love, he also admitted the first. 
She changed color. 
“Really?” she asked. “Six months away from me would be misery?” 
“Immensely―the only sorrow I can imagine that absolutely terrorizes me.” 
Mathilde was happy. Julien had played his role so studiously that, by now, she’d come to 
believe her love greater than his. 
The fatal Tuesday came. At midnight, on his return, the marquis was given a letter that 
had been marked for him alone to open, and for him to read only when alone: 
MY FATHER, 
All merely social connections have been broken, as between us: all that remain are those 
created by Nature. After my husband, you are and always will be most dearest to me. My eyes 
fill with tears, I imagine the pain I cause you, but to keep my shame from becoming public I 
could no longer withhold the confession I owe you, so you will have the opportunity to think, 
and to act. If your affection for me, which I know is strong, leads you to grant me some small 
allowance, I will go and live wherever you like, perhaps in Switzerland, with my husband. His 
name is so little known that no one will recognize your daughter as Madame Sorel, daughter-
                                                             
11  Among  the  busy  society  of  the  Parisian  monde,  many  aristocrats  reserved  one  day  a  week  when  they 
received guests. 
 
 
Chapter Thirty-Three: The Hell of Weakness 
in-law  of  a  carpenter  from Verrières.  There  is  the  name  it  so  hurts me  to  write.  I  dread,  on 
Julien’s behalf, the anger which will seem to you so just. I will not be a duchess, my father, but 
I  knew  that  from  the  moment  I  loved  him―and  it  was  I  who  first  fell  in  love,  it  was  I  who 
seduced him. It is from you that I come by a soul too lofty to linger over matters that are, or 
which  seem  to  me  to  be,  coarse.  I  tried  unsuccessfully,  as  you  wished,  to  please  you  and 
contemplate Monsieur de Croisenois. Why did you set true merit right under my eyes? You 
yourself said to me, when I returned from Hyères: “This young Sorel is the only person I find 
entertaining.” The poor fellow is every bit as distressed as I am, if that is possible, at the pain 
this letter will cause you. I cannot keep you from being angry, as a father, but love me, always 
love me, as a dear friend. 
Julien  always  respected  me.  If  he  sometimes  spoke  to  me,  that  was  only  due  to  his 
profound gratitude toward you, because natural pride allowed him only to respond in formal 
terms to everything he knew was beyond him. He is keenly, inherently aware of the difference 
in  our  social  positions.  It  was  I―I  confess  this  to  my  best  friend,  blushing,  nor  is  this  a 
confession I will ever make to anyone else―it was I who, in the garden one day, took his arm. 
Twenty-four  hours  from  now,  why  should  you  be  angry  with  him?  My  offense  is 
irreparable. If you so require, I will be the one to transmit to you his assurances of the most 
profound respect, and his despair at having displeased you. You need not see him, but I will 
join him, once again, wherever he may go. That is his right, and it is my duty: he is my child’s 
father.  If  in  your  kindness  you  wish  to  give  us  six  thousand  francs  to  live  on,  I  would  be 
grateful.  Otherwise,  Julien  plans  to  reside  in  Besan04on,  where  he  will  become  a  teacher  of 
Latin and of literature. No matter how low his beginning may be, I am positive he will rise. I 
am not worried about obscurity, living with him. If there is a revolution, I am confident he will 
play a leading role. Could you possibly say such a thing of any of the others who have sought 
my  hand?  They  possess  fine  lands  and  estates!  That  alone  does  not  seem  to  me  reason  to 
admire them. Even under the regime now in power, my Julien will rise to high position, if he 
had a million and my father’s support.... 
Knowing her father to be a man who regularly acted, and at once, on the first thought 
that came to him, Mathilde had written him a full eight pages. 
“What can I do?” Julien was asking himself, while Monsieur de La Mole read this letter. 
“What,  first  of  all,  is  my  duty?  And  second,  what  would  be  best  for  me?  My  debt  to  him  is 
immense. Without him, I might have been a worthless rogue, and not enough of a rogue to 
prevent my being hated and persecuted. He made me a man of the world, on which account 
my necessary rascalities will be, first, less frequent, and second, less unworthy. That’s a good 
deal more than if he’d given me a million. I owe him this medal, and some show of diplomatic 
activity, which set me on equal terms with the world. 
“If he were, right now, to write out rules for my behavior, what would he write...?” 
Julien was cut short by Monsieur de La Mole’s old manservant. 
“The marquis wants you, right now, dressed or not.” 
As he walked at Julien’s side, the valet added, his voice low: “He’s beside himself. Watch 
out.” 
Chapter Thirty-Three: The Hell of Weakness 
Cutting this diamond, a clumsy jeweler took away some of its greatest brilliance. In the Middle Ages―no, 
even under Richelieu―a Frenchman had willpower . 
―Mirabeau 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
The  marquis  was  furious.  For  the  first  time  in  his  life,  perhaps,  this  noble  lord  acted 
unacceptably:  he  showered  Julien  with  every  insult  he  could  think  of.  Our  hero  was 
astonished,  irritated,  but  his  gratitude  was  in  no  way  shaken.  What  wonderful  plans,  long 
cherished deep in the poor man’s heart, came crashing down in a tumbled heap! “But I ought 
to  answer  him:  my  silence  will  make  him  angrier.”  His  response  was  provided  by  Molière’s 
Tartuffe. 
“I’m not an angel...I’ve served you well, and you’ve paid me generously...I was grateful, but 
I’m twenty-two years old...In this house, you were the only one who understood my thoughts, 
and that lovable lady―” 
“Monster!”  cried  the  marquis.  “Lovable!  Lovable!  The  day  you  found  her  lovable,  you 
should have fled.” 
“And I tried to. I asked you, at the time, to let me go to Languedoc.” 
Weary of pacing angrily up and down, subdued by sorrow, the marquis threw himself into 
an armchair. Julien heard him mutter: “That does show he’s not malicious.” 
“No,  that’s  not  what  I’ve  been  to  you,”  exclaimed  Julien,  falling  to  his  knees.  But  that 
made him feel deeply shamed, and he rose at once. 
The marquis was truly unhinged. Seeing Julien on his knees, he began to heap insults on 
him, horrible and quite worthy of a taxi driver. Hearing such unheard-of things from his own 
lips may have offered a degree of distraction. 
“What!  My  daughter  to  be  known  as  Madame  Sorel! What!  My  daughter  is  not  to  be  a 
duchess!” Every time these two ideas plainly presented themselves, Monsieur de La Mole’s soul 
was racked; his mind was no longer under control. Julien feared the marquis might beat him. 
In lucid intervals, and when he began to grow more habituated to his misery, the marquis 
spoke quite reasonably of Julien’s behavior: 
“You had to flee, sir,” he said...”Your duty was to flee.. .. You’re the lowest of men....” 
Julien went to a desk and wrote: 
“My life has long been unbearable: I here end it. I beg Marquis de La Mole to accept, along 
with  an  expression  of  boundless  gratitude,  my  regret  for  the  embarrassment  which  my  death, 
under his roof, may cause him.” 
“If monsieur will trouble himself to read this...Kill me,” said Julien, “or have your valet kill 
me. It’s now one in the morning. I’m going to walk in the garden, near the far wall.” 
“Go to the devil,” cried the marquis as he left. 
“I  quite  understand,”  Julien  thought.  “He  wouldn’t  regret  it,  if  I  spared  his  valet  the 
trouble of killing me...All right, let him kill me himself: I offer him that reparation...But, damn 
it, I love life...I owe myself to my son.” 
This idea, for the first time clearly presenting itself to his mind, took over his thoughts, 
after the first few minutes of his walk, which had been filled with the sense of danger. 
This brand-new concern made him a prudent man. “I need to get advice, to deal with this 
wildly insane man...He’s lost his mind; he’s capable of anything. Fouqué is too far off. Besides, 
he has no sense for what the heart of someone like the marquis would be feeling. 
“Count  Altamira...Can  I  be  sure  of  eternal  silence?  The  advice  I  seek  must  not  involve 
performance of an action: that would complicate my position. Alas: the only one I can turn to 
is  somber  Father  Pirard...His  spirit  has  been  shrunken  by  Jansenism...Some  rascally  Jesuit 
would  understand  the  world,  and  would  suit  me  better...Father  Pirard  is  capable  of  beating 
me, the instant he hears what I’ve done.” 
Tartuffe’s genius came to Julien’s aid: “Yes, I’ll go and make my confession to him.” After 
walking in the garden for two whole hours, that was the last decision he came to. He no longer 
expected to be surprised by a gunshot. Sleep prevailed. 
 
 
Chapter Thirty-Three: The Hell of Weakness 
The  next  day,  very  early  in  the  morning,  Julien  was  miles  from  Paris,  knocking  at  the 
harsh  Jansenist’s  door.  He  discovered,  to  his  immense  astonishment,  that  Father  Pirard  was 
not particularly surprised by what he heard. 
“I ought perhaps to reproach myself,” he said, more worried than annoyed. “I should have 
been  able  to  predict  this  love  affair.  My  affection  for  you,  my  miserable  little  one,  kept  me 
from warning the father....” 
“What’s he going to do?” Julien asked anxiously. 
(At this moment, he loved the priest, and any kind of quarrel would have been, for him, 
extremely painful.) 
“I  myself  envisage  three  choices,”  Julien  went  on.  “First,  Monsieur  de  La  Mole  can 
sentence me to death.” He described the suicide letter he had left with the marquis. “Second, 
he  can  have  me  shot  at  point-blank  range  by  Count  Norbert,  who  would  challenge  me  to  a 
duel.” 
“You’d accept?” said the priest, furious, and he rose from his chair. 
“You’re not letting me finish. Most assuredly, I could never fire at my benefactor’s son. 
“Third, he might send me away. If he says: ’Go to Edinburgh, to New York,’ I’d obey him. 
Then they might be able to hide Mademoiselle de La Mole’s condition. But I would not permit 
them to do away with my son.” 
“And  that  will  be―have  no  doubt―,”  said  Father  Pirard,  “―this  corrupt  man’s  first 
idea....” 
At  Paris,  Mathilde  was  in  despair.  At  seven  o’clock,  she  had  seen  her  father.  He  had 
shown her Julien’s letter: she shivered, thinking he might have considered that putting an end 
to  his  life  would  be  a  noble  deed.  “And  without  my  permission,”  she  said  to  herself,  with  a 
sadness that was also anger. 
“If  he  is  dead,”  she  told  her  father.  “I  will  die.  And  you’ll  be  the  cause  of  his  death...It 
might make you happy...But I swear by his departed ghost, I’d first put on mourning, and in 
every  public  place  I  will  be  known  as  the  widowed  Madame  Sorel,  and  I’ll  send  out  death 
notices: you can count on it. You’ll find me neither timid nor cowardly.” 
Love drove her almost mad. For his part, Monsieur de La Mole was stunned. 
He  began  to  see  what  had  happened  with  some  degree  of  rationality.  Mathilde  did not 
come to lunch. The marquis felt himself freed of an enormous weight, and above all flattered, 
when he realized she’d said nothing to her mother. 
Julien dismounted. Mathilde had him called, and threw herself into his arms, almost in 
sight of her chambermaid. Julien was not terribly gratified by this demonstration, having left 
his  long  conference  with  Father  Pirard  in  an  intensely  diplomatic  and  calculating  state  of 
mind. Turning all the possibilities over and over in his mind, his imagination had worn itself 
down. Mathilde, tears in her eyes, told him she’d seen his suicide letter. 
“My  father  might  change  his  mind.  Please,  for  my  sake,  leave  this  very  instant  for 
Villequier. Get back on your horse and leave, before they rise from the table.” 
Julien still seemed amazed, and cold; she shed enormous quantities of tears. 
“Let  me  manage  our  business,”  she  exclaimed  ecstatically,  holding  him  tightly  in  her 
arms.  “You  know  very  well  I’m  not  separating  us  of  my  own  choice.  Write  to  me,  using  my 
chambermaid’s  name,  and  have  the  address  written  by  someone  else.  Me,  I’ll  write  you 
volumes. Farewell! Flee!” 
This last word offended Julien, but he obeyed. “It’s nothing less than fated,” he thought, 
“that, even in their best moments, these people know how to hurt me.” 
Mathilde  was  completely  firm,  resisting  every  one  of  her  father’s  prudent  plans.  She 
refused to negotiate on any other bases than these: she would be Madame Sorel and live in 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
poverty,  with  her  husband,  in  Switzerland,  or  else  at  her  father’s  great  house  in  Paris.  The 
proposal that her delivery be a clandestine one was totally out of the question: “That would 
open  the  door  for  possible  slander  and  dishonor.  Two  months  after  my  marriage,  I’ll  go 
traveling with my husband, and then, to suggest that my son was born at the proper time will 
be extremely simple.” 
Greeted, at first, by fits of anger, her steadiness ended by shaking the marquis. 
Once, in a tender moment: 
“Look  here,”  he  told  his  daughter.  “This  is  a  registered  certificate,  good  for  a  yearly 
income of ten thousand francs. Send it to your Julien, and let him hide it somewhere so I can’t 
take it back.” 
In order to obey Mathilde, whose passion for giving orders he knew only too well, Julien 
had  made  a  useless  hundred-and-twenty-mile  journey.  He  had  been  staying  in  Villequier, 
putting the farmers’ accounts in order; the marquis’s gift brought him back. He went to seek 
asylum with Father Pirard, who in his absence had become Mathilde’s most useful ally. Every 
time the marquis sought his advice, Father Pirard demonstrated that any choice, other than a 
public marriage, would be a sin in the eyes of God. 
“And  luckily,”  the  priest  would  continue,  “the  world’s  wisdom  is,  in  this  matter, 
completely  in  accord  with  that  of  the  Church.  Could  one  rely  for  a  single  moment,  given 
Mademoiselle de La Mole’s fiery character, on the sanctity of a secret she would not impose on 
herself? If you do not take the frank step of a public marriage, society will be busy, for a long 
time to come, with this strange mismatch. Everything must be said and done at the same time, 
without any display, or any reality, of the mysterious and unknown.” 
“That’s  true,”  the  marquis  acknowledged  somberly.  “That  way,  talk  about  the  marriage, 
after  three  days,  would  become  the  boring  gossip  of  empty-headed  people.  We  will  have  to 
take  advantage  of  some  great  anti-Jacobin  proposals  from  the  government,  and  slide  along, 
unseen, right behind that.” 
Two or three of Monsieur de La Mole’s friends agreed with Father Pirard. To their minds, 
the  great  obstacle  was  Mathilde’s  notorious  willfulness.  Yet  for  all  these  finely  tuned 
arguments,  the  marquis’s  soul  found  it  hard  to  abandon  hope  of  a  duchess’s  title  for  his 
daughter. 
His memory, and his mind, were equally well stocked with tricks and pretenses of every 
kind, for in his earlier days they had all been possible. To give in to necessity, to be afraid of 
the  law  of  the  land,  seemed  absurd  and  dishonorable  for  a  man  of  his  rank.  He  was  paying 
dearly, now, for those enchanting daydreams about his daughter’s future in which, for ten long 
years, he had indulged himself. 
“Who could have foreseen it?” he told himself. “A girl of such a haughty nature, of so fine 
a mind, prouder even than I am of the name she bears! whose hand had been sought of all of 
the most illustrious men in France! 
“All prudence must be renounced! This century was born to overwhelm everything! We 
are marching into chaos.” 
Chapter Thirty-Four: a Man of Spirit 
The  governor  was  riding  along  on  his  horse,  saying  to  himself:  “Why  can’t  I  be  a  government  minister? 
President  of  the  Privy  Council?  A  duke?  Here’s  how  I’d  wage  war...And  this  is  how  I’d  lock  away  all 
innovators, chain them up....” 
 
 
Chapter Thirty-Four: a Man of Spirit 
―The Globe12 
Ten years of dreaming take such complete control of a man’s mind that no argument can 
destroy them. The marquis did not think it reasonable to be angry, but neither could he make 
up  his  mind  to  forgive.  Sometimes  he  said  to  himself:  “If  this  Julien  could  have  a  fatal 
accident...”  This  was  how  his  gloomy  mind  found  a  bit  of  solace,  pursuing  the  most  absurd 
fantasies.  His  wild  fancies  numbed  the  effect  of  Father  Pirard’s  wise  reasoning.  And  so  an 
entire month went by, and negotiations did not advance a single step. 
In  this  family  business,  as  in  politics,  the  marquis  formulated  brilliant  insights,  his 
enthusiasm for which lasted three days. No plan pleased him, merely on the basis that it was 
supported  by  excellent  arguments:  he  approved  only  of  those  arguments  which  favored 
whatever, at that moment, his favorite plan happened to be. For three days, he labored with a 
poet’s  ardor  and  enthusiasm,  bringing  everything  to  a  certain  posture.  The  next  day,  he 
wouldn’t hear of it any longer. 
Julien was initially disconcerted by all the marquis’s delaying actions. After several weeks, 
however,  he  began  to  understand  that,  in  this  business,  Monsieur  de  La  Mole  had  no  fixed 
approach whatever. 
Madame de La Mole, like everyone else in the house, believed that Julien had gone to the 
provinces to supervise family properties. He was in fact staying, secretly, with Father Pirard, 
and  saw  Mathilde  almost  every  day.  Every  morning,  she  spent  an  hour  with  her  father,  but 
sometimes  they  went  for  weeks  without  mentioning  the  business  that  remained  central  in 
their minds. 
“I don’t want to know where that man is,” the marquis told her, one day. “Just send him 
this letter.” Mathilde read it: 
My Languedoc properties bring in 20,600 francs. I give 10,600 francs to my daughter, and 10,000 francs 
to  Monsieur  Julien  Sorel.  This  means,  of  course,  that  I  hereby  give  the  property  as  well  as  the  income 
therefrom. Tell the lawyer to draw up two separate deeds of gift, and have them brought to me tomorrow. 
From then on, there will be no relationship between us. Ah! Sir, should I have expected all this? 
Marquis De La Mole 
“I  thank  you  very  much,”  said  Mathilde  gaily.  “We’ll  be  staying  at  Ch09teau  d’Aiguillon, 
between Agen and Marmande. I’m told it’s every bit as beautiful as Italy.” 
The gift was an immense surprise to Julien. This was not the cold, severe marquis he had 
known.  Julien’s  own  thoughts  were  taken  up,  well  in  advance,  with  his  son’s  future.  This 
unexpected  and,  for  a  man  as  poor  as  himself,  rather  considerable  fortune  made  him 
ambitious for his child. He anticipated, either on his wife’s account or his own, an income of 
thirty-six  thousand  francs.  All  Mathilde’s  emotions  were  absorbed  in  adoration  of  her 
husband―as  pride  always  caused  her  to  refer  to  Julien.  Her  great,  her  sole  ambition  was  to 
have her marriage made known. She spent her days in exaggerating to herself the high wisdom 
she had shown, linking her destiny to that of so superior a man. Personal merit had become 
her preoccupation. 
Almost continuous separation, the great number of business matters to be dealt with, the 
shortage of time for talking of love, completed the healthy effect of wise diplomacy, conceived 
originally by Julien. 
Mathilde  finally  became  impatient  at  seeing  so  little  of  the  man  she  had,  in  fact,  truly 
learned to love. 
In a fit of bad humor, she wrote to her father, beginning her letter like Othello:13 
                                                             
12 See note for p. 364, l. 20. 
13 It is actually Desdemona who writes a letter. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
The fact of my choice sufficiently demonstrates, in itself, that I have preferred Julien to 
the pleasures society offered to the daughter of Marquis de La Mole. The delights of esteem 
and rank, and of petty vanity, are as nothing to me. I have lived, separated from my husband, 
for  nearly  six  weeks.  This  should  be  sufficient  to  demonstrate  my  filial  respect.  Before  this 
coming Wednesday, I will have left my father’s house. Your benefactions have enriched us. No 
one knows my secret, except worthy Father Pirard. I will go to him; he will marry us, and an 
hour  after  the  ceremony  we  will  be  en  route  to  Languedoc,  and  we  will  not  return  to  Paris 
unless you so order. But what pierces my heart is that all this will make a juicy story aimed at 
me, and at you. Might not the witticisms of some public fool compel our excellent Norbert to 
pick a quarrel with Julien? In that case, I know Julien too well to think I’d have any control 
over  him.  We  should  see  that  his  soul  is  that  of  a  plebeian  in  revolt.  I  beg  you  on  bended 
knees, oh my father! come and attend our marriage, which will be next Thursday, in Father 
Pirard’s  church.  The  nasty  stories  will  have  their  spice  smoothed  away,  and  the  life  of  your 
only daughter and her husband will be saved, etc., etc. 
The  marquis’s  heart  was  thrown  into  a  strange  quandary.  Finally,  he  had  to  make  a 
choice. All his petty customs, all his coarse friends, had lost their influence. 
In these unusual circumstances, lofty characteristics, born out of the events of his youth, 
came once again to the fore. The miseries of forced emigration had made him an imaginative 
man. For a brief two years he had enjoyed the benefits of a huge fortune and all manner of 
court distinctions, and then 1790 had thrown him into frightful suffering. It was a hard school 
and  had  changed  a  twenty-two-year-old’s  soul:  he  was  still  encamped  in  the  middle  of  his 
wealth, rather than ruled by it. But this same imagination, which had protected his soul from 
the gangrene of gold, had plunged him into a mad passion to see his daughter dignified by a 
glorious title. 
In the past six weeks, which had been dominated by his whims, the marquis first wanted 
to make Julien rich. Poverty seemed to Monsieur de La Mole unworthy, dishonorable to him 
personally, utterly impossible in his daughter’s husband. He threw money at Julien. The next 
day,  his  mind  took  a  different  direction:  he  was  sure  Julien  would  come  to  understand  the 
silent language in which all this gold was speaking, and would change his name, exile himself 
to  America,  write  to  Mathilde,  saying  he  was  now  dead,  as  far  as  she  was  concerned.... 
Monsieur de La Mole imagined this letter written, received, read; he traced out its effect on his 
daughter’s character.... 
On the day when Mathilde’s real letter drew him out of such childish dreams, instead of 
fancies  about  killing  Julien,  or  making  him  disappear,  he  imagined  creating  for  him  a  truly 
brilliant fortune. He would have him take the name of one of his estates, and saw no reason 
why the de La Mole peerage should not descend to Julien. His own father-in-law, the Duke of 
Chaulnes, had more than once spoken to him―after the duke’s only son was killed in Spain―
of his wish that Norbert succeed to the title.... 
“How could we deny Julien his marked aptitude for business, his boldness, perhaps even 
his brilliance, “ the marquis said to himself. “But there is something frightening, deep down in 
his character. This is the effect he always has on others, so it must stem from something real.” 
(The more difficult it was to be sure just how real, the more the old marquis’s imaginative soul 
took fright.) 
“The other day, my daughter told me, very cleverly [this letter has been deleted]: ’Julien 
has  not  joined  any  social  group,  nor  any  intellectual  one.’  He  hasn’t  mustered  any  support 
against me, not even the smallest resources, were I to turn my back on him...But is this simple 
ignorance of how things actually work? ... I’ve said to him, two or three times: ’The only real, 
the only profitable, society to join is society itself.’... 
 
 
Chapter Thirty-Four: a Man of Spirit 
“No, he lacks the lawyer’s fawning shrewdness, which never loses a minute or wastes an 
opportunity...He’s not a bit like someone from Louis XI’s14 time. On the other hand, I see in 
him a most striking lack of generosity. ...I can’t fathom him...Does he say such things simply to 
dam up his passions? 
“Still, one thing stands out: he cannot tolerate contempt. That gives me a grip on him. 
“He has no faith in high birth; that’s a fact. He has no instinctive respect for us...That’s a 
drawback―yet,  ultimately,  a  seminarian’s  soul  should  be  impatient  only  with  shortages  of 
pleasure and money. He is totally different, incapable of enduring scorn, no matter what the 
price.” 
Pressured by his daughter’s letter, Monsieur de La Mole saw that he had to make up his 
mind: “In the end, this is the central question: Was Julien’s boldness, his daring in courting my 
daughter, founded in his knowledge that I love her more than anything in the world―and that 
I have an income of a quarter of a million francs? 
“Mathilde directly challenges this...No, my Julien; this is a matter about which I cannot 
afford to entertain any illusions. 
“Is what we have here a genuine love, unforeseen, unplanned? Or merely a low desire to 
rise into a higher social standing? Mathilde sees things very clearly. She knew from the very 
beginning that, for me, this could be the issue on which he ruins himself, and so she made her 
confession, saying it was she who was the first to think of love... 
“A girl of such lofty character, so far forgetting herself that she makes physical advances! 
Clutching at his arm, in the garden, one night: how ghastly! As if she hadn’t a hundred less 
indecent ways of letting him know she was thinking of him. 
“He  who  excuses  himself,  accuses  himself:  I  don’t  believe  Mathilde.”  On  this  day,  the 
marquis’s thoughts were more conclusive than usual. But habit prevailed; he decided to gain 
time by writing to his daughter, since they had been corresponding back and forth, from one 
part  of  the  house  to  the  other.  Monsieur  de  La  Mole  did  not  dare  engage  in  a  face-to-face 
discussion with Mathilde; he would not be able to hold his own. He was afraid of ending it all 
by some sudden surrender: 
Beware of any new foolishness. Here is a commission as a cavalry lieutenant, for Chevalier 
Julien Sorel de La Vernaye. You can see what I’m doing for him. Don’t oppose me; don’t ask me 
any questions. Let him leave in twenty-four hours, to report at Strasbourg, where his regiment 
is stationed. Here too is a draft on my banker. See to it that I am obeyed. 
Mathilde’s  love,  and  her  joy,  were  boundless.  She  wanted  to  take  due  advantage  of  her 
victory, and replied immediately: 
Monsieur de La Vernaye would be at your feet, wild with gratitude, if he knew what you 
are  willing  to  do  for  him.  But,  so  immersed  has  my  father  been  in  his  generosity,  he  has 
forgotten  his  daughter,  whose  honor  is  at  risk.  One  single  indiscretion  can  result  in  an 
everlasting  stain,  which  sixty  thousand  francs  of  income  would  never  wipe  away.  I  will  not 
send his commission to Monsieur de La Vernaye unless you give me your word that, sometime 
next month, my marriage will be celebrated in public, at Villequier. Shortly thereafter―and I 
beg you not to exceed the stipulated period―your daughter will appear in public, under the 
name Madame de La Vernaye. How grateful I am to you, dear Papa, for having saved me from 
the name Sorel, etc., etc. 
The reply was unexpected: 
                                                             
14 Known as the Spider King, Louis XI (born 1423, reigned 1461C83) was a shrewd and ruthless politician who 
made great strides in increasing the centralized power of the French monarchy. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Obey me, or I’ll take back everything. Be careful, rash young woman. I still do not know 
what  your  Julien  truly  is,  and  you  yourself  know  even  less  than  I  do.  Let  him  leave  for 
Strasbourg, and let him do what he ought to do. I will let you know my wishes in two weeks’ 
time. 
This strict response stunned Mathilde. “I don’t know who Julien is.” These words threw her 
into a reverie, which soon ended in the most enchanting of imaginary events. But she thought 
they  were  real.  “My  Julien’s  spirit  hasn’t  worn  the  drawing  rooms’  shabby  uniform,  and  my 
father doesn’t believe in his superiority, precisely on these grounds, which in fact prove it... 
“Just the same, if I don’t give in to this characteristic whim, I can see the real possibility of 
a  public  quarrel.  A  scandal  would  lower  my  social  position,  and  might  well  make  me  less 
lovable  to  Julien.  After  a  scandal  ...ten  years  of  poverty―,  and  the  madness  of  choosing  a 
husband because of his merit, and nothing else, can only be rescued from ridicule by the most 
gleaming opulence. If I live far away from my father, at his age he might forget me...Norbert 
will  marry  some  lovable,  clever  woman:  old  Louis  XIV  was  seduced  by  the  Duchess  of 
Burgundy.”15 
She  decided  to  obey,  but  was  careful  not  to  let  Julien  see  her  father’s  letter.  His  fierce 
nature might lead him to do something foolish. 
That evening, when she told Julien he was a cavalry lieutenant, his joy was unrestrained. 
One can easily picture it, knowing his lifelong ambition, and also his new passion for his son. 
The name change absolutely struck him dumb. 
“After all,” he thought, “this romantic story is over, and the glory is all mine. I’ve learned 
how  to  love  this  prideful  monster,”  he  added,  looking  at  Mathilde.  “Her  father  can’t  live 
without her, nor she without him.” 
Chapter Thirty-Five: A Thunderstorm 
My God, give me mediocrity.16 
―Mirabeau 
His  soul  was  lost  in  thought;  he  only  partially  responded  to  her  eager  tenderness.  He 
remained silent, somber. He had never seemed to her so noble, so adorable. She worried that 
his pride might fall into some subtlety, which would end by jumbling up everything. 
Virtually  every  morning,  she  saw  Father  Pirard  come  to  the  house.  Couldn’t  he  have 
helped Julien discover something of what her father meant to do? Might the marquis himself, 
moved  by  an  eccentric  impulse,  have  written  to  the  priest?  Following  on  such  intense 
happiness, how explain Julien’s somber behavior? She did not dare ask him. 
She did not dare! She, Mathilde de La Mole! From then on there was something vague, 
unpredictable, almost terror-stricken in her feelings about Julien. Her dry heart experienced 
all the passion possible, for someone brought up in the midst of the extravagant civilization 
worshipped by Paris. 
The next day, very early, Julien was at Father Pirard’s. A team of mail-coach horses arrived 
in the priest’s courtyard, pulling a dilapidated carriage, rented from the nearby mail office. 
“This  kind  of  thing  is  no  longer  appropriate,”  the  harsh  priest  told  him,  sourly.  “Here’s 
twenty thousand francs, given you by Monsieur de La Mole. He expects you to spend this in 
                                                             
15 Wife of the old king’s grandson, the Duchess of Burgundy became a favorite of―but certainly not a mistress 
to―Louis XIV. 
16 This quotation is difficult to imagine from the mouth or pen of Mirabeau. 
 
 
Chapter Thirty-Five: A Thunderstorm 
the course of a year, but is also expecting you not to look any more ridiculous than you have 
to.” (The priest also saw, in so large a sum thrown to so young a man, the commission of a sin.) 
“The marquis also writes,” Father Pirard went on, “that Monsieur Julien de La Vernaye has 
had this money from his father, who needs no further designation. It will be up to Monsieur de 
La Vernaye to decide if he wants to give something to Monsieur Sorel, a carpenter in Verrières, 
in whose charge he was, as a child...I can take care of that part of the commission,” the priest 
added.  “I  have  finally  brought  Monsieur  de  La  Mole  to  the  point  of  settling  with  Father  de 
Frilair,  that  ultimate  Jesuit.  His  influence  is  definitely  stronger  than  ours.  The  implicit 
recognition of your high birth, by that man who rules Besan04on, will be one of the tacit terms 
of the settlement.” 
Unable  to  control  his  excitement,  Julien  embraced  the  priest.  He  saw  himself 
acknowledged. 
“What  nonsense!”  said  Father  Pirard,  pushing  him  away.  “What’s  the  meaning  of  such 
worldly vanity? As for Sorel and his sons, I will offer them, in my name, an annual pension of 
five hundred francs each, to be paid so long as I hear no evil of them.” 
Julien had already become cold and distant. He expressed his thanks, but in the vaguest 
language, and without committing himself to anything. “Might it be possible,” he was asking 
himself, “that I could be the natural son of some great lord, exiled to our mountains by the 
dreaded  Napoleon?”  The  more  he  considered  it,  the  idea  seemed  to  him  less  and  less 
improbable...”My hatred for my father would be one thing that proved it.. .. And I wouldn’t be 
a monster!” 
A few days later, the Fifteenth Cavalry Regiment, one of the army’s shining units, was in 
battle  formation  on  the  Strasbourg  parade  ground.  Chevalier  de  La  Vernaye  rode  the  finest 
horse  in  all  Alsace,  which  had  cost  him  six  thousand  francs.  He  had  been  mustered  in  as  a 
lieutenant,  without  ever  having  been  a  second  lieutenant,  except  on  the  rolls  of  a  regiment 
he’d never heard of. 
His  imperturbable  demeanor,  his  severe  and  almost  malicious  eyes,  his  pallor,  and  his 
invariable calm coolness began to frame his reputation. Soon, his perfect, measured politeness, 
his  swordsmanship  and  skill  with  his  pistol,  which  he  neither  hid  nor  affectedly  advertised, 
eliminated the possibility of open, audible jesting about him. Matters hung in the balance for 
five or six days, but then regimental opinion publicly declared itself in his favor. “This young 
fellow has everything,” pronounced bantering senior officers, “except youth.” 
From Strasbourg, Julien wrote to Father Chélan, formerly parish priest at Verrières, who 
was reaching the outer limits of extreme old age: 
You  will  have  heard,  with  a  joy  I  cannot  doubt,  of  the  events  which  have  induced  my 
family  to  make  me  rich.  I  enclose  five  hundred  francs  which  I  beg  you  to  distribute,  very 
quietly, and with no mention of my name, to such miserable wretches as, once, I myself used 
to be, people you are surely helping as once you helped me. 
Julien was drunk with ambition, not with vanity, but all the same most of his attention 
was devoted to his appearance. His horses, his and his servants’ uniforms, received such care 
as  would  have  done  honor  to  the  fastidiousness  of  a  great  English  lord.  Though  very  newly 
commissioned, just two days since, and by preferential treatment, he was already calculating 
that to be commander in chief by, at the latest, age thirty (as all great generals were), by the 
time he was twenty-three he must be more than a mere lieutenant. All he thought about were 
glory and his son. 
It  was  thus  in  the  midst  of  the  most  ungoverned  ecstasies  of  ambition  that  he  was 
surprised by a young de La Mole footman, who came bearing a letter: 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
We’re completely ruined [Mathilde wrote]. Hurry as fast as you can, sacrifice everything, 
desert  if  necessary.  When  you  come,  wait  for  me  in  a  taxi,  near  the  garden’s  little  door,  at 
number ―― of ――― Street. I’ll come and speak with you; perhaps I can bring you into the 
garden. We’re ruined, I believe, beyond any hope whatever. You can count on me: you’ll see 
that, in adversity, I am both devoted and constant. I love you. 
In a matter of minutes, Julien obtained a leave from his colonel and left Strasbourg at full 
gallop. But he was too horribly upset, consumed by anxiety, to continue this mode of travel 
any  farther  than  Metz.  He  threw  himself  into  a  mail  coach  and,  with  a  speed  that  seemed 
almost incredible, reached the place she had indicated, near the little door to the de La Mole 
garden. The door was opened. And in a moment, forgetting all concern for what others might 
see, Mathilde dashed into his arms. Fortunately, it was only five in the morning, and the street 
was still deserted. 
“We’re completely ruined. My father, afraid of my tears, left Thursday night. For where? 
No one knows. Here is his letter. Read it.” And she got into the cab with him. 
I could pardon anything, but not a plan to seduce you because you’re rich. That, my ill-
fated daughter, is the ghastly truth. I give you my word of honor that I will never consent to 
your marrying this man. I promise him an income of ten thousand francs, if he wishes to live 
abroad, outside the borders of France, or best of all in America. Read the letter I received, in 
response to the inquiries I made. The shameless fellow himself is responsible for my writing to 
Madame de Rênal. If you write to me about him, I will never read a line of it. I loathe both 
Paris and you. Try to keep totally secret that which will be happening. Renounce―renounce 
sincerely ―this vile man, and you will regain a father. 
“Where is Madame de Rênal’s letter?” Julien asked, coldly. 
“Here it is. I didn’t want you to see it till you were ready.” 
My duty to the sacred cause of religion and morality requires me, sir, to proceed with the 
painful step I am about to take, in writing to you. An infallible law now orders me to do harm 
to my neighbor, but in order to prevent an even greater disgrace. The sorrow I feel must yield 
to my sense of duty. It is entirely true, sir, that the person in question’s conduct, about which 
you seek full and accurate information, might be considered inexplicable, or even honorable. I 
might have thought it proper to hide, or to disguise, some part of the truth; prudence might so 
desire,  as  might,  also,  religion.  But  the  conduct  about  which  you  inquire  has  in  fact  been 
extraordinarily blameworthy―indeed, more than I can tell you. Poor and voraciously greedy, 
this man sought position and reputation by the most consummate hypocrisy, as well as by the 
seduction of a weak and miserable woman. One part of my painful duty is to add, here, that I 
believe Monsieur J――― has absolutely no religious beliefs. In good conscience, I am obliged 
to believe that one of his roads to success, in any house into which he comes, is to search for 
and seduce the woman whose assets are the greatest. Cloaked by a pretense of unselfishness, 
and  by  romantic  talk,  his  great,  and  his  sole,  goal  is  to  enable  himself  to  make  use  of  the 
master of the house and of his fortune. He leaves behind him misery and eternal regret, etc., 
etc. 
This extremely long letter, partially erased by tears, had in fact been written by Madame 
de Rênal. She had written it, indeed, more carefully than usual. 
“I can’t blame Monsieur de La Mole,” said Julien when he had finished reading. “He is fair 
and sensible. What father would give his beloved daughter to such a man! Farewell!” 
Julien jumped down from the cab and ran to a mail coach, which had stopped at the end 
of the street. He appeared to have forgotten Mathilde, who took several steps as if to follow 
after him. But staring merchants, coming to the doors of their shops―people very well aware 
of who she was―forced her to turn and hurriedly go back into the garden. 
 
 
Chapter Thirty-Six: Somber Details 
Julien was going to Verrières. During this rapid trip, he was unable to write to Mathilde, 
as he had planned: the only marks he made on paper were illegible scribblings. 
It was Sunday morning when he reached Verrières. He went into a local gunsmith’s shop, 
where  he  was  covered  with  compliments  for  his  recent  good  fortune.  Everyone  was  talking 
about it. 
It was not easy for Julien to make the man understand that what he wanted was a pair of 
pistols. At his request, the gunsmith loaded and charged them. 
He heard three bells tolling: it was a familiar signal, in French villages. After the various 
morning bells had been rung, this announced that mass would soon be said. 
He went into Verrières’s new church. All the building’s high windows were draped with 
crimson curtains. He found himself standing a few steps behind Madame de Rênal’s pew. He 
thought she was praying quite fervently. Seeing this woman, for whom he had felt such love, 
made Julien’s limbs tremble so much that, at first, he could not do what he had planned. “I 
can’t do it,” he was saying to himself. “It’s physically impossible, shaking like this.” 
Just then, the young priest who was saying mass rang the little bell, announcing elevation 
of the Host. Madame de Rênal bent her head, and for a moment she was completely hidden 
beneath the folds of her shawl. Julien could no longer see her as plainly as he had. He fired the 
first pistol at her, and missed. He fired the second, and she fell. 
Chapter Thirty-Six: Somber Details 
Don’t expect me to show weakness. I have taken my revenge. I deserve death, and here I am. Pray for my 
soul. 
―Schiller 
Julien remained motionless; he could not see. When he came back to himself, just a little, 
he became aware that all the faithful had fled from the church. The priest had left the altar. 
Julien began to walk, very slowly, behind several women who were screaming as they ran. One 
woman,  wanting  to  run  faster  than  the  others,  shoved  him,  roughly,  and  he  fell.  His  feet 
became entangled in a chair, knocked over by the rushing crowd. As he rose, he felt his neck 
tightly  gripped.  It  was  a  policeman,  in  full  uniform,  who  was  holding  him.  Automatically, 
Julien tried to reach for his pistols, but a second policeman grasped his arms. 
He was brought to prison. They came into a room; chains were put on his wrists. He was 
left all alone. The door had been double-locked. Everything had happened quickly, and he had 
no idea what was going on. 
“My God, it’s all over,” he said out loud, as he came back to himself...”Yes, fifteen days, 
and then the guillotine...or I kill myself, between now and then.” 
His thinking could go no further. His head felt as if it had been violently compressed. He 
looked around to see if someone had hold of it. Almost immediately afterward, he fell into a 
very deep sleep. 
Madame de Rênal had not been fatally wounded. The first ball had gone through her hat. 
The second shot had been fired as she was turning around. The ball had hit her in the shoulder 
and, astonishingly, had been redirected by the shoulder bone which, however, it had cracked; 
the ball had ended by striking a Gothic pillar, from which it had split off an enormous sliver of 
stone. 
Later, after a long, painful dressing and bandaging, when the serious-faced surgeon told 
her, “I answer for your life as I would for my own,” she was profoundly distressed. 
For  a  long  while,  she  wished  sincerely  for  death.  The  letter,  written  to  Monsieur  de  La 
Mole on the order of her current confessor, had been the final blow to a creature weakened by 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
unremitting misery. This misery was Julien’s absence; she called it, she herself, remorse. Her 
confessor, a young, fervently virtuous priest, newly arrived from Dijon, was not taken in. 
“To die this way, but not by my own hand: that’s not a sin,” thought Madame de Rênal. 
“God will perhaps pardon me for rejoicing in my death.” She did not dare add: “And to die at 
Julien’s hand, that is the very height of bliss.” 
She  was  barely  free  of  the  surgeon,  and  all  the  friends  crowding  around,  when  she 
summoned Elisa, her chambermaid. 
“The jailer,” she told her, blushing deeply, “is a savage man. He will surely mistreat Julien, 
believing I would want that...I cannot endure the idea. Might you yourself go and bring the 
jailer this little package, which contains some gold coins? You’ll tell him that religion does not 
allow him to mistreat a prisoner...Above all, he must not go around talking about receipt of 
this money.” 
And this, which we have just been recounting, was responsible for the Verrières jailer’s 
humanity to Julien. This was, as ever, Monsieur Noiroud, the perfect bureaucrat, in whom we 
have seen Monsieur Appert’s presence strike such notable fear. 
A  judge  came  to  the  prison.  “I  killed  by  premeditation,”  Julien  told  him.  “I  bought  the 
pistols from, and had them loaded and charged by, Monsieur So-and-So, a gunsmith. Article 
1342 of the Code is clear: I deserve a sentence of death, and I expect it.” Astonished by this kind 
of response, the judge wanted to ask a whole batch of  questions, so  that the accused might 
have an opportunity to give conflicting answers. 
“But don’t you see,” said Julien, smiling, “that I’m making myself as guilty as you could 
ever want? Face it, sir: there’ll be no difficulty nabbing the victim you’re chasing. You will have 
the pleasure of sentencing him. Spare me, please, having to deal with you.” 
“I  have  one  boring  duty  to  fulfill,”  Julien  thought.  “I  must  write  to Mademoiselle  de  La 
Mole.” 
I  have  had  my  revenge  [he  told  her].  Unfortunately,  my  name  will  appear  in  the 
newspapers;  I  cannot  escape,  incognito,  from  this  world.  I  will  die  in  two  months.  It  was  a 
revenge entirely ghastly, as is my sorrow at being separated from you. From this moment on, I 
forbid myself either to write or to speak your name. Never speak of me, even to my son: silence 
is  the  only  way  of  honoring  me.  For  the  vulgar  herd,  I  will  be  a  coarse  assassin...Let  me  be 
allowed  to  speak  the  truth,  at  this  supreme  moment:  you  will  forget  me.  This  immense 
catastrophe―as to which I advise you never to say a word, not to any living being―will for 
several years have drained away everything romantic and adventurous, so far as I can see, in 
your nature. You were made to dwell with the heroes of the Middle Ages: exhibit that same 
firmness in your own character. What must take place will be done in secret, without in any 
way compromising you. You will take an assumed name, and you will confide in no one. If you 
absolutely need a friend’s help, let me leave you Father Pirard. 
Speak to no one else, and above all not to people of your own class: the de Cayluses, the 
When  I’ve  been  dead  a  year,  marry  Monsieur  de  Croisenois:  please,  I  am  commanding 
you, as your husband. Do not write to me; I will not reply. Since I’m not as evil as Iago,17 at 
least in my own mind, I’m going to say to you, as he said: “From this time forth I never will 
speak word.” 
I will not speak or write to anyone. You alone will have my final words, as also my final 
de Luzes. 
adoration. 
                                                             
17 The jealous false friend of Othello, who persuades him of the innocent Desdemona’s betrayal. Julien implies 
that he is using sincerely the words Iago used to stoke the Moor’s suspicions. 
 
Chapter Thirty-Six: Somber Details 
 
J.S. 
Only  after  having  sent  this  letter,  and  for  the  first  time,  was  Julien,  now  a  bit  more 
himself, very miserable. All the expectations and hopes of ambition had to be yanked out of 
his heart, one after the other, by those immense words: I am going to die. Death did not seem 
to him, in and of itself, horrible. His whole life had been nothing but a long prelude to misery, 
nor did he have to worry that he might forget what commonly passed as the greatest event of 
all. 
“Well then!” he told himself. “Suppose in sixty days I had to fight a duel against a truly 
magnificent  swordsman,  would  I  be  so  weak-minded  that  I’d  never  think  of  anything  else, 
terror-stricken at heart?” 
He spent more than an hour trying to learn where he stood on this matter. 
When he could see clearly into his soul, and the truth was as plain as the prison’s stone 
pillars, which he saw very clearly indeed, he turned to thoughts of remorse! 
“Why should I be remorseful? I was atrociously offended against. I killed, I deserve death, 
but that’s all there is to it. I die, having first settled my accounts with humankind. I’m leaving 
no obligations unsatisfied, I owe no one anything: the only shameful aspect of my death is the 
instrument which will cause it. That alone, of course, will do more than nicely for the Verrières 
bourgeoisie, but from an intellectual perspective what could be more contemptible! In their 
eyes, all I have left is a single road to importance―and that would be to scatter pieces of gold 
among the crowd, as I go to the gallows. Thus joined to the idea of gold, my memory would be, 
for them, a truly resplendent thing.” 
A  minute  after  this  internal  discussion,  which  seemed  to  him  quite  obvious:  “I  have 
nothing more to do on this earth,” Julien told himself, and fell deeply asleep. 
Toward nine, that night, the jailor woke him, bringing in his supper. 
“What’s being said, in Verrières?” 
“Monsieur Julien, the oath I took in front of the holy cross, right in the king’s courtroom 
the day I was installed in my place here, forces me to remain silent.” 
He was silent, but he did not leave. This coarse hypocrisy amused Julien. “I have to keep 
him  waiting  a  long  time,”  he  thought,  “for  the  five  francs  he  wants,  so  he  can  sell  me  his 
conscience.” 
The jailer saw the meal concluded without any attempt at bribery: 
“My  regard  for  you,  Monsieur  Julien,”  he  said,  smoothly  hypocritical,  “compels  me  to 
speak, even if they say it’s not in the interests of justice, because maybe it would let you better 
settle your defense.... Monsieur Julien, who’s a good fellow, will be very glad to hear Madame 
de Rênal’s getting better.” 
“What! She’s not dead?” cried Julien, beside himself. 
“Ah,  you  didn’t  know  that?”  said  the  jailer  stupidly;  in  another  moment  he  had  turned 
happily  greedy.  “It  would  only  be  fair  if  Monsieur  Julien  felt  like  giving  something  to  the 
surgeon, who according to law and justice should never say anything. But just to please you, 
sir, I went to see him, and he let me know everything, strictly in confidence....” 
“You  mean,  the  wound  wasn’t  fatal?”  Julien  said  impatiently.  “You’d  stake  your  life  on 
The jailer, a giant of a man, was afraid, and backed toward the door. Julien saw he’d taken 
the  wrong  road  to  get  at  the  truth;  calming  himself,  he  threw  a  five-franc  gold  piece  to 
Monsieur Noiroud. 
As the jailer’s account began to convince Julien that Madame de Rênal’s wound had not 
been fatal, he felt himself overwhelmed by tears. “Get out,” he said sharply. 
that?” 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
The jailer left. The door had barely closed behind him: “Good God! She’s not dead!” Julien 
exclaimed. And he fell to his knees, weeping hot tears. 
At that supreme moment, he was a true believer. “What difference does priestly hypocrisy 
make! Are they capable of depriving the idea of God of its truth and sublimity?” 
Only then did Julien begin to repent the crime he’d committed. Purely by coincidence, he 
escaped  from  despair:  beginning  at  that  very  moment,  he  no  longer  felt  physically  inflamed 
and half mad, the state into which he had been plunged after his departure from Paris. 
His  tears  had  sprung  from  a  noble  source;  he  had  not  the  slightest  doubt  about  the 
sentence awaiting him. 
love me....” 
“So she’ll live!” he was saying to himself...”She’ll live, so she can forgive me, and so she can 
The jailer woke him, late the next morning: 
“You’ve got to have a first-rate heart, Monsieur Julien,” he said. “I’ve been here twice, and 
I  didn’t  want  to  wake  you  up.  Here’s  two  bottles  of  good  wine,  that  our  good  parish  priest, 
Father Maslon, sends you....” 
“Really? That rascal’s still here?” said Julien. 
“Yes, sir,” answered the jailer, lowering his voice. “But don’t speak so loud. It might not be 
good for you.” 
Julien had a good laugh. 
“From  where  I’m  standing,  my  friend,  you’re  the  only  one  who  could  hurt  me,  if  you 
stopped being gentle and humane...You’ll be well paid,” Julien said, breaking off and resuming 
his imperious air. And he justified himself, immediately thereafter, by a golden gift. 
Monsieur Noiroud told him, once again,  and in much greater detail, everything he  had 
learned about Madame de Rênal, but he never said a word about Mademoiselle Elisa’s visit. 
The man was as deferential and tame as he could possibly be. An idea came into Julien’s 
head: “This deformed giant earns, at most, three or four hundred francs a year, because this 
jail’s  not  a  very  busy  place.  I  could  guarantee  him  ten  thousand,  if  he  were  willing  to  save 
himself,  and  me,  by  going  to  Switzerland.  ...The  problem  would  be  convincing  him  I  really 
meant it.” The thought of the long discussion he’d have to endure, with such a vile creature, 
disgusted Julien. He turned his mind to other things. 
There was no more time for such diversions, after that night. At midnight, a mail coach 
arrived  to  take  him  away.  He  was  very  pleased  with  the  policemen  who  made  the  trip  with 
him. In the morning, when he arrived at the Besan04on prison, they were kind enough to lodge 
him on the upper floor of a Gothic tower. He estimated the date of construction to be early 
fourteenth  century;  he  admired  the  tower’s  grace,  and  the  striking  lightness  of  its  design. 
Through  a  narrow  space  between  two  walls,  on  the  far  side  of  a  great  courtyard,  he  had  a 
glimpse of the superb view. 
He was interrogated the next day, after which, for several days, he was left in peace. His 
soul  was  calm.  All  he  could  see  in  the  whole  affair  was  perfectly  simple: “I  wanted  to  kill;  I 
ought to be killed.” 
There  was  no  point  to  even  thinking  about  it,  beyond  this.  The  trial,  the  boredom  of 
having  to  appear  in  public,  his  defense―all  of  those  things  seemed  to  him  trivial 
embarrassments, boring ceremonies he need not think about, until the day came. The moment 
of his death hardly concerned him any more than these matters: “I’ll think about it after the 
trial’s  over.”  He  did  not  find  life  boring:  he  found  himself  considering  things  from  a  new 
perspective.  He  had  no  more  ambition.  He  seldom  thought  of  Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole. 
Remorse  preoccupied  him,  and  often  presented  him  with  the  image  of  Madame  de  Rênal, 
 
 
Chapter Thirty-Seven: the Tower 
especially during the nighttime silence, only disturbed, in his high tower, by the shrieking of 
an osprey. 
He thanked heaven he had not fatally wounded her. “Astonishing!” he said to himself. “I 
felt that her letter to Monsieur de La Mole had destroyed, and forever, all my future happiness, 
and now, less than fifteen days after the date of that letter, I no longer think of what was then 
filling  my  mind....  An  income  of  two  or  three  thousand  francs,  to  live  peacefully  up  in  the 
mountains, some place like Vergy...I was happy, then...I didn’t realize how happy I was!” 
Other times, he leaped up from his chair. “If I had fatally wounded Madame de Rênal, I 
would have committed suicide...I need to know that without a doubt, so I’m not horrified by 
myself. 
“Kill  myself!  That’s  the  really  big  question,”  he  told  himself.  “These  terribly  formalist 
judges, so relentless toward the poor accused, who’d have the worthiest of citizens strung up 
on a rope so they could earn themselves a medal...I’d take myself out of their control, to the 
insults they frame in their awful French, which the regional newspapers will call eloquence.... 
“Anyway,  I  like  being  alive.  This  vacation  resort  is  peaceful.  There  aren’t  any  boring 
people in here,” he added, laughing, and began noting the books he’d like sent on to him, from 
Paris. 
Chapter Thirty-Seven: the Tower 
A friend’s tomb. 
―Sterne18 
He heard a loud noise in the corridor. It wasn’t the right time for people to be visiting the 
prison. The osprey flew off, screaming, the door opened, and old Father Chélan, trembling all 
over, walking cane in hand, flung himself into his arms. 
“Ah, Lord in heaven! Is it possible. My child...You monster, I really ought to say.” 
And the good old man could not manage another word. Julien was afraid he’d collapse. 
He  had  to  lead  him  to  a  chair.  Time’s  hand  lay  heavily  on  this  man,  once  so  energetic.  He 
seemed to Julien no more than a shadow of himself. 
When the old man could breathe again: “I got your letter, from Strasbourg, just the day 
before yesterday, and the five hundred francs for the poor in Verrières. They’ve taken me up to 
the mountains, where my nephew Jean lives, and I’m staying up there. Yesterday I heard about 
the catastrophe...Oh heaven! Is it possible?” And he was not crying anymore; he seemed blank, 
and went on, mechanically: “You’ll need your five hundred francs. Here.” 
“What  I  need  is  seeing  you,  my  Father!”  exclaimed  Julien,  deeply  moved.  “I’ve  still  got 
money.” 
But there was no coherent response. Now and then Father Chélan dropped a few tears, 
which  crawled  slowly  down  his  cheeks;  then  the  old  man  looked  at  Julien,  and  seemed 
astonished to see his hands clasped in Julien’s, and lifted to Julien’s lips. His once-lively face, 
which had portrayed so many noble feelings, and with such vivid energy, remained apathetic. 
A peasantlike man came looking for him. “We mustn’t let him get too tired,” he told Julien, 
who realized this was the nephew. 
This ghostly visit left Julien profoundly upset; he wept. Everything struck him as gloomy 
and comfortless; he felt his heart frozen in his breast. 
                                                             
18  
 
 
The Red and the Black 
This was the hardest moment he’d experienced since his crime. He had just seen death, in 
all its ugliness. All his illusions of soulful heights and nobility of feeling were blown away, like 
clouds in a wind. 
This horrible  situation lasted for several  hours. After having been morally poisoned, he 
needed physical remedies, and some good wine. Julien felt it was cowardly to fall back on such 
measures. Toward the end of this ghastly day, spent walking up and down his narrow tower: 
“What a fool I am!” he cried. “If I were to die as other people do, then seeing this poor old man 
ought to throw me into this frightful misery. But to die quickly, and in the flower of my life, is 
exactly what preserves me from this sad decrepitude.” 
But whatever arguments he set forth, Julien felt himself  full  of  pity, like some chicken-
livered fellow, and so was made miserable by the visit. 
There  was  nothing  rough  and  grandiose  left  in  him,  nothing  of  high  Roman  stoicism. 
Death  seemed  to  be  descending  on  him  from  some  immense  height,  and  was  no  longer  so 
easily faced. 
“This  will  be  my  thermometer,”  he  told  himself.  “Tonight  I’m  ten  degrees  below  the 
courage that can carry me to the guillotine. This morning, I had that courage.  Nothing else 
matters,  except  lifting  myself  back,  when  I  need  to  be  there!”  He  found  this  metaphoric 
thermometer an amusing notion, and was at last able to turn his thoughts elsewhere. 
When he woke, the next day, he felt shamed by what had taken place the day before. “My 
happiness,  my  peace  of  mind,  are  threatened.”  He  was  almost  resolved  to  write  to  the 
prosecutor and ask that nobody at all be permitted to visit. “And Fouqué?” he thought. “If he 
decides to come to Besan04on, how painful that would be!” 
It was two months, probably, since he’d thought of Fouqué. “I was a stupendous idiot, at 
Strasbourg:  my  mind  stopped  when  it  got  to  the  collar  on  my  coat.”  He  lingered  over  his 
memories of Fouqué, which left him feeling more tender. He walked nervously up and down. 
“By  now  I’m  definitely  twenty  degrees  below  my  death-level...If  this  weakness  gets  worse,  it 
would be better to kill myself. What pleasure I’d give the likes of Father Maslon and Monsieur 
de Valenod if I die like a slob!” 
Fouqué came. This simple, good man was frantic with grief. His only idea―if he had an 
idea―was to sell everything he owned, to bribe the jailer and save Julien. He spoke at length 
about Count de Lavalette’s19 escape from the guillotine, in 1815. 
“You’re upsetting me,” Julien told him. “Monsieur de Lavalette was innocent, and me, I’m 
guilty. You don’t mean to, but you’re making me think about the difference.... 
“But  really?”  he  continued.  “Really?  You’d  sell  everything?”  Suddenly,  Julien  was  once 
again watchful, suspicious. 
Thrilled to see his friend responding to his great idea, Fouqué went into immense detail, 
down to the last hundred francs, of what he could get for each bit of property. 
“What  a  sublime  effort  for  a  country  landowner!”  Julien  thought.  “What  scraping  and 
saving,  what  petty  scrimping―which  used  to  make  me  blush  when  I’d  see  him  do  it―he’d 
sacrifice for me! One of those handsome young fellows I saw at the de La Moles, wallowing in 
René,20  wouldn’t  do  all  the  ridiculous  things  that  Fouqué  does.  But  except  for  the  terribly 
young ones who came into all their money by inheriting it, and have no idea what money is 
worth, which of those young Parisians would be capable of such a sacrifice?” 
                                                             
19 Condemned to death by the Bourbon government for having rallied to Napoleon during the Hundred Days, 
Lavalette escaped from prison by trading clothes with his wife and leaving her in his place. 
20 The highly successful novel by Fran04ois-Auguste-René de Ch09teaubriand (1768C1848), which was a key text 
of  the  early  Romantic  movement.  Stendhal  disliked  the  sentimentality  of  Ch09teaubriand’s  work  and 
frequently tweaked the “noble vicomte” in his own writing. 
 
 
Chapter Thirty-Eight: A Powerful Man 
All Fouqué’s grammatical errors, his country bumpkin manners, disappeared: Julien threw 
himself  into  his  arms.  Never  have  the  provinces,  set  in  comparison  to  Paris,  received  a 
handsomer homage. Seeing the flaring of enthusiasm in his friend’s eyes, Fouqué was ecstatic; 
he took it as consent for an escape. 
Seeing this sublimity restored all Julien’s strength, lost after Father Chélan’s ghostly visit. 
He  was  still  very  young,  reader,  but  as  I  see  him,  he  was  already  a  fine  growth.  Instead  of 
proceeding, as most men do, from tender youth into crooked sticks, age would have endowed 
him with a kindness easily roused; he would have been cured of his insane mistrust.... But is 
there any point to such empty predictions? 
Interrogations became more frequent, no matter how hard Julien tried: all his responses 
were  intended  to  shorten  the  whole  business.  “I  killed,  or  at  least  I  tried  to  kill,  with 
premeditation,” he repeated every day. But above all else, the judge was a formalist. Julien’s 
statements in no way shortened the interrogations. The judge’s vanity had been roused. Julien 
had  no  knowledge  of  their  plan  to  transfer  him  to  a  dark,  frightful  dungeon:  only  Fouqué’s 
efforts forced  them to leave him in his  pleasant little room, reached  by climbing a hundred 
and eighty steps. 
Father de Frilair was one of the many important men who bought their supply of wood 
from Fouqué. The good-hearted timber merchant went to see the all-powerful vicar-general. 
To  his  inexpressible  delight,  Father  de  Frilair  assured  him  that,  moved  by  Julien’s  good 
qualities, and by the services he had, in the past, performed for the seminary, Father de Frilair 
could  be  counted  upon  to  commend  him  to  the  judge.  Fouqué  saw  some  chance,  here,  of 
saving his friend, and as he left he prostrated himself, begging the vicar-general to accept ten 
gold coins, to be expended in masses said for the accused’s acquittal. 
Fouqué had oddly misunderstood. Father de Frilair was no Valenod. He would not take 
Fouqué’s money; he even tried to make the good peasant understand that he’d do better to 
hold  on  to  his  gold.  Seeing  how  impossible  it  was  to  be  perfectly  clear,  without  becoming 
seriously imprudent, he finally advised Fouqué to donate this sum as alms for poor prisoners―
who lacked, in truth, everything. 
“This Julien is a bizarre creature, quite inexplicable,” thought Father de Frilair, “though, 
for me, nothing ought to be that...Perhaps it will be possible to turn him into a martyr...In any 
case, I intend to probe this business to the bottom. Perhaps I can find a way to strike fear into 
this Madame de Rênal, who does not think highly of us and, underneath it all, simply detests 
me...Perhaps I can find, in all this, some dazzling road to reconciliation with Monsieur de La 
Mole, who has a weakness for this little seminarian.” 
The  lawsuit  settlement  had  been  signed  some  weeks  earlier,  and  Father  de  Frilair  had 
returned  to  Besan04on,  the  day  of  the  unfortunate  attempt  to  kill  Madame  de  Rênal,  in  the 
Verrières church; he had said nothing about Julien’s mysterious birth. 
Only one disagreeable event remained, as Julien saw it, between him and his death, and 
that would be his father’s visit. He consulted Fouqué about writing to the prosecutor, to be 
excused from receiving any more visitors. His horror at the idea of seeing his father, at such a 
moment, profoundly shocked the timber merchant’s honest, bourgeois heart. 
He believed he could understand why so many people passionately hated his friend. Out 
of respect for the miserable fellow, he hid his feelings. 
“In any case,” he replied stiffly, “such an order would not apply to your father.” 
Chapter Thirty-Eight: A Powerful Man 
But she moves so mysteriously, and her figure is so elegant! Who can she be? 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
―Schiller 
The tower doors opened very early, the next day. Julien woke with a start. 
“Oh, Good God!” he thought. “Here’s my father. What unpleasantness!” 
Just then, a woman dressed like a peasant threw herself into his arms; he could just barely 
recognize her. It was Mademoiselle de La Mole. 
“You’re wicked! I couldn’t tell from your letter where you were. This crime, as you call it, 
is simply a noble act of vengeance, and shows me all the loftiness of the heart beating in your 
breast. I only found out in Verrières....” 
Despite his bias against Mademoiselle de La Mole (which, incidentally, he never directly 
admitted to himself), Julien found her extremely pretty. How could he not see, in everything 
she  did,  and  everything  she  said,  noble,  unaffected  feelings  far  beyond  what  a  petty,  vulgar 
soul could have dared? He still believed he had loved a queen; after a few moments, he said to 
her, with a rare nobility of both speech and thought: 
“I saw the future wonderfully clearly. After my death, I saw you remarried to Monsieur de 
Croisenois,  who  would  be  marrying  a  widow.  The  noble  but  a  bit  romantic  soul  of  this 
charming widow had been so shocked by a bizarre occurrence, for her both tragic and great, 
that  she  became  a  convert  to  the  cult  of  common  prudence,  and  took  the  trouble  to 
understand the real worth of the young marquis. You would have been resigned to everyday 
happiness: respect, wealth, a lofty rank...But, my dear Mathilde, your coming here, should it be 
suspected, would be a fatal blow for Monsieur de La Mole, and for that he will never forgive 
me. I’ve already caused him so much sorrow! The academician will be saying he nourished a 
serpent in his breast.” 
“I confess I did not expect so much cold reasoning, so much concern for the future,” said 
Mademoiselle de La Mole, almost angry. “My chambermaid, virtually as cautious as you are, 
took herself a passport, and I’ve been traveling, as fast as I could, under the name Madame 
Michelet.” 
“And Madame Michelet was able to arrive where she now is, just as easily as that?” 
“Ah,  you’re  always  the  superior  man  I  favored!  First,  I  offered  a  hundred  francs  to  a 
judge’s secretary, who acted as if my getting in here was an impossibility. But once the money 
was  in  his  hand,  this  respectable  man  kept  me  waiting,  and  raised  all  sorts  of  objections.  I 
wondered if he was thinking of robbing me....” She stopped. 
“And?” said Julien. 
“Don’t be angry, my little Julien,” she said, hugging him. “I had to give the secretary my 
name:  he  thought  I  was  some  young  working  girl  from  Paris,  who’d  fallen  in  love  with 
handsome Julien...In fact, those are his words. I swore I was your wife, and I have permission 
to see you every day.” 
“The  idiocy  is  complete,”  thought  Julien.  “I  haven’t  been  able  to  stop  it.  But  after  all, 
Monsieur de La Mole is such a great lord that the newspapers, and their readers, will know 
how  to  invent  excuses  when  a  young  colonel  marries  this  charming  widow.  My  imminent 
death will muffle everything else.” He abandoned himself, delighted, to Mathilde’s love, which 
contained madness, greatness of soul, everything strangest and most remarkable. She seriously 
proposed dying with him. 
After the first ecstasies, and when her happiness at seeing Julien had been sated, a lively 
curiosity suddenly seized her mind. She looked her lover over and found him far beyond what 
she had been imagining. Boniface de La Mole seemed to be resuscitated in him, but even more 
heroic. 
She  visited  the  region’s  leading  lawyers,  and  offended  them  by  offering  gold  rather  too 
crudely. But they ultimately accepted the case. 
 
 
Chapter Thirty-Eight: A Powerful Man 
She  quickly  decided  that,  in  Besan04on,  any  dealings  of  a  doubtful  nature,  in  which 
important matters were at stake, were completely dependent on Father de Frilair. 
Using  her  obscure  assumed  name,  she  at  first  experienced  insurmountable  difficulties, 
and could not reach the Congregation of the Holy Virgin’s all-powerful agent. But rumors had 
soon  spread  all  over  town  about  the  beautiful,  young,  fashionable  dressmaker,  come  to 
Besan04on from Paris, wild with love, to console the young ecclesiastic, Julien Sorel. 
Mathilde  hurried,  alone  and  on  foot,  along  the  streets  of  Besan04on;  she  hoped  no  one 
would  recognize  her.  In  any  case,  she  thought  it  unwise  for  her  cause  to  produce  a  great 
impression on ordinary people. She was foolish enough to dream of starting a revolution, to 
rescue Julien as he was going to his death. Mademoiselle de La Mole fancied herself dressed 
simply, as befitted a woman who was suffering; she was in fact dressed to catch every eye. 
In  Besan04on,  she  was  the  center  of  attention  everywhere  she  went,  until  finally,  after  a 
week of petitioning, she obtained an audience with Father de Frilair. 
No matter how courageous she might be, two ideas―powerful men in the Congregation 
of  the  Holy  Virgin,  and  foxlike  wickedness―were  so  strongly  linked  in  her  mind  that  she 
shook as she stood at the episcopal palace door and rang the bell. She could barely walk when 
she had to climb the stairway leading to the vicar-general’s rooms. The palace’s empty silence 
gave  her  chills.  “I’ll  sit  in  an  armchair,  and  the  chair  will  take  hold  of  me.  I’ll  disappear.  To 
whom can my chambermaid go, seeking news of me? The police captain will be careful not to 
do anything...I am totally alone in this great town!” 
Her first glimpse of the vicar-general’s rooms reassured her. First, the door was opened by 
a  servant  in  very  elegant  livery.  The  drawing  room  where  one  waited  displayed  a  subtle, 
delicate luxury to be found, in Paris, only in the best houses. The moment she saw Father de 
Frilair,  who  approached  her  most  paternally,  all  her  notions  of  horrible  criminality 
disappeared.  The  appearance  of  this  handsome  man  did  not  in  the  least  evoke  a  sense  of 
energetic virtue, more than a little barbaric, so obnoxious to Paris society. The half smile on 
the  priest’s  face―he  who  controlled  everything  in  Besan04on―proclaimed  a  man  of  good 
manners, the learned prelate, the crafty administrator. Mathilde felt herself back in Paris. 
It  did  not  take  more  than  a  few  moments  before  Mathilde  admitted  that  she  was  the 
daughter of his powerful adversary, Marquis de La Mole. 
“I am not in fact Madame Michelet,” she said, resuming her haughty bearing, “and that 
admission  costs  me  very  little,  for  I  have  come  to  consult  you,  sir,  about  the  possibility  of 
arranging  Monsieur  de  La  Vernaye’s  escape.  First  of  all,  he  is  guilty  of  nothing  more  than 
thoughtlessness: the woman he fired at is doing well. Secondly, in order to bribe underlings I 
will give you, here and now, fifty thousand francs, and pledge myself to doubling that. And, 
finally,  my  gratitude  and  that  of  my  family  will  find  nothing  impossible  for  whoever  saves 
Monsieur de La Vernaye.” 
The vicar-general was astonished at this name. Mathilde showed him several letters from 
the minister of war, addressed to Monsieur Julien Sorel de La Vernaye. 
“You can see, sir, that my father has made himself responsible for the accused’s fortunes. I 
married  him,  in  secret:  my  father  wished  him  to  be  a  commissioned  senior  officer  before 
announcing this marriage―not at all a usual one for a de La Mole.” 
Mathilde saw the kindly, pleasantly sweet-tempered expression fade swiftly away, step by 
step,  as  Father  de  Frilair  made  these  important  discoveries.  Shrewdness,  blended  with 
profound duplicity, settled onto his face. 
The vicar-general was uncertain; he reread the official documents, slowly. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
“How  should  I  act,  in  the  face  of  these  strange  revelations?  This  sets  me  in  a  familiar 
relationship,  all  of  a  sudden,  with  a  woman  who  is  a  friend  of  the  famous  Madame  de 
Fervaques, niece of the all-powerful Bishop of ―――, he who creates bishops here in France. 
“That  which  has  seemed  to  be  the  remote  future  has  unexpectedly  materialized.  This 
could lead me to everything I have wished for.” 
Mathilde was initially frightened, seeing how this powerful man’s face kept changing: she 
was alone with him in a secluded room. “But Good Lord!” she soon told herself. “Wouldn’t it 
be  the  worst  thing  that  could  have  happened,  had  I  made  no  impression  at  all  on  the  cold 
egotism of a power- and pleasure-glutted priest?” 
Dazed  by  the  swift,  unexpected  vision  of  actually  becoming  a  bishop,  stunned  by 
Mathilde’s quick intelligence, for a moment Father de Frilair’s defenses were no longer fully 
operational. Mademoiselle de La Mole saw him virtually at her feet, ambitious and eager to the 
point of nervous trembling. 
“It’s all quite apparent,” she thought. “Nothing will be impossible, here, for Madame de 
Fervaques’s friend.” Although still moved by gloomy jealousy, she was courageous enough to 
explain that Julien was on intimate terms with Marshall de Fervaques’s widow, and had met, 
almost daily, the Bishop of ―――. 
“Any  list  of  thirty-six  jurors,  drawn  by  chance  even  four  or  five  times  over,  and 
representative of the most important residents of this district,” said the vicar-general, grasping 
ambition visible on his face as he carefully stressed each and every word, “would be extremely 
unlikely not to include eight or ten of my friends, who would be the most sensible of the whole 
lot. I would usually have a majority―even more than that, indeed―of the necessary votes. You 
see, mademoiselle, I can very easily pardon and exonerate―” 
He suddenly stopped himself, as if amazed by what he was saying: he’d been admitting 
things never spoken of in front of secular people. 
Then Mathilde was stunned, in turn, when Father de Frilair disclosed that, above all other 
things,  what  had  astounded,  and  interested,  Besan04on  society  about  Julien’s  bizarre 
adventures was that he had begun by inspiring a grand passion in Madame de Rênal, and for a 
long time had reciprocated it. The priest had no trouble seeing how this account produced a 
strong reaction. 
“Now  I  can  even  the  score!”  he  thought.  “Finally,  I  have  a  way  of  managing  this  very 
determined  little  lady:  I  was  quivering,  afraid  of  not  finding  one.”  The  noble  and  rather 
unmanageable charm of this beautiful woman doubled, in his eyes, as he saw her virtually a 
supplicant. He recovered his cold collectedness, and did not hesitate to twist the dagger in her 
heart. 
“I  wouldn’t  be  surprised,  in  the  end,”  he  said  casually,  “if  we  learned  that  jealousy  was 
behind Monsieur Sorel’s having fired two shots at this woman, once so dearly beloved. It’s not 
likely that she has deprived  herself of all  human pleasures, and  of late she very  often saw a 
certain young priest from Dijon, a kind of Jansenist without manners or morals, as of course 
they all are.” 
Father  de  Frilair  took  vast  sensuous  delight  in  torturing,  very  slowly,  this  pretty  young 
girl, whose weak side he took by surprise. 
“And why,” he said, fastening his burning eyes on Mathilde, “why would Monsieur Sorel 
have chosen a church, if it hadn’t been because, at exactly that moment, his rival was there, 
celebrating mass? Everyone agrees on the vast intelligence, and even more on the good sense, 
of this happy man you are shielding. What could be simpler than to hide himself in Monsieur 
de Rênal’s gardens, which he knew so well? There, with the virtual certainty of not being seen, 
or arrested, or even suspected, he could have killed the woman who had made him so jealous.” 
 
 
Chapter Thirty-Nine: Plotting 
This  argument,  apparently  so  legitimate,  drove  Mathilde  out  of  control.  Her  soul  was 
lofty,  but  saturated  in  the  sterile  prudence  which,  in  sophisticated  society,  is  considered  an 
accurate depiction of the human heart: it had not been fashioned to understand, quickly  or 
easily, the joy of mocking such prudence, which to a burning soul can be so inspiriting. In the 
upper ranks of Paris high society, where Mathilde had always dwelled, passion can only very 
rarely cut through prudence. People who throw themselves out of windows always leap from 
the upper stories. 
The vicar-general was finally sure he had everything under control. He let Mathilde know 
(and was surely lying) that he could do as he liked, in dealing with the public official who was 
prosecuting Julien’s case. 
If he had not thought Mathilde so very pretty, Father de Frilair would not have spoken to 
her so openly until, at least, the fifth or sixth interview. 
Chapter Thirty-Nine: Plotting 
Castres, 1676: A man had just murdered his sister, in the house next to mine; this gentleman had previously 
been  guilty  of  murder.  His  father,  by  having  five  hundred  francs  distributed,  in  secret,  among  the  town 
councillors, saved his son’s life. 
―Locke, A Trip To France21 
Leaving  the  bishop’s  palace,  Mathilde  had  no  hesitation  about  sending  a  courier  to 
Madame de Fervaques: fear of compromising herself did not hold her back for a second. She 
begged her rival to secure a letter for Father de Frilair, handwritten by the Bishop of ―――. 
She went so far as to plead that Madame de Fervaques herself hurry to Besan04on. For a soul so 
jealous, and so proud, this was an heroic act. 
Following  Fouqué’s  advice,  she  had  been  careful  not  to  tell  Julien  about  any  of  these 
proceedings.  Her  presence  sufficiently  disturbed  him,  without  adding  more.  Far  more 
respectable  in  the  face  of  death  than  ever  before  in  his  life,  Julien  felt  remorseful  not  only 
toward Monsieur de La Mole, but toward Mathilde as well. 
“What’s  this?”  he  said  to  himself.  “I  find  myself  paying  no  attention  to  her,  and  even 
feeling bored. She’s ruining herself for me, and this is how I repay her! Am I as bad as all that?” 
He had not been much concerned about this, when he’d been ambitious: in those days, the 
only shame he felt was for not achieving success. 
His  moral  discomfort,  when  he  was  with  Mathilde,  was  even  more  marked  because,  at 
those very moments, he was inspiring in her the most extraordinary and most insane passion. 
All she talked about was the wild, exotic sacrifices she wished she could make to save him. 
Excited  by  feelings  that  she  cherished,  and  that  swept  before  them  all  her  pride,  she 
wished she could fill every second of her life with some dramatic development. The weirdest 
plans, and the most perilous for her, filled her long sessions with Julien. The jailers, who had 
been well paid, let her do what she liked. Mathilde’s ideas did not stop at the sacrifice of her 
reputation: she did not care if every member of good society knew how things were with her. 
Falling on her knees in front of the king’s carriage, as it galloped along, and begging for Julien’s 
pardon, catching the king’s eye at the risk of being crushed a thousand times over, was one of 
the least extravagant daydreams concocted by her exalted, courageous heart. By making use of 
friends with posts close to the king, she was sure she could get into areas of the castle closed to 
the public. 
                                                             
21 John Locke (1632C1704); his Trip to France is found in Peter King’s 1676 The Life of John Locke, with extracts 
from his Correspondance, Journals, and Commonplace Books. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Julien did not consider himself worth this much devotion: to tell the truth, he was tired of 
heroism. Simple tenderness, unsophisticated and even shy, would have made an impression on 
him, but Mathilde’s proud soul always required a public, the presence of all those other people. 
In the middle of all her suffering, and all her fears for her lover’s life (she did not want to 
survive him), she had a hidden need to astonish the public with the utter extravagance of her 
love, and the sublimity of everything she was trying to do. 
Julien was not happy, finding himself indifferent to all this heroism. How would he have 
felt had he known all the craziness she piled on that devoted, but thoroughly reasonable―as 
well as limited―spirit, good Fouqué? 
Fouqué was bewildered, and could not really criticize Mathilde’s devotion, since he too 
would  have  sacrificed  everything  he  had,  exposing  himself  to  the  greatest  perils  in  order  to 
save Julien. He was staggered by the quantities of gold she dispensed. In the beginning, he had 
been  impressed  by  the  vast  sums  she  spent,  having  a  provincial’s  absolute  veneration  of 
money. 
He finally discovered that Mademoiselle de La Mole’s plans were not always fixed, and, to 
his  immense  relief,  he  devised  a  way  of  describing  this  utterly  wearying  person:  she  was 
changeable. To proceed from this label to that of scatterbrained―a provincial’s most damning 
criticism―was no great leap. 
“How  strange,”  Julien  told  himself  one  day  as  Mathilde  was  leaving  his  prison,  “that  so 
violent a passion, directed toward me, leaves me so cold! And just two months ago, I adored 
her!  I’ve  read,  certainly,  that  death’s  approach  turns  you  away  from  everything.  But  to  feel 
myself an ingrate and be unable to change! Am I an egotist?” He subjected himself to the most 
humiliating censure. 
In  his  heart,  ambition  had  died,  but  from  its  ashes  another  passion  had  emerged:  he 
called it remorse for having tried to kill Madame de Rênal. 
In  fact,  he  was  frantically  in  love  with  her.  He  experienced  an  odd  happiness,  left 
absolutely alone and not worried about being interrupted, completely surrendering himself to 
memories  of  the  happy  days  he  had  once  passed,  at  Verrières  and  at  Vergy.  The  smallest 
incidents  from  those  times,  which  had  flown  past  far  too  rapidly,  had  a  freshness,  an 
irresistible charm for him. He never thought of his successes in Paris: he was weary of them. 
These  tendencies,  which  grew  rapidly,  were  to  some  extent  perceptible  to  Mathilde’s 
jealousy.  She  saw  very  clearly  how  she  had  to  struggle  against  his  desire  to  be  alone. 
Sometimes,  in  her  terror,  she  spoke  Madame  de  Rênal’s  name.  She  could  see  Julien  shiver. 
After that, her passion was unlimited, unrestrained. 
“If he dies, then I will die, too,” she said to herself, as sincerely as such things can be said. 
“What will they say, in the drawing rooms of Paris, seeing a girl of my rank so adore a lover 
about to die? To find such sentiments, you’d have to return to the day of heroes: it was love of 
this kind that made hearts flutter, in the time of Charles IX and Henry III.” 
In the middle of the most intense ecstasies, when she pressed his head to her heart: “Oh!” 
she told herself, horrified, “this lovely head is going to be chopped off! All right!” she went on, 
inflamed  by  a  heroism  that  contained  its  own  happiness.  “My  lips,  now  pressed  against  his 
beautiful hair, will be cold as ice, less than twenty-four hours later.” 
Thoughts of these heroic moments, and of a ghastly eroticism, held her in an invincible 
grip.  The  idea  of  suicide,  itself  so  engrossing,  and  before  then  so  entirely  foreign  to  her 
haughty soul, made its way into her mind and soon ruled it with iron control. “No,” she said to 
herself proudly, “my ancestors’ blood hasn’t become lukewarm, as it has come down to me.” 
“I  have  a  favor  to  ask  of  you,”  her  lover  said  to  her  one  day.  “Let  your  child’s  nurse  be 
someone in Verrières. Madame de Rênal would watch over the nurse.” 
 
 
Chapter Thirty-Nine: Plotting 
“That’s a very difficult thing to ask of me....” And Mathilde grew pale. 
“You’re right, and I beg your pardon, a thousand times over,” exclaimed Julien, shaking off 
his reverie and clasping her in his arms. 
Having dried her tears, he came back to his notion, but more skillfully. He colored the 
conversation with philosophical melancholy. He spoke of the future, which was to close, for 
him, so very soon. “You surely agree, my dearest, that passions are accidental, in these lives of 
ours, but they are accidents that happen to superior souls...My son’s death, in the end, would 
be a blessing for your family’s pride: that’s what underlings would think. Disregard will be the 
fate of this child of misery and shame...I hope that on a day I have no wish to set, but which I 
am  strong  enough  to  foresee,  you  will  obey  my  last  wishes:  you  will  marry  Monsieur  de 
Croisenois.” 
“Once I’ve been dishonored!” 
“Dishonor cannot adhere to a name like yours. You’ll be a widow, the widow of a lunatic, 
and that’s all. I’ll go further: my crime, for which there is absolutely no monetary motive, will 
not be dishonorable. In those times, perhaps, some philosophical legislator will have secured, 
despite his contemporaries’ prejudices, the abolition of the death penalty. Then some friendly 
voice will cite an example: ’Consider: Mademoiselle de La Mole’s first husband was crazy, yes, 
but  not  a  wicked  man,  not  a  scoundrel.  It  was  absurd  to  cut  off  his  head....’  And  then  my 
memory won’t be infamous, at least after a certain length of time...Your position in the world, 
your  wealth  and,  if  you’ll  permit  me  to  say  so,  your  first-rate  mind,  will  allow  Monsieur  de 
Croisenois,  after  he’s  become  your  husband,  to  play  a  role  which,  on  his  own,  he’d lack  the 
ability  to  achieve.  All  he  has  is  birth  and bravery,  and  these  qualities,  by  themselves,  which 
gave a man the reputation of being accomplished, in 1729, are anachronisms a century later, 
and  only  lead  to  pretentiousness.  There  must  be  other  qualities,  before  you  can  lead  our 
French youth. 
“You’ll bring a firm, adventuresome character to the assistance of whatever political party 
you  choose  for  your  husband.  You  could  be  the  successor  to  women  like  Madame  de 
Chevreuse  and  the  Duchess  of  Longueville,  in  the  great  Fronde  wars22  of  the  seventeenth 
century...But then, my beloved, the heavenly fire which burns in you, now, will have cooled a 
little.... 
“Permit me to say to you,” he added, after many more preparatory observations, “that in 
fifteen years you’ll perceive as an excusable folly, but nevertheless a folly, the love you now feel 
for me....” 
He  stopped  abruptly,  and  returned  to  his  daydreams.  He  faced,  as  he  had  earlier,  the 
thought that had so shocked Mathilde: “In fifteen years, Madame de Rênal will adore my son, 
and you will have forgotten him.” 
                                                             
22  Civil  wars  brought  about  by  the  power  vaccuum  of  the  minority  of  Louis  XIV,  from  1648  to  1653. 
Resentment against the late Cardinal de Richelieu and his political heir, Mazarin, spurred a quest for power 
among  the great nobles and the  parlements. In an era filled with larger-than-life  figures,  the  Duchesses de 
Chevreuse and de Longueville stood out. The former (1600C79) was a lifelong plotter and political schemer, 
and was an ally of the  Cardinal de Retz  (see note for p. 101, l. 11), who was also  her unmarried daughter’s 
acknowledged  lover.  The  Duchesse  de  Longueville  (1619C79)  was  a  Princess  of  the  Blood  Royal,  cousin  of 
Louis  XIV,  and  one  of  the  most  beautiful  women  of  the  age.  She  brought  her  lover,  the  Duke  de  La 
Rochefoucauld―future author of the Maximes ―into the party of her brother, the Grand Condé (see note for p. 
38, l. 33), and had many picaresque adventures of her own in the course of the war. The word Fronde means 
slingshot, given to this conflict by contemporaries because of its opera bouffe qualities, but they inflicted five 
years of civil war on France. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Chapter Forty: Tranquillity 
It’s because I was foolish, then, that I’m wise today. Oh you philosopher, seeing nothing but the things of 
this moment, how shortsighted you are! Your eye was not made for tracing the subterranean labor of the 
passions. 
―Madame Goethe23 
Their time together was interrupted by an interrogatory, followed by a conference with 
the lawyer responsible for Julien’s defense. These were the only truly unpleasant moments in a 
life without cares, filled with tender daydreams. 
“It was murder, and premeditated,” Julien said to the judge as well as to the lawyer. “I’m 
sorry, gentlemen,” he added, smiling, “but this reduces your job to a very small affair.” 
“After all,” Julien said to himself, when he had freed himself from both of them, “I have to 
be  brave―and  apparently  braver  than  either  of  these  two.  They  take  as  the  height  of  all 
misfortune, as the king of all terrors, this duel that has an unfortunate ending, and I will only 
take it seriously when the day arrives. 
“It’s because I’ve known greater misery,” Julien continued, philosophizing with himself. “I 
was suffering far more, on my first trip to Strasbourg, when I thought I’d been abandoned by 
Mathilde...And how I longed, with such passion, for that perfect intimacy which, today, leaves 
me so cold! ... In fact, I am happier alone than when this wonderfully beautiful girl shares my 
solitude....” 
The  defense  lawyer,  a  man  of  rules  and  formalities,  thought  Julien  was  crazy;  like  the 
public at large, he thought it was jealousy that had made him pick up his pistols. He tried, one 
day, to make Julien understand that such a plea, whether true or false, would serve him very 
well  in  the  trial.  But  the  accused  was  instantly  transformed  back  into  a  fiery  and  mordant 
creature. 
“On your life, sir,” cried Julien, beside himself, “be careful, never utter that abominable lie 
again!” The cautious lawyer was afraid, for just a moment, that he might be killed, too. 
He  polished  his  address  to  the  court,  because  the  decisive  time  was  fast  approaching. 
Besan04on and the entire region talked about nothing but this celebrated case. Julien paid no 
attention: he had requested that things of this sort never be mentioned to him. 
That day, Fouqué and Mathilde wanted to tell him about some much-discussed rumors, 
quite likely, according to them, to raise his hopes. Julien had stopped them at the first word. 
“Let me live my imaginary life. Your petty concerns, your details of real existence, all of 
them more or less irritating to me, pull me away from heaven. Each of us has to die as best we 
can: me, I prefer to think about death exclusively in my own way. What do other people mean 
to me? My relationships to other people are going to be abruptly cut off. Please, don’t talk to 
me  anymore  about  such  people.  It’s  more  than  enough,  having  to  see  the  judge  and  the 
lawyer.” 
“Indeed,” he said to himself, “it seems my destiny is to die dreaming. An unknown, like 
me, certain of being forgotten in less than two weeks, would be a real fool, wouldn’t he, if he 
tried being dramatic.... 
“How strange, all the same, that I never learned the art of enjoying life until I could see its 
end closing in on me.” 
He  spent  these  final  days  walking  on  the  narrow  terrace,  at  the  very  top  of  the  tower, 
smoking some first-rate cigars Mathilde had brought for him, by courier, from Holland; more 
                                                             
23  In  the  original  French,  the  word  foolish  (fou)  appears  in  the  masculine  form  in  this  quote  attributed  to 
Madame Goethe. Many editors have mistakenly replaced “Madame” with “J. W. von Goethe.” 
 
 
Chapter Forty: Tranquillity 
than likely his appearance was looked for and watched, every day, through all the telescopes in 
town. His thoughts were at Vergy. He never mentioned Madame de Rênal to Fouqué, but two 
or three times his friend told him she was recovering quickly, and the words resounded in his 
heart. 
While Julien lived almost completely in his inner world, Mathilde, deeply concerned with 
reality  (as  an  aristocratic  heart  ought  to  be),  had  brought  the  correspondence  between 
Madame de Fervaques and Father de Frilair to such a point of direct intimacy that the great 
words diocese and bishopric had already been pronounced. 
Madame  de  Fervaques’s  elderly  uncle,  responsible  for  the  assignment  of  Church 
preferments,  had  added,  in  a  footnote  to  a  letter  he  wrote  her, “That  poor  Sorel  is  simply  a 
fool; I hope he can be returned to us.” 
Seeing  these  words,  Father  de  Frilair  was  incredibly  excited.  He  had  no  doubts  about 
saving Julien. 
“Without that Jacobin law, requiring an absolutely endless list of possible jurors, with no 
other  purpose,  actually,  but  to  strip  away  all  the  influence  of  well-born  people,”  he  told 
Mathilde,  the evening  before  lots  were  drawn  for  the  thirty-six  jurors,  “I  could  have  already 
told you the verdict. I certainly arranged Father N―――’s acquittal....” 
The next day he was delighted to find, among the names pulled from the lottery box, five 
Besan04on members of the Congregation of the Holy Virgin, and among those from outside the 
city, Messieurs de Valenod, de Moirod, and De Cholin. ―”I can speak for these eight jurors,” 
he told Mathilde. “The first five are no more than machines. Valenod is my agent, Moirod owes 
me  everything,  and  De  Cholin  is  an  idiot  and  afraid  of  everyone.”  Newspapers  spread  the 
jurors’ names all over the district, and Madame de Rênal, to her husband’s inexpressible terror, 
decided to go to Besan04on. Her husband was barely able to convince her that, if she went, she 
should  at  least  not  leave  her  bed,  to  save  herself  the  unpleasantness  of  being  called  as  a 
witness. “You don’t understand my situation,” said the former mayor of Verrières. “I have now 
defected  to  the  liberals.  Certainly,  that  dissolute  rascal,  de  Valenod,  and  the  vicar-general, 
won’t have much trouble getting the prosecutor and the judges to make things unpleasant for 
me.” 
It was not hard for Madame de Rênal to agree to her husband’s request. “If I appear in 
court,” she told herself, “it would look as if I were seeking revenge.” 
But in spite of all the promises she’d made, to her confessor and to her husband, about 
being  cautious  and  sensible,  she  had  barely  reached  Besan04on  when  she  wrote,  in  her  own 
hand, to each of the thirty-six jurors: 
I will not appear at the trial, sir, because my presence might prejudice Monsieur Sorel’s 
case.  There  is  only  one  thing  in  the  world  I  passionately  desire,  which  is  that  he  be  saved. 
Please  be  in  no  doubt:  the  frightful  idea  that,  because  of  me,  an  innocent  man  has  been 
consigned to death, would poison the rest of my life and, without any doubt, would shorten it. 
How could you condemn him to death, while I live on? No, surely society has no right to strip 
away life, and above all the life of someone like Julien Sorel. Everyone in Verrières has known 
some  of  his  wilder  moments.  This  poor  young  man  has  many  powerful  enemies,  but  even 
among  his  enemies  (and  how  many  of  them  there  are!)  is  there  anyone  who  doubts  his 
wonderful  gifts  and  his  profound  learning?  This  is  not  an  ordinary  citizen,  sir,  the  man  on 
whom you will be passing judgment. For nearly eighteen months we have all known him to be 
pious, wise, hardworking. Yet two or three times a year, he was overtaken by fits of melancholy 
that approached aberration. The whole town of Verrières, all our neighbors at Vergy, where we 
spend  our  summers,  our  whole  family,  and  the  deputy  governor  of  the  district  himself,  will 
affirm his exemplary piety: he knows the Holy Bible by heart. Would anyone lacking in piety 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
have worked so hard, over the years, to memorize the holy book? My sons will have the honor 
of bringing you this letter: they are children. Take the trouble to question them, sir: they will 
give you whatever details, about this poor young man, that might yet be needed to convince 
you of how barbarous it would be to convict him. Far from revenging me, you would be killing 
me.  What  can  his  enemies  say  to  contradict  me?  There  is  not  much  danger  in  the  wound, 
caused by one of those wild moments that even my children noticed in their tutor: after less 
than two months I have been able to take the mail coach from Verrières to Besan04on. Should I 
learn, sir, that you hesitate in any way whatever to release someone so minimally guilty from 
the law’s barbarity, I will rise from my bed, where I remain only because my husband has so 
ordered me, and I will come and throw myself at your feet. 
Determine, sir, that premeditation is not a fixed and unwavering affair, and you will not 
have the blood of an innocent man on your conscience, etc., etc. 
Chapter Forty-One: The Trial 
The  whole  region  will  long  remember  this  celebrated  case.  Concern  for  the  accused  heightened  into 
agitation, because his crime, though astonishing, was not horrible. And even had it been, the young man was 
so  handsome!  His  immense  good  fortune,  brought  to  an  end  so  soon,  swelled  people’s  pity.  Will  he  be 
found guilty, women asked the men they knew? And they grew pale as they waited for the answer. 
―Sainte-Beuve 
The day finally came, the day so dreaded by Madame de Rênal and Mathilde. 
The  town’s  strange  appearance  heightened  their  terror;  even  Fouqué’s  steady  soul  was 
troubled. The whole province had come hurrying to Besan04on, to see this romantic case tried. 
For several days, all the inns were filled to the brim. The presiding judge had to deal with 
a storm of ticket requests; every lady in town wanted to be there; portraits of Julien were being 
sold in the streets, etc., etc. 
Mathilde  had  been  holding  in  reserve,  for  exactly  this  moment,  a  letter  written  in  its 
entirety  in  the  hand  of  the  Bishop  of  ―――.  This  prelate,  administrator  of  the  Church 
throughout France, and creator of bishops, took the trouble to ask for Julien’s acquittal. The 
night before the trial, Mathilde brought this letter to the all-powerful vicar-general. 
When the interview had ended, and she was leaving in tears: “I will vouch for the jury’s 
verdict,”  said  Father  de  Frilair,  finally  shedding  his  diplomatic  reserve,  and  himself  almost 
moved.  “Among  the  dozen  persons  charged  with  determining  if  the  crime,  alleged  to  have 
been committed by the man you have been assisting, has been proven, and above all whether 
there  was  premeditation,  there  are  six  who  are  dedicated  to  my  good  fortune,  and  I  have 
informed  them  that  it  is  up  to  them  whether  or  not  I  become  a  bishop.  Baron  de  Valenod, 
whom I made mayor of Verrières, has complete control of his two subordinates, Messieurs de 
Moirod  and  de  Cholin.  Admittedly,  fate  has  given  us  two  jurors,  in  this  matter,  whose 
intentions  are  likely  to  be  exceedingly  poor.  On  the  other  hand,  although  they  are 
ultraliberals, on high occasions they are faithful to my orders, and I have asked them to vote 
with  Monsieur  de  Valenod.  I  have  been  informed  that  a  sixth  juror,  an  immensely  wealthy 
manufacturer,  and  a  long-winded  liberal,  is  secretly  angling  for  a  Ministry  of  War  contract, 
and surely he would not want to annoy me. I have told him that Monsieur de Valenod has my 
final orders.” 
“And just who is this Monsieur de Valenod?” Mathilde asked, concerned. 
“If you were acquainted with him, you could not doubt our success. He possesses a bold 
tongue, he is rude, coarse―in short, ideal for leading fools by the nose. He was plucked out of 
 
 
Chapter Forty-One: The Trial 
misery,  in  1814,  and  I  intend  to  make  him  governor  of  the  district.  He  is  quite  capable  of 
striking the other jurors, if they refuse to vote as he wishes.” 
Mathilde was somewhat reassured. 
She was to have another discussion that evening. In order not to prolong an unpleasant 
scene, the final result of which was, in his eyes, completely certain, Julien had resolved not to 
take the witness stand. 
“My lawyer will speak: that is surely sufficient,” he said to Mathilde. “I have no desire to 
be exposed to all my enemies, as a spectacle, for any longer than necessary. These provincials 
have been stunned by my rapid rise, which I owe to you, and, believe me, there isn’t one of 
them who doesn’t want me convicted, though they’ll all weep like idiots as I’m taken to my 
death.” 
“They want to see you humiliated: that’s very true,” Mathilde replied, “but I hardly think 
they’re savages. My presence in Besan04on, and the sight of my sorrow, has awakened interest 
in all the women. Your handsome face will do the rest. If you say anything, when you appear 
before the judges, the whole audience will be on your side, etc., etc.” 
The next day, at nine in the morning, when Julien came down from the tower, on his way 
to  the  great  hall  of  the  Palace  of  Justice,  the  gendarmes  almost  could  not  clear  away  an 
immense crowd crammed into the courtyard. Julien had slept well; he was very calm, and felt 
nothing but philosophic compassion for this envious mob that, without the slightest cruelty, 
would be applauding his death sentence. He was intensely startled, having been detained more 
than a quarter of an hour, surrounded by the crowd, finding himself forced to admit that his 
presence  stirred  the  public  to  affectionate  pity.  He  did  not  hear  a  single  unpleasant  word. 
“These provincials are not as nasty as I believed,” he said to himself. 
Entering  the  courtroom,  he  was  struck  by  the  elegant  architecture.  It  was  true  Gothic, 
with a host of lovely little columns of carved stone, fashioned with the greatest of care. He felt 
as if he were in England. 
But  soon  his  attention  was  captured  by  twelve  or  fifteen  pretty  women  who,  seated 
directly across from the prisoner’s bench, filled the three galleries over the judges and jurors. 
Looking once more at the audience, he saw that the circular gallery all around the hall was full 
of women. Most were young and seemed to him very pretty; their eyes shone and were filled 
with  concern.  In  the  rest  of  the  auditorium,  the  crowd  was  enormous:  those  outside  were 
beating on the doors, and the guards could not keep them quiet. 
As all the eyes that had been looking for Julien saw him there, and observed him ascend 
to  the  slightly  elevated  spot  designated  for  the  accused,  he  was  greeted  by  a  murmur  both 
surprised and tender. 
That day, it might have been said he was not yet twenty. His clothing was very simple, but 
perfectly graceful; his hair and his face were charming: Mathilde had herself presided over his 
grooming. He was extremely pale. He had hardly taken his seat when he heard, from all sides: 
“My  Lord!  How  young  he  is!  ...  He’s  nothing  but  a  child...He’s  even  better-looking  than  his 
picture.” 
“Defendant,”  said  the  policeman  sitting  to  Julien’s  right,  “do  you  see  those  six  ladies, 
sitting in the gallery over there?” The policeman pointed out a small gallery, protruding into 
the  hall  just  above  the  jurors.  “That’s  the  governor’s  wife,”  the  policeman  went  on,  “next  to 
Marquise de M―――, the one who thinks so well of  you; I heard her speaking to the chief 
judge. And next to her is Madame Derville....” 
“Madame  Derville!”  Julien  exclaimed,  blushing  fiercely.  “When  she  leaves  here,”  he 
thought, “she’ll go and write to Madame de Rênal.” He did not know that Madame de Rênal 
had come to Besan04on. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
The witnesses were thoroughly examined. From the very first words of the prosecutor’s 
statement,  two  of  the  ladies  in  the  small  gallery,  directly  facing  Julien,  dissolved  in  tears. 
“Madame Derville is not as moved as they are,” thought Julien. But he noted that her face had 
turned quite red. 
The prosecutor heaped up pathos, in bad French, about the barbarity of the crime. Julien 
observed that the ladies sitting near Madame Derville looked very disapproving. Several jurors, 
apparently people known to these women, spoke to them, and they seemed to be reassured. 
“That cannot help but be a good omen,” Julien thought. 
To  that  point,  he  felt  himself  overwhelmingly,  and  unmitigatedly,  contemptuous  of 
everyone on the prosecution side. The platitudinous eloquence of the prosecutor added to his 
disgust.  But  bit  by  bit  Julien’s  tepid  soul  quickened,  in  the  face  of  the  signs  of  interest 
obviously directed at him. 
He  was  pleased  by  his  lawyer’s  firm  bearing. “No  fancy  phrases,”  Julien  directed,  as  the 
lawyer prepared to speak. 
“All  this  empty  eloquence,  stolen  from  Bossuet  and  pointed  at  you,  has  in  fact  helped 
you,” the lawyer told Julien as he rose. In fact, Julien’s lawyer had not been speaking for five 
minutes  when  all  the  women’s  handkerchiefs  were  out.  Encouraged,  the  lawyer  made  some 
very  emphatic  remarks  to  the  jurors.  Julien  shivered,  feeling  himself  at  the  point  of  tears. 
“Good God! What will my enemies be saying?” 
He was prepared to yield to the tenderness creeping up on him when, luckily for him, he 
caught an overbearing glance from Baron de Valenod. 
“This pig’s eyes are blazing,” he said to himself. “How victorious his vulgar soul must feel! 
Even if my crime had produced nothing but this, I’d have to curse it. Lord knows what he’ll tell 
Madame de Rênal about me!” 
This  idea  erased  everything  else  from  his  mind.  But  not  too  long  afterward,  Julien  was 
brought back to himself, hearing the sounds of public approval. His lawyer had just ended his 
speech. Julien reminded himself that it was proper to shake the lawyer’s hand. The time had 
gone by very quickly. 
Refreshments were brought to the lawyer and to his client. Only then was Julien struck by 
something: not a single woman had gotten up and left, in order to have dinner. 
“Ah, I’m dying of hunger,” said the lawyer. “And you?” 
“Exactly the same,” Julien replied. 
“See? The governor’s wife has just had her dinner delivered,” said the lawyer, gesturing to 
the small gallery. “Have courage, everything went well.” 
The trial resumed. 
As  the  presiding  judge  presented  his  summation,  midnight  sounded.  The  judge  was 
forced to interrupt himself: in the midst of a silence born of universal anxiety, the tolling of the 
clock filled the hall. 
“This  is  how  my  last  day  on  earth  begins,”  thought  Julien.  And  soon  he  felt  himself 
burning with the idea of duty. He had controlled his emotions, to that point, and his resolve to 
remain silent had been firm. But when the presiding judge asked him if he had anything to 
say,  he  rose.  He  saw,  right  opposite  him,  Madame  Derville’s  eyes;  in  the  light  of  the  many 
lamps, they seemed unusually brilliant. “Is she by any chance crying?” he wondered. 
“Gentlemen of the Jury: 
“My  loathing  for  being  disdained,  which  I  thought  I  could  control  till  the  moment  of 
death,  now  obliges  me  to  speak.  Gentlemen,  I  do  not  have  the  honor  of  belonging  to  your 
class. What you see in me is a peasant, in revolt against the barrenness of his fate. 
 
 
Chapter Forty-One: The Trial 
“I ask no mercy of you,” Julien continued, his voice growing steadier. “I have absolutely no 
illusions: what awaits me is death, and it will be a just verdict. I have tried to kill a woman 
eminently worthy of respect, and of homage. Madame de Rênal was like a mother to me. My 
crime  is  atrocious―and  it  was  premeditated.  I  thoroughly  deserve  death,  gentlemen  of  the 
jury.  But  even  were  I  less  guilty,  what  I  see,  here,  is  men  who,  not  stopping  to  consider 
whatever  pity  my  youth  may  merit,  wish  to  punish―in  me―and  to  discourage  forever  all 
young people born into an inferior class, and in one way or another oppressed by poverty, who 
wish  for  themselves  the  happiness  of  a  good  education,  young  people  who  might  have  the 
audacity to mingle among those who are labeled, by the arrogance of the rich, ‘society.’ 
“There is my crime, gentlemen, and it will be punished even more severely if, in truth, I 
am not judged by my peers. I do not see, on these jury benches, a single wealthy peasant, but 
only the angry and indignant bourgeoisie.” 
For twenty minutes, Julien spoke like this, saying everything that had been in his heart. 
The prosecutor, who longed for aristocratic favor, was bouncing on his bench. But in spite of 
the somewhat abstract turn of phrase Julien employed, all the women melted in tears. Before 
he finished, Julien came back to the issue of premeditation, and to his repentance, and to the 
respect,  the  adoration―filial  and  limitless―that  he  felt  for  Madame  de  Rênal.  Madame 
Derville gave a cry and fainted away. 
One o’clock was sounding as the jurors retired to their room. Not a single woman had left 
her place; numbers of men had tears in their eyes. Conversation was, at first, very lively, but 
gradually,  as  they  waited  for  the  jury’s  decision,  universal  weariness  began  to  quiet  the 
audience. It was a solemn moment; the lamps were not burning as brightly as before. Julien, 
very weary indeed, heard people discussing, near him, whether the jury’s delay was a good or a 
bad omen. He saw with pleasure that everyone wished him well. The jury did not return, and 
still not a single woman left. 
Two o’clock had just sounded, and much stirring about was heard. The little door to the 
jury  room  swung  open.  Baron  de  Valenod  came  forward,  walking  gravely,  theatrically;  the 
other jurors followed him. He coughed, then announced, on his soul and conscience, the jury’s 
unanimous decision that Julien Sorel was guilty of murder, and murder with premeditation. 
This verdict carried with it the death sentence, which was pronounced a moment later. Julien 
looked at his watch, and was reminded of Count de Lavalette, who had escaped the guillotine. 
It was a quarter after two. “Today is Friday,” he thought. 
“Yes, but it’s a happy day for that Valenod, who just sentenced me to death...I am far too 
closely  watched;  Mathilde  can’t  possibly  save  me,  as  de  Lavalette’s  wife  saved  him. 
Accordingly,  in  three  days,  at  this  same  time,  I  will  know  what  to  think  about  the  great 
perhaps.” 
At  that  moment,  he  heard  a  cry  and  was  recalled  to  the  things  of  this  world.  All  the 
women around him were crying: he saw every face turned toward a small gallery, built into the 
highest part of a Gothic column. He learned, later, that Mathilde had been hidden there. There 
being  no  further  cry,  everyone  turned  to  look  at  Julien  again:  policemen  were  leading  him 
through the crowd. 
“Let’s give that scoundrel de Valenod nothing he can laugh about,” Julien thought. “With 
what a glib, contrite face he announced his verdict, and the death penalty! And the chief judge, 
though he’s been on the bench I don’t know how many years, had tears in his eyes as he said 
the words. How happy Valenod was, taking revenge for our old rivalry over Madame de Rênal! 
And now I’ll never see her again! It’s over...A last farewell is impossible, I know it...But how 
good it would have been to tell her how horrified I am, for what I did! 
“And these words only: I’ve been rightly condemned.” 
 
The Red and the Black 
 
Chapter Forty-Two 
Returned  to  prison,  Julien  was  put  into  a  cell  meant  especially  for  those  sentenced  to 
death. Ordinarily, he took in every small detail of his surroundings, but was not aware he’d not 
come back to his tower. He was imagining what he’d say to Madame de Rênal, if at the last 
moment he was fortunate enough to see her. He thought she’d cut him off, and wanted his 
first words to fully express repentance. Having done what he’d done, how could he persuade 
her he loved her and her only? “And, really, it was ambition that made me want to kill her, or 
else it was love for Mathilde.” 
Getting into bed, he realized the sheets were made of coarse cloth. His eyes were opened. 
“Ah,  I’m  in  solitary  confinement,”  he  told  himself,  “having  been  sentenced  to  death.  That’s 
quite right.... 
“Count Altamira told me that Danton, the night before he was to die, said in his rough 
voice: ’How odd: the verb “to guillotine” can’t be conjugated in all the tenses. You can say “I 
will be guillotined, you will be guillotined,” but you can’t say “I have been guillotined.” ’ 
“But  why  not?”  Julien  responded,  “if  there  is  another  life?.  ..  Oh,  if  what  I  find  is  the 
Christian  God,  I’m  ruined.  He’s  a  despot,  so  He’s  obsessed  with  revenge:  all  His  Bible  talks 
about  is  atrocious  punishments.  I’ve  never  loved  Him;  I’ve  never  even  wanted  to  believe 
anyone honestly loved Him. He’s utterly devoid of pity (and here Julien remembered several 
passages from the Bible). He’ll punish me with abominations...But if what I find is Fénelon’s 
God!24 He might tell me: ’Much will be forgiven thee, since thou hast loved much....’ 
“Have I loved much? Ah, yes, I loved Madame de Rênal, but I behaved atrociously. There, 
as I always did, I abandoned simple, modest worthiness in favor of what was brilliant.... 
“And yet, what a future! ... A cavalry colonel, if we had a war―an embassy secretary, in 
peacetime,  and  then  an  ambassador...because  I’d  have  quickly 
learned  all  about 
diplomacy...and if I were an absolute idiot, what rival would the Marquis de La Mole’s son-in-
law need to be afraid of? All my stupidities would have been forgiven, or more likely thought 
worthy. A man of high repute, enjoying high life in Vienna or London.... 
“Not exactly, sir: you’ll be guillotined in three days.” 
Julien laughed heartily at his own mordant wit. “Really, we all have two personalities,” he 
thought. “What devil thought up that nasty joke? 
“All right! Yes, my friend, guillotined in three days,” he replied to whoever or whatever 
had interrupted him. “Monsieur de Cholin will rent a window, for watching the show; he’ll go 
halves with Father Maslon. And then, to pay themselves back, which one of these two worthies 
will rob the other?” 
Suddenly, he thought of these lines from Rotrou’s play, Venceslas:25 
LADISLAS : My soul is prepared and ready. 
THE KING, LADISLAS’S FATHER : So is the scaffold. Bring it your head. 
“A  fine  reply!”  he  thought,  and  went  to  sleep.  Someone  woke  him,  the  next  morning, 
gripping him hard. 
                                                             
24 Fénelon was a humanistic but devout Christian; the love Julien has felt was probably not the sort Fénelon 
would have professed. 
25 One of the most popular and enduring plays of Jean Rotrou (1609C50). Venceslas, aging King of Poland, 
abdicates in order to avoid having to carry out the execution of his son, Ladislas, who has been convicted of 
murder. 
 
 
Chapter Forty-Two 
It  was  Mathilde.  “Good:  she  didn’t  understand  me.”  That  realization  restored  his  calm 
coolness.  Mathilde  looked  as  if  she’d  been  sick  for  six  months:  indeed,  she  was  not 
recognizable. 
“That vile de Frilair betrayed me,” she told him, wringing her hands. Anger kept her from 
crying. 
“Wasn’t  I  wonderful,  yesterday,  when  I  made  my  speech?”  Julien  replied.  “For  the  first 
time in my life, I was improvising! Of course, it may well be the last time, too.” 
Julien  was  playing  on  Mathilde’s  character  with  all  the  calm  skill  of  a  trained  pianist 
seated at a keyboard...”I don’t have the advantage of illustrious birth: true. But,” he went on, 
“Mathilde’s lofty soul has raised her lover to her level. Do you think Boniface de La Mole would 
have done better, facing these judges?” 
That  day,  Mathilde  was  unaffectedly  tender,  like  some  poor  girl  who  lived  high  on  the 
fifth story, but she could not get him to speak more straightforwardly. He did not realize it, 
but he was paying her back for the torments she had often inflicted. 
“We  have  no  idea  where  the  Nile  begins,”  he  said  to  himself.  “No  human  eye  has  ever 
been allowed to see the king of rivers as a simple little brook; so, too, no human eye will see 
Julien weak, first of all because he isn’t. But my heart is easily moved: perfectly ordinary words, 
if said truly, can affect my voice and even make my tears fall. How many times have dried-out 
hearts scorned me for this defect! They think I’m begging for mercy―and I can’t endure that. 
“It’s said Danton was moved by thoughts of his wife, even at the foot of the scaffold, but 
Danton had given strength to a nation of conceited puppies, and kept the enemy out of Paris. 
I’m the only one who knows what I might have been able to do...For everyone else, I’m pretty 
much a perhaps. 
“If Madame de Rênal were here in my cell, instead of Mathilde, could I have answered for 
what  I’ve  done?  The  intensity  of  both  my  despair  and  my  repentance  would  be  seen  by  the 
Valenods,  and  all  the  Franche-Comté  patricians,  as  vulgar  fear  of  death.  They’re  so  proud, 
these feeble-hearted men, because their wealth sets them above temptation! ‘See what it’s like,’ 
Messieurs  de  Moirod  and  de  Cholin  would  say―the  men  who  have  just  condemned  me  to 
death―’to be born a carpenter’s son! You can make yourself learned, and skillful―but ah, the 
spirit!  ...  That  cannot  be  learned.’  Not  even  by  this  wretched  Mathilde,  who’s  crying,  right 
now,” he said to himself, looking at her reddened eyes. .. and then he put his arms around her. 
Seeing real sorrow made him forget his philosophizing...”Perhaps she’s been crying all night,” 
he said to himself. “But, some day, how ashamed she’ll be, remembering this! She’ll see herself, 
in  her  early  youth,  having  been  led  astray  by  the  base  ideas  of  a  plebeian...De  Croisenois  is 
weak enough to marry her and, damn it, he’ll do very well. She’ll give him a role to play: 
“By the rights a steady spirit enjoys, all filled with high Ideals, against the coarser spirit of 
vulgar humans.26 
“Now that’s amusing: since I knew I had to die, all the poetry I’ve ever known has been 
coming back to me. This indicates a failing mind...” 
Mathilde  was  repeating,  her  voice  faint:  “He’s  there,  in  the  next  room.”  He  finally  paid 
attention to what she was saying.  “Her voice may be weak,” he thought, “but her imperious 
manner is still there. She’s keeping her voice down, so she can hold in her anger.” 
“And who’s there?” he said to her, gently. 
“The lawyer, so you can sign the appeal.” 
“I won’t appeal.” 
                                                             
26 An inexact quotation from Voltaire’s play Mahomet. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
“What do you mean, you won’t appeal?” she said, raising her voice, her eyes blazing with 
anger. “And why, if you don’t mind telling me?” 
“Because  right  now  I  think  I’ve  got  courage  enough  to  die,  without  too  many  people 
laughing at my expense. And who can promise that, two months from now, after a long stay in 
this damp cell, I’ll be just as willing? I can see meeting with priests, with my father...Nothing in 
the world could be as disagreeable. Let me die.” 
This unexpected opposition roused all Mathilde’s lofty pride. She hadn’t been able to see 
the vicar-general before the cells were opened: her anger fell on Julien. She adored him but, for 
a full quarter of an hour, as she cursed his very nature, and swore she regretted ever having 
loved him, he saw once again the same haughty soul that, in other days, had covered him with 
such poisonous insults, in the de La Mole library. 
“Heaven should have glorified your race by making you a man,” he said. “But for myself,” 
he  thought,  “I’d  be  a  wretched  fool,  believing  I  could  stand  two  months  in  this  disgusting 
place,  the  butt  of  slanders  and  humiliations  invented  by  the  patricians,27  with  my  only 
consolation being the curses of this crazy woman...All right, two mornings from now I’ll fight a 
duel with a fellow known for his calm collectedness and remarkable skill.... ‘Very remarkable,’ 
said his Mephistophelian side. ‘He never misses.’ 
“All right, so be it, fine (Mathilde’s eloquence flowed on). Damn it, no,” he told himself. “I 
won’t appeal.” 
Having made this decision, he fell into a reverie...”The mail carrier, making his rounds, 
will bring the newspaper at six o’clock, as usual. At eight, after Monsieur de Rênal has read it, 
Elisa will go up, on tiptoes, and put it on her bed. Later, she’ll wake up: suddenly, as she reads, 
she’ll be upset, her pretty hand will tremble; she’ll read as far as: ’At five minutes after ten, he 
ceased to exist.’ 
“She’ll shed hot tears, I know she will. Never mind that I tried to kill her: everything will 
be forgotten. And she who I wanted to deprive of her life will be the only one honestly crying 
over my death. 
“Ah,  what  an  antithesis!”  he  thought―and  for  the  rest  of  a  long  quarter  of  an  hour,  as 
Mathilde  went  on  with  her  scene,  all  he  thought  about  was  Madame  de  Rênal.  In  spite  of 
himself, and even though he often replied to what Mathilde was saying to him, he could not 
pull  his  soul  away  from  the  memory  of  her  bedroom,  in  Verrières.  He  saw  the  Besan04on 
Gazette lying on the orange taffeta quilt. He saw that whitest of white hands clutching it, in a 
convulsive movement. He saw Madame de Rênal weeping...He followed the path of each of her 
tears, down that charming face.... 
Unable to get anything out of Julien, Mademoiselle de La Mole had the lawyer brought in. 
Luckily he had been a captain in the army, during the Italian campaign of 1796, where he had 
been  the  illustrious  Jacques  Manuel’s28  comrade.  Good  form  required  him  to  oppose  the 
condemned man’s decision. Wishing to treat him respectfully, Julien set out all his reasons. 
“On  my  faith,  it’s  possible  to  think  that  way,”  Monsieur  Félix  Vaneau―that  being  the 
lawyer’s name―finally said. “But you have three full days to file an appeal, and it’s my duty to 
return on each of those days. Then, if a volcano erupted under the prison, you’d be saved. You 
could die of illness,” he said, watching Julien. 
Julien  shook  his  hand.  “Let  me  thank  you.  You’re  a  thoroughly  decent  man.  I’ll  think 
about it.” 
                                                             
27 This is a Jacobin speaking [Stendhal’s note]. 
28  A  soldier  (1775C1827)  of  the  Revolution  who  became  one  of  the  leading  orators  of  the  liberal  opposition 
under the Restoration. 
 
 
Chapter Forty-Three 
And when Mathilde at last left, together with the lawyer, he felt a good deal friendlier to 
him than to her. 
Chapter Forty-Three 
An hour later, as he was sleeping deeply, he was awakened by tears falling on his hand. 
“Ah!  It’s  Mathilde  again,”  he  thought,  only  half  awake.  “She’s  come,  faithful  to  her  theory, 
attacking  my  decision  with  tenderness.”  Bored  by  the  prospect  of  yet  another  scene  of  the 
pathetic variety, he did not open his eyes. La Fontaine’s lines about Belphégor29 fleeing from 
his wife came into his mind. 
He heard an odd sigh, and opened his eyes. It was Madame de Rênal. 
“Ah! I’m seeing you before I die. Is this an illusion?” he cried, throwing himself at her feet. 
“But excuse me, madame. To you, I’m only a murderer,” he said quickly, getting control of 
himself. 
she could not speak. 
“Sir, I come to beg that you appeal. I know you do not wish to―” Her sobs choked her; 
“Can you forgive me?” 
“If  you  want  me  to  forgive  you,”  she  said,  rising  and  throwing  herself  into  his  arms, 
“appeal the death sentence―at once.” 
Julien covered her with kisses. 
“Will you come and see me every day, for the next two months?” 
“I swear it. Every day, unless my husband forbids it.” 
“I’ll sign!” Julien cried. “Really? You forgive me? Is it possible!” 
He held her tightly; he was wild with joy. She gave a faint cry. 
“It’s nothing,” she said. “You hurt me.” 
“Your shoulder!” exclaimed Julien, bursting into tears. He stepped back a bit, covering her 
hand with burning kisses. “Who could have told me all this, the last time I saw you, in your 
room, in Verrières?” 
“Who could have told me, then, I’d write Monsieur de La Mole that scandalous letter?” 
“Believe me, I’ve always loved you, I’ve never loved anyone else.” 
“Is that really true?” cried Madame de Rênal, equally overjoyed. She leaned against Julien, 
who was on his knees, and for a long time they wept in silence. 
Julien had never known anything like it, never in all his life. 
Much later, when they could speak: 
“And that young Madame Michelet,” said Madame de Rênal. “Or, rather, Mademoiselle de 
La Mole, because I’m beginning to believe this strange story.” 
“It’s only true on the surface,” Julien replied. “She’s my wife, but she’s not my beloved....” 
And  interrupting  each  other,  a  hundred  times  over,  they  each  managed,  though  with 
difficulty, to tell the other what had not been known. The letter sent to Monsieur de La Mole 
had been composed by the young priest, now her confessor, and she had copied it out. ―”The 
horror that religion has made me commit!” she told him. “But, still, I toned down the most 
ghastly parts of that letter....” 
Julien’s ecstasy, and his happiness, proved to her how completely she had been forgiven. 
He had never been so wildly in love. 
“Still, I consider myself pious,” Madame de Rênal told him, as they were talking. “I believe 
most sincerely in God, and I believe, just as fervently, that the sin I’m committing is frightful―
                                                             
29 An unhappily married man in a comic tale by La Fontaine. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
and  the  very  moment  I  see  you,  even  after  you’ve  twice  fired  a  pistol  at  me―”  And  at  this 
point, in spite of her, Julien covered her with kisses. 
“Let me go,” she went on. “I need to argue with you, before I forget...As soon as I see you, 
my whole sense of duty disappears, all I am is my love for you―though the word love is much 
too feeble. What I feel for you is what I ought to feel only for God: a mixture of respect, and 
love, and obedience...But, really, I don’t know what you make me feel. If you told me to attack 
the  jailer  with  a  knife,  the  crime  would  have  been  done  before  I  even  knew  I  was  doing  it. 
Explain that to me, very clearly, before I leave here: I want to see right into my heart, since in 
another  two  months  we’ll  be  separated...And  speaking  of  which,  do  we  really  need  to  be 
separated?” 
“I take back my promise,” cried Julien, rising. “I will not appeal the death sentence if you 
try by any means to end your life―poison, a knife, gas, a pistol―or if you seek in any other 
way to stop yourself from living.” 
Madame  de  Rênal’s  face  suddenly  changed.  The  most  vivid  tenderness  gave  way  to  a 
profound reverie. 
“And if we were to die right now?” she finally said. 
“Who  knows  what  we’ll  find,  in  that  other  life?”  Julien  answered.  “Perhaps  suffering, 
perhaps nothing at all. Can’t we spend two months together, delightfully? Two months: that’s 
a great many days. I’ll never have been so happy!” 
“You’ll never have been so happy?” 
“Never,” Julien repeated ecstatically. “And I’m speaking to you as I speak to myself. God 
“When you speak like that, I feel myself compelled to obey you,” she said, smiling timidly 
save me from exaggeration.” 
and sadly. 
“Very well! Do you swear, on the love you feel for me, not to attempt your life in any way, 
direct or indirect...Imagine,” he added, “that you need to live for my son’s sake. For Mathilde 
will abandon him to the servants as soon as she’s the Marquise de Croisenois.” 
“I swear,” she said calmly. “But I plan to take with me your appeal, written in your hand, 
and signed. I will bring it to the prosecutor myself.” 
“Be careful. You’ll compromise yourself.” 
“Having taken the step of coming to see you in prison, I’ll forever be, for Besan04on and all 
Franche-Comté, the heroine of endless anecdotes,” she said, seeming deeply sorrowful. “The 
boundaries of strict modesty have been crossed...I am a woman without honor and, truly, it 
has been for you...” 
Her voice was so sad that Julien embraced her with a happiness utterly new to him. This 
was not love’s drunkenness, but extraordinary gratitude. He had just seen, for the first time, 
the full extent of the sacrifice she’d made for him. 
Some charitable soul, without a doubt, informed Monsieur de Rênal of the long visits his 
wife was making to Julien’s prison, because after three days he sent his carriage, along with an 
express order that she return at once to Verrières. 
That cruel separation began a cruel day for Julien. Two or three hours later, he learned 
that a certain scheming priest (who had not been able to wheedle himself into the Jesuit order 
in  Besan04on)  had,  that  morning,  set  himself  in  the  street  outside  the  prison  gates.  It  was 
raining heavily, and he stayed there, intending to play a martyr’s role. Julien was not a bit in 
the mood: this stupidity profoundly troubled him. 
He had already, that morning, refused to see this priest. But the man had gotten it into 
his head that he would hear Julien’s confession and thus give himself a reputation among the 
young women of Besan04on, especially for the secrets he could then pretend to have been told. 
 
 
Chapter Forty-Four 
He declared, loudly, that he would spend day and night at the prison gates. “God has sent 
me to move the heart of this new apostate....” And the common people, always curious about 
any dramatic spectacle, began to gather around him. 
“Yes,  brethren,”  he  told  them,  “I  will  spend  the  day  here,  and  the  night,  every  day  the 
same, and every night the same. The Holy Spirit has called to me. I have a mission from on 
high. I am the one who must save young Sorel’s soul. Join me in my prayers, etc., etc.” 
Julien had a horror of scandal, and of everything that might draw attention to him. He 
thought about seizing this moment to escape, incognito, but he still hoped to see Madame de 
Rênal again, and he was frantically in love. 
The prison gate opened onto one of the town’s busiest streets. The very thought of this 
mud-spattered  priest,  creating  crowds  and  scandal,  was  torturing  his  soul.  “And  surely,  he 
keeps repeating my name!” It was more painful than death. 
He called two or three times, an hour apart, to a guard who was devoted to him, sending 
him to see if the priest was still out there. 
“Sir, he’s on his knees in the mud,” the guard told him, each time. “He prays in a loud 
voice, and says prayers for your soul....” “The bare-faced rascal!” thought Julien. And just then, 
in fact, he heard a dull droning: it was the people calling out the litany’s responses. To add to 
his  annoyance,  he  saw  the  guards  themselves  moving  their  lips,  as  they  repeated  the  Latin 
words. “People are starting to say,” they told him, “you must have a really hard heart, to refuse 
the help of this saintly man.” 
“O my country! How barbarous you still are!” cried Julien, wildly angry. And he continued 
to argue aloud, without a thought to the guards’ presence: 
“This man wants an article in the papers, and this is sure to get it for him. 
“Ah,  accursed  provincials!  In  Paris,  I’d  never  be  submitted  to  such  annoyances!  There, 
they know more about charlatans. 
“Bring in this holy priest,” he finally said to the guards, sweat pouring down his forehead. 
The guards made the sign of the cross and hurried out, all of them joyful. 
The saintly priest turned out to be horribly ugly; he was even dirtier. The cold rain that 
had been falling added to the darkness and the humidity in  Julien’s cell. The priest tried to 
embrace him, and set himself to speaking tenderly. The lowest form of hypocrisy was only too 
obvious: Julien had never been so angry in his life. 
A  quarter  of  an  hour  after  the  priest  came  in,  Julien  suddenly  felt  himself  turn  into  a 
coward.  For  the  first  time,  death  seemed  to  him  horrible.  He  thought  of  the  state  of 
putrefaction his body would be in, two days after his execution, etc., etc. 
He would either betray himself, by some sign of weakness, or he’d throw himself on the 
priest and strangle him with his chain. Then, suddenly, he conceived the idea of asking this 
holy man to go and say a mass for him, a good forty-franc mass, that very same day. 
Since it was already almost noon, the priest took his forty francs and hurried away. 
Chapter Forty-Four 
As  soon  as  he  had  gone,  Julien  wept  for  a  long  time,  and  it  was  death  that  made  him 
weep. He gradually realized that, if Madame de Rênal had been in Besan04on, he would have 
admitted his weakness to her.... 
Just  when  he  was  most  regretting  this  adored  woman’s  absence,  he  heard  Mathilde 
“The  worst  of  all  prison’s  miseries,”  he  thought,  “is  not  being  able  to  close  the  door.” 
Everything Mathilde said to him was irritating. 
coming. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
She told him that, on the day of the trial, since Monsieur de Valenod already had, in his 
pocket, his nomination as governor, he had dared to scoff at the vicar-general and give himself 
the pleasure of passing a death sentence on Julien. 
“‘What  could  have  been  in  your  friend’s  mind,’  Father  de  Frilair  was  just  saying  to  me, 
‘setting out to rouse and attack the petty vanity of that aristocratic bourgeois! Why talk about 
class? He showed them what they had to do, in their own political interest: these simpletons 
hadn’t ever thought of that; they were ready to weep for him. Raising the idea of class masked 
their eyes to the horror of passing a death sentence. It must be admitted that Monsieur Sorel is 
very much a novice in these matters. If we can’t save him, now, by an act of pardon, his death 
will be a sort of suicide ....’” 
Mathilde  was  careful  not  to  tell  Julien  something  she  no  longer  doubted,  namely,  that 
Father de Frilair, seeing Julien lost, believed it would be helpful to his ambitions if he sought 
to replace him in her affections. 
Virtually beside himself with impotent anger and irritation: “Go hear a mass for me,” he 
told  her,  “and  let  me  have  a  little  peace.”  Mathilde,  already  very  jealous  about  Madame  de 
Rênal’s visits, having just heard of her rival’s departure, understood Julien’s sullen mood and 
melted into tears. 
Her sorrow was real. Julien saw that, and was only more irritated by it. He had a desperate 
need for solitude, but how obtain it? 
Finally, having tried to soften him by every argument she could muster, Mathilde left him 
alone. But at almost that same moment, Fouqué appeared. 
“I  really  need  to  be  alone,”  Julien  told  his  faithful  friend....  And  seeing  how  his  friend 
hesitated:  “I’m  composing  a  memorandum,  to  advance  my  appeal  for  a  pardon...besides...do 
me a favor: don’t ever talk to me about death. If I need some special help, that day, let me ask, 
first.” 
When  Julien  finally  had  his  solitude,  he  found  he  was  even  more  overwhelmed  and 
cowardly than before. Whatever strength there had been in his weakened soul had been used 
up, trying to hide his state of mind from both Mademoiselle de La Mole and from Fouqué. 
Toward evening, he had an idea that consoled him: 
“Supposing,  this  morning,  just  when  death  seemed  so  awful,  I’d  been  warned  to  ready 
myself  for  execution:  the  public’s  eyes  would  have  spurred  me  to  glory.  My  walk  might  have 
been rather heavy, like some timid fop going into a drawing room. Some clear-sighted people, 
if there are any among these provincials, might have guessed my weakness...but nobody would 
have seen it.” 
And  he  felt  himself  freed  of  some  part  of  misery.  “Right  now  I’m  a  coward,”  he  was 
repeating to himself, chanting the words, “but nobody will know that.” 
The next day, there was something almost more unpleasant waiting for him. His father 
had long since said he would be making a visit, and that day, before Julien woke up, the old 
white-haired carpenter appeared in his cell. 
Julien felt weak; he was expecting reproaches of the nastiest sort. To finish off the pain he 
was  experiencing,  that  very  morning  he  had  been  feeling  the  most  intense  remorse  for  not 
loving his father. 
“Pure chance put us near each other on this earth,” he was saying to himself, as the guards 
did a bit of tidying up, in the cell, “and we’ve done each other just about all the harm we could. 
Here he comes, at the moment of my death, to deal me the final blow.” 
The old man’s reproaches began just as soon as there was no one else to hear him. 
Julien  could  not  hold  back  his  tears.  “What  shameful  weakness!”  he  said  to  himself, 
furious.  “He’ll  go  everywhere,  exaggerating  my  failed  courage.  What  a  triumph  for  Valenod 
 
 
Chapter Forty-Four 
and all the dull hypocrites who run Verrières! They’re truly powerful, in France: they combine 
in themselves every social advantage. Till now I could at least tell myself: they take in all the 
money, it’s true; all the honors are heaped on them; but me, I have nobility of heart. 
“And here’s a witness no one will doubt, who will certify to everyone in Verrières―and 
exaggerate it, too―that in the face of death I was a coward! That’s what I’ll have become, in 
this great test that they can all understand!” 
Julien was close to despair. He did not know how he could send his father away. And to 
invent  some  pretense  that  would  deceive  this  sharp-sighted  old  man  was,  at  that  moment, 
completely beyond his strength. 
His mind ran quickly through all the possibilities. 
“I’ve saved some money!” he suddenly cried. 
These inspired words changed the old man’s face, and changed Julien’s status. 
“How  should  I  take  care  of  it?”  Julien  went  on,  more  calmly.  The  effect  he’d  produced 
took away all his feelings of inferiority. 
The  old  carpenter  was  burning,  longing  not  to  let  this  money  get  away  from  him:  he 
thought Julien wanted to leave something to his brothers. He talked at length and strongly. 
Julien felt he could scoff at him. 
“All right, then! God’s given me an inspiration. In my will I’ll leave a thousand francs to 
each of my brothers, and the rest to you.” 
“Very good,” said the old man. “I deserve all the rest. But since God has been good enough 
to move your heart, you have to pay your debts if you really want to die as a good Christian. 
There are still expenses for your food, and your education―moneys I have advanced, on your 
behalf, though you’ve never thought about it....” 
“And here we have fatherly love!” Julien said to himself when he was alone  once more, 
and he said it again, and again, cut to the heart. Soon the jailer appeared. 
“Sir, after a visit from relatives, I always bring my guests a bottle of good wine. It’s a bit 
expensive, six francs a bottle, but it soothes the heart.” 
“Bring three glasses,” Julien told him with childlike haste, “and bring in the two prisoners 
I hear walking in the corridor.” 
The  jailer  brought  in  two  convicts,  who  had  fallen  back  into  their  old  ways  and  were 
getting ready to return to the penitentiary. They were the gayest of rascals, and really quite 
remarkable for their sharpness, their courage, and their calm collectedness. 
“If you give me twenty francs,” one of them said to Julien, “I’ll tell you, in detail, the story 
of my life. It’s a blast.” 
“But you’ll be telling me a lot of lies?” asked Julien. 
“Not at all,” was the answer. “My friend here, who’s jealous about my twenty francs, will 
squeal on me if I don’t tell the truth.” 
It was a horrible story, showing a brave heart, which knew only one passion, and that was 
money. 
When they’d left, Julien was no longer the same man. His anger at himself had completely 
vanished. The ghastly sorrow, inflamed by cowardliness, that had been gripping him ever since 
Madame de Rênal’s departure, had been turned into straightforward melancholy. 
“As  I’ve  become  less  deceived  by  mere  appearances,”  he  told  himself,  “I’ve  learned  that 
Paris  drawing  rooms  are  inhabited  by  respectable  people  just  like  my  father,  or  by  clever 
rogues like these old convicts. They’re right: society people will never wake up, in the morning, 
with this agonizing thought: ’How am I going to eat?’ And they boast about how honest they 
are!  And  when  they  serve  on  juries,  they  fiercely  condemn  a  man  who  stole  a  set  of  silver 
tableware because he thought he’d die of hunger. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
“But  whether  it’s  a  courtroom,  or  the  question  of  getting  or  losing  a  ministerial 
appointment, my honest society folk fall into crimes strictly parallel to the ones, inspired by 
the necessity of eating, that these two convicts have committed.... 
“There  is  no  such  thing  as  natural  law.  Such  terms  are  nothing  more  than  ancient 
twaddle, worthy of the public prosecutor who was hunting me, the other day: his grandfather’s 
wealth came from a forfeiture in the days of Louis XIV. There are no rights, unless there’s a law 
forbidding  you  to  do  this  or  that,  or  else  you’ll  be  punished.  Before  there’s  a  law,  there’s 
nothing natural except a lion’s strength, or the needs of someone who’s hungry, who’s cold―
who, in short, needs ...No, those we honor are simply rascals who’ve been lucky enough not to 
get caught with their hands in the cookie jar. The prosecutor who society hurled at me was 
made wealthy by a disgraceful act...I tried to kill, and I have been justly condemned, but if you 
put aside this one thing, the Valenod who condemned me is a hundred times more harmful to 
society. 
“All right!” Julien added, sadly but without anger. “In spite of his greed, my father’s worth 
more  than  all  these  fellows.  He  never  loved  me.  I’m  going  to  fill  that  cup  to  overflowing, 
dishonoring him with an infamous death. His fear of not having money, that exaggerated view 
of human wickedness which is called greed, made him see a gigantic source of consolation, and 
of  security,  in  the  sum  of  a  few  thousand  francs  which  I  can  leave  him.  Some  Friday,  after 
dinner, he’ll show his gold to all his jealous friends in Verrières. At this price, his look will tell 
them, which of us would not be charmed to have a son guillotined?” 
This approach might be valid, but it was the sort that makes death seem desirable. And so 
five long days went by. He was polite and gentle to Mathilde; he could tell she was driven by 
the liveliest furies of jealousy. One evening, Julien thought seriously about killing himself. His 
soul  had  been  worn  down,  ever  since  Madame  de  Rênal’s  departure,  by  the  deepest  misery. 
Nothing would have pleased him more, neither in reality nor in his imagination.  Having no 
exercise  began  to  affect  his  health,  giving  him  the  lofty-minded,  wan  nature  of  a  young 
German student. He lost the masculine haughtiness that rejects, with a decisive oath, the less-
than-decent ideas that swarm up at miserable souls. 
“I used to love truth...What’s happened to it? ... Hypocrisy is everywhere, or charlatanism, 
at least, even among the most virtuous, even among the most honored.” His lips took on an 
expression of disgust...”No: Man cannot be proud of men. 
“Madame de ――― took up a collection for poor orphans; she told me such-and-such a 
nobleman had just given her ten gold coins. She lied. But what am I saying? Napoleon at Saint-
Helena...Pure charlatanism. A proclamation for his son, the King of Rome.30 
“Good Lord! If such a man, even when misery ought, by rights, to sharply recall him to his 
duty, lowers himself to charlatanism, what should we expect from the rest of the species?... 
“Where can we find truth? In religion...Oh yes,” he added, his smile bitter with the most 
intense  contempt.  “In  the  mouths  of  Maslon,  de  Frilair,  Castaneda...Perhaps  in  real 
Christianity,  where  priests wouldn’t  be  paid,  any  more  than  the  Apostles  were?  ...  But  Saint 
Paul was paid because he loved giving orders, and public speaking, and getting people to talk 
about him.... 
“Ah! If there were a true religion...Idiot that I am! I see a Gothic cathedral, with ancient 
stained-glass  windows;  my  feeble  heart  pictures  the  priest’s  face,  in  those  images...My  heart 
                                                             
30 Son of Napoleon and Marie-Louise, proclaimed “King of Rome” by his father even before his birth in 1811. 
He  was  known  as  the  King  of  Rome  to  true  believers  in  the  Bonapartiste  cause―who  also  called  him 
Napoleon II, Napoleon having pointlessly abdicated in his favor in 1814. He was named Duke of Reichstadt 
by his grandfather, the Austrian emperor, and died in 1832, not having seen his father after the age of three. 
 
 
Chapter Forty-Four 
understands him, my soul needs him...But all I find is a fop with filthy hair―aside from the 
pleasant amenities, a Chevalier de Beauvoisis. 
“But a true priest, a Massillon,31 a Fénelon...Massillon consecrated Dubois32 as a bishop. 
The  Memoirs  of  Saint-Simon  spoiled  Fénélon33  for  me.  But,  finally,  a  real  priest...Then  the 
world’s  sensitive  hearts  would  have  a  place  to  come  together...We  would  not  be  isolated..  .. 
This good priest would talk to us about God. But which God? Not the one in the Bible, a cruel, 
petty tyrant, thirsting for vengeance...but Voltaire’s God, just, good, infinite...” 
He was troubled by all his memories of that Bible, which he knew by heart...”Yet, if there 
are three in one, how can we believe in that great name, GOD, after the frightful abuse, acting 
in that name, the priests have committed? 
“To live in isolation! ... What torture! ... 
“I’m  becoming  crazy  and  unjust,”  Julien  told  himself,  striking  his  forehead.  “I  am 
completely alone in this cell, but on this earth I have not lived in isolation. I had a powerful 
idea of duty. That duty, which rightly or wrongly was prescribed for me...It’s been like a solid 
tree trunk, and I have leaned on it when it stormed. I staggered, I was shaken. In the end, I’ve 
never been anything more than a man...But I wasn’t swept away. 
“The damp air in this cell is what’s making me think about isolation.... 
“And why be a hypocrite, even as I’m cursing hypocrisy? It isn’t really death, nor this cell, 
nor its damp air―it’s Madame de Rênal’s absence that’s crushing me. If, in Verrières, just to 
see her I had to live for whole weeks, hidden in the cellars, would I be complaining? 
“I’m overwhelmed by my contemporaries’ influence,” he said haughtily and with a bitter 
laugh.  “Speaking  only  to  myself,  and  two  steps  from  death,  I’m  still  a  hypocrite...Oh  you 
nineteenth century! 
“...A hunter in a forest fires his gun, his prey falls, he comes to get it. His boot smashes 
into  an  anthill,  two  feet  high,  and  destroys  the  ants’  home;  ants  are  scattered  far  and  wide, 
their eggs...The best ant philosopher could never understand this huge black thing, immense, 
horrible―the hunter’s boot―which suddenly broke into their dwelling, with incredible speed, 
and  just  before  that  happened  there  had  been  a  dreadful  noise,  together  with  a  shower  of 
reddish sparks.... 
“...So too death, life, eternity: matters terribly simple to whoever has organs vast enough 
to have any conception of them.... 
“A mayfly born at nine in the morning, during the summer’s long days, and dying at five 
that evening: How could it comprehend the word night? 
“Let it live another five hours, and it sees and understands what night is. 
“As for me, I will die in twenty-three hours. Give me five more years of life, to be with 
Madame de Rênal.” 
through such huge questions. 
listen to me. 
And then he began to laugh like Mephistopheles. “What stupidity, trying to think my way 
“First of all, I’m just as much a hypocrite, all alone, as I would be were there anyone to 
                                                             
31  Jean-Baptiste  Massillon  (1663C1742),  priest  and  celebrated  orator,  delivered  the  funeral  oration  for  Louis 
XIV. 
32 The virtuous Massillon (see note for p. 391, l. 20) consecrated the dissolute abbé Dubois as a bishop at the 
command  of  the  Regent  Duke  d’Orléans,  whose  political  confidant  and  compagnon  in  debauchery  Dubois 
was. Dubois ended his checkered ecclesiastical career as a cardinal. 
33 The Duke de Saint-Simon (see note for p. 388, l. 14, and note for p. 391, Epigraph) was decidedly partisan in all 
his judgments, and he portrays Fenélon as a weak, obsequious courtier. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
“Second,  I’m  forgetting  living  and  loving,  though  I  have  so  very  few  hours  left  to 
live...Alas,  Madame  de  Rênal  is  not  here.  Maybe  her  husband  won’t  let  her  come  back  to 
Besan04on, to continue dishonoring herself. 
“That’s what’s isolating me, not any lack of a just God, good, all-powerful, not a bit evil-
minded, not at all greedy for revenge.... 
“Ah,  but  if  He  existed...Alas,  I’d  fall  at  His  feet.  ‘I  deserved  death,’  I’d  tell  Him.  But 
Almighty God, kind God, indulgent God: give me back the woman I love!” 
The night was well along. After an hour or two of peaceful sleep, Fouqué arrived. 
Julien felt as strong and resolved as a man who can see clearly into his soul. 
Chapter Forty-Five 
“I can’t do such a thing to poor Father Chas-Bernard; it would be a shabby trick to ask 
him,”  he  told  Fouqué.  “He  wouldn’t  eat  his  dinner  for  three  days.  But  try  to  find  me  a 
Jansenist, some friend of Father Pirard, immune to plots and scheming.” 
Fouqué had been waiting, most impatiently, for this overture. Julien had done decently 
everything public opinion requires, in the provinces. Thanks to Father de Frilair, and in spite 
of having chosen the wrong kind of confessor, Julien had been protected, in his cell, by the 
Congregation of the Holy Virgin: had he behaved with more spirit, he might have been able to 
escape. But as the damp air of the cell worked on him, his mind seemed to shrink. He was even 
happier when Madame de Rênal returned. 
“My  primary  responsibility  is  to  you,”  she  said,  embracing  him.  “I’ve  escaped  from 
Julien  felt  no  petty  vanity:  he  told  her  all  his  weaknesses.  She  was  kind,  and  she  was 
Verrières....” 
charming. 
That  evening,  as  soon  as  she’d  left  the  prison  and  gone  back  to  her  aunt’s  house,  she 
summoned the priest who, like a hunting animal, had fastened himself onto Julien. Since all he 
wanted  was  to  establish  a  reputation  among  Besan04on’s  young  society  women,  it  was  not 
difficult to hire him for a novena at Upper Bray, in the old abbey. 
Julien’s mad love was beyond anything words can express. 
Employing gold, and both using and abusing her aunt’s influence, Madame de Rênal got 
permission to see him twice a day. 
Hearing this, Mathilde’s jealousy rose to the point of insanity. Father de Frilair had sworn 
that  all  his  influence  could  not  so  defy  the  rules  that  she  might  see  her  beloved  more  than 
once a day. Mathilde had Madame de Rênal followed, so she could learn everything she did. 
Father de Frilair expended every ounce of his ingenuity, which was very considerable, trying to 
persuade her that Julien was not worthy of her. 
And in the midst of these torments, she had never loved him more; virtually every day she 
staged a ghastly scene for his benefit. 
Julien wanted with all his strength to behave, right to the very end, as decently as possible 
to this young girl he had so strangely compromised. But over and over, his ungovernable love 
for  Madame  de  Rênal  swept  him  away.  When  he  could  not  truly  persuade  Mathilde  (the 
reasons  he  gave  her  were  not  good  enough)  that  her  rival’s  visits  were  entirely  innocent: 
“Well,” he told himself, “the end of the drama isn’t very far off: that’s the best excuse I have, if I 
can’t think of better ones.” 
Mademoiselle  de  La  Mole  learned  that  de  Croisenois  had  died.  The  exceedingly  rich 
Monsieur  de  Thaler  had  allowed  himself  some  unpleasant  comments  about  Mathilde’s 
disappearance.  Monsieur  de  Croisenois  requested  that  he  publicly  deny  these  statements. 
 
 
Chapter Forty-Five 
Monsieur de Thaler showed him certain anonymous letters he had received, full of details so 
skillfully juxtaposed that poor de Croisenois could not tell what was false and what was true. 
Monsieur  de  Thaler  then  permitted  himself  some  distinctly  unsubtle  jests.  Drunk  with 
misery  and  anger,  de  Croisenois  demanded  such  extravagant  amends  that  the  millionaire 
preferred a duel. Stupidity was victorious, and one of the most lovable men in Paris was found 
dead, at age twenty-four. 
His death had a strange and morbid effect on Julien’s affable soul. 
“Poor de Croisenois,” he said to Mathilde, “was really very reasonable and decent to us. 
He was obliged to hate me when you behaved so incautiously in your mother’s drawing room, 
and so he wanted a quarrel, since the hate that follows after contempt is usually a furious one.” 
Monsieur de Croisenois’s death changed all of Julien’s ideas about Mathilde’s future. He 
spent several days proving to himself that, after all, she ought to accept Monsieur de Luz. “He’s 
rather shy, but not too Jesuitical,” he told her, “and he’ll surely try to marry you. His ambitions 
are duller than poor de Croisenois’s, but they’re steadier, and since there’s no dukedom in his 
family, he won’t hesitate about marrying Julien Sorel’s widow.” 
“And a widow who despises grand passions,” Mathilde answered coldly, “since she’s lived 
long enough to have seen, six months later, that her lover prefers another woman, and indeed 
the very woman who brought about all his misfortunes.” 
“You’re not being fair. Madame de Rênal’s visits will supply our Paris lawyer, who’s trying 
to win me a pardon, with invaluable information. He’ll  be able to show the murderer being 
honored by his victim’s attentions. That might work, and maybe, someday, you’ll see me the 
subject of a melodrama, etc., etc.” 
Furious  jealousy,  which  could  not  be  avenged;  a  continuous,  hopeless  misery  (because 
even assuming Julien were saved, how would she win back his heart?); the shame and sorrow 
of loving her unfaithful lover more than ever before―all this had plunged Mademoiselle de La 
Mole  into  a  mournful  silence,  from  which  neither  Father  de  Frilair’s  eager  courtship,  nor 
Fouqué’s rough honesty, could help her escape. 
Aside from time stolen away by Mathilde, Julien lived a life of love in which there did not 
need to be a future. By a strange working of this passion, now that it was at fever pitch and 
without  the  slightest  pretense,  Madame  de  Rênal  almost  shared  his  jauntiness,  his  gentle 
gaiety. 
“It used to be,” Julien told her, “when I was so happy, walking with you in the woods at 
Vergy,  fiery  ambition  would  carry  my  soul  into  imaginary  places.  Instead  of  clasping  to  my 
heart this charming arm, which was so near my lips, the future swept me away from you. I was 
fighting  endless  battles,  which  had  to  be  fought  so  I  could  build  a  colossal  fortune...No,  I 
would have died without knowing happiness, if you hadn’t come to see me, here in prison.” 
Two things occurred to trouble this peaceful existence. Julien’s confessor, even being the 
devout  Jansenist  he  was,  could  not  help  being  the  screen  for  a  Jesuit  scheme,  and,  without 
knowing it, becoming the Jesuits’ instrument. 
One day he came to tell Julien that, to avoid the frightful sin of suicide, he needed to do 
everything  he  could  to  secure  a  pardon.  Now,  the  Church  having  great  influence  with  the 
Ministry of Justice, in Paris, there was a singularly open road: he needed to make as big a show 
as possible about having reformed his sinful soul... 
“A show!” Julien echoed. “Oh, I see: you’re playing the missionary game, Father, just as the 
“Your  youth,”  the  Jansenist  answered  somberly,  “the  attractive  face  with  which 
Providence has blessed you; even the motive for your crime, which remains inexplicable; the 
prodigious measures Mademoiselle de La Mole has so lavishly engaged in, on your behalf; and, 
others do.” 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
finally,  the  astonishing  friendliness  your  victim  has  shown  you―all  this  contributes  to  the 
young women of Besan04on having made you into a hero. They have forgotten everything else 
for you, even politics.... 
“Your awakening will find an echo in their hearts and will make a profound impression. 
You can be of major importance to religion, and the trifling reasoning of the Jesuits, in similar 
situations, does not give me pause. Even in this special case, which has escaped their rapacity, 
they  would  still  act  destructively.  They  should  not  be  allowed  to...The  tears  that  your 
awakening  will  cause  to  flow  will  wipe  out  the  corrosive  effect  of  ten  editions  of  Voltaire’s 
impious works.” 
“And  what  will  I  have  left,”  Julien  responded  coldly, “if  I  turn,  contemptuously,  against 
myself?  I  have  been  ambitious,  but  I  have  no  intention  of  calling  that  blameworthy:  I  was 
simply following the conventions of my time. Now I live from day to day. But as people here 
see these things, I would  be making myself seriously miserable, were I to surrender to such 
cowardice...” 
The  other  episode,  which  was  far  more  painful  to  Julien,  stemmed  from  Madame  de 
Rênal. I have no idea, reader, which of her lady friends managed to persuade this na07ve and shy 
soul that it was her duty, now, to go to Saint-Cloud and throw herself on her knees in front of 
King Charles X. 
She was prepared to make the sacrifice of tearing herself away from Julien, which was an 
immense struggle. Her distaste at making a spectacle of herself, which at any other time would 
have been worse than death itself, was now, in her eyes, of no consequence whatever. 
“I’ll  go  to  the  king;  I  will  proclaim  loudly  that  you  are  my  lover.  A  man’s  life,  and 
especially such a man as you, must prevail over all other considerations. I will say that it was 
jealousy which caused you to seek my life. There are many instances where young men have 
been saved, in such a case, either by the jury’s humanity or by the king’s―” 
“I’ll never let you in here again. I’ll have the door of my cell shut against you,” cried Julien, 
“and without any question I’ll kill myself, in despair, the day after you leave, unless you swear 
you’ll do nothing to make the two of us a public spectacle. This notion of going to Paris cannot 
be your own. Tell me the name of the schemer who proposed it to you.... 
“Let us be happy, in the few days left to this short life. Let’s hide our existence; my crime 
is already too conspicuous. Mademoiselle de La Mole has powerful friends at court: believe me, 
she’s doing what can humanly be done. Here in the provinces, all the rich and respected men 
are against me. If you go to Saint-Cloud, they’d be bitterer still, and especially the moderates 
who lead such easy lives...Let’s not give an opportunity for mocking laughter to the Maslons, 
the Valenods, and a thousand better men than them.” 
The cell’s foul air had become unbearable. Fortunately, on the day they told him he was 
to die, the sun was making all of nature rejoice, and Julien was in a courageous mood. Walking 
in the open air was, for him, a delightful sensation, as walking on the firm ground is for the 
sailor, long at sea. “Let’s go, everything’s fine,” he said to himself. “I have more than enough 
courage.” 
Never  had  that  head  felt  more  poetic  than  now,  when  it  was  going  to  be  cut  off.  The 
sweetest times he had known, once, in the woods of Vergy, came crowding back into his mind, 
and with wonderful force. 
Everything happened simply, decently, and on his part without the slightest affectation.34 
                                                             
34 Julien’s story was inspired, in part, by the trial of Antoine Berthet, which took place in Grenoble in 1827. 
Berthet  was  the  bright  son  of  a  blacksmith  who  entered  the  seminary  and  was  later  hired  by  the  wealthy 
Michoud de La Tour family as a tutor. He and Madame Michoud had an affair, and Berthet was dismissed. 
Hired as a tutor by the Cordon family, he was fired for initiating a liaison with  the eldest daughter of the 
 
 
Chapter Forty-Five 
The night before, he had said to Fouqué: 
“As far as emotions are concerned, I can’t predict. This ugly, damp cell gives me feverish 
moments when I can’t recognize myself. But fear―no. They won’t see me turning pale.” 
He had arranged matters, in advance, for  this last day.  Fouqué was to leave, afterward, 
with Mathilde and Madame de Rênal. 
“Take them in the same carriage,” Julien had instructed. “Make sure the horses never stop 
galloping.  Either  they’ll  fall  into  each  other’s  arms,  or  they’ll  show  mortal  hatred.  In  either 
case, the poor women will be a little distracted from their frightful sorrow.” 
Julien had exacted from Madame de Rênal her oath that she would live on, so she could 
care for Mathilde’s son. 
“Who knows? Maybe we still feel things, after our death,” he’d said to Fouqué one day. 
“I’d  like  to  rest,  considering  that  ‘rest’  is  the  right  word,  in  that  little  cave  up  on  the  tall 
mountain, overlooking Verrières. I spent the night there more than once, as I’ve told you, and 
I  could  see  in  the  distance  the  richest  provinces  in  all  France.  My  heart  was  burning  with 
ambition: that was my true passion, then...Anyway, that cave is dear to me, and no one can 
argue  it  isn’t  situated  where  a  philosopher  might  envy  me....  All  right!  These  fine  Besan04on 
fanatics,  these  Congregationalists  of  the  Holy  Virgin,  are  good  at  making  money  out  of 
anything. If you handle it properly, they’ll sell you my mortal remains....” 
Fouqué was successful, in this grim negotiation. He was spending the night in his room, 
alone with his friend’s body, when to his great surprise he saw Mathilde come in. Just a few 
hours  earlier,  he  had  left  her,  fifteen  miles  from  Besan04on.  She  looked  distraught,  her  eyes 
were wild. 
“I want to see him,” she said. 
Fouqué  did  not  have  the  courage  either  to  speak  or  to  rise.  He  pointed  to  a  large  blue 
cloak, lying on the floor, in which what remained of Julien was wrapped. 
She  dropped  to  her  knees.  The  memory  of  Boniface  de  La  Mole  and  Marguerite  de 
Navarre surely gave her superhuman courage. Her trembling hands opened the cloak. Fouqué 
turned away his eyes. 
He  heard  Mathilde  walking  rapidly  around  the  room.  She  was  lighting  candles.  When 
Fouqué had the strength to look at her, she had set on a marble table, in front of her, Julien’s 
head, and she was kissing his forehead.... 
Mathilde followed her lover to the tomb he had chosen for himself. There were a great 
many priests escorting the bier. No one knew it but, alone in her covered carriage, she carried 
on her knees the head of the man she had so loved. 
So, when they reached the highest point of one of the highest of the Jura mountains, in 
the middle of the night, in the little cave, lit by an enormous number of candles, twenty priests 
celebrated the service for the dead. All those who lived in the little mountain villages along 
their route had followed them, drawn by the bizarre nature of this strange ceremony. 
Mathilde was in their midst, wearing long mourning robes. At the end of the service, she 
had thousands of five-franc pieces scattered among the villagers. 
Left  alone  with  Fouqué,  she  insisted  on  burying  her  lover’s  head  with  her  own  hands. 
Fouqué was almost insane with grief. 
                                                                                                                                                                    
family. When Madame Michoud then refused to renew their relationship, Berthet followed her to church and 
shot her during Mass. Although the victim was only slightly wounded, Berthet was condemned to death, and 
was beheaded in Grenoble on February 27, 1828. In other writings, Stendhal compared this verdict to that in 
the 1829 Lafargue case, in which the defendant, Lafargue, slit the throat of a peasant girl. He was sentenced to 
five years in prison and pardoned after serving two. 
 
 
The Red and the Black 
Mathilde  had  this  wild  grotto  ornamented  with  marble  sculptures,  brought  at  great 
expense from Italy. 
Madame de Rênal was faithful to her promise. She did not try in any way to shorten her 
life, but three days after Julien, she died while hugging her children. 
About the Translator 
BURTON RAFFEL is distinguished professor of humanities at the University of Louisiana 
at Lafayette. His many translations include Rabelais’s Gargantua and Pantagruel, winner of the 
1991  French-American  Foundation  Translation  Prize;  Chrétien  de  Troyes’s  Arthurian 
romances;  Cervantes’s  Don  Quijote;  and  Balzac’s  Père  Goriot.  His  translation  of  Beowulf  has 
sold more than a million copies. 
 
2003 Modern Library Edition 
Biographical note copyright 08 1995 by Random House, Inc. 
Introduction copyright 08 2003 by Diane Johnson 
Translation copyright 08 2003 by Burton Raffel 
Notes copyright 08 2003 by Random House, Inc. 
All  rights  reserved  under  International  and  Pan-American  Copyright  Conventions. 
Published  in  the  United  States  by  Modern  Library,  an  imprint  of  The  Random  House 
Publishing Group, a division of Random House, Inc., New York, and simultaneously in Canada 
by Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto. 
MODERN  LIBRARY  and  the  TORCHBEARER  Design  are  registered  trademarks 
of Random House, Inc. 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING - IN - PUBLICATION DATA 
Stendhal, 1783C1842. 
[Rouge et le noir.English] 
The  red  and  the  black:  a  chronicle  of  1830  =  Le  rouge  et  le  noir  /  Stendhal;  a  new 
translation by Burton Raffel; introduction by Diane Johnson; notes by James Madden. 
p. cm. 
e-ISBN 1-58836-305-8 
1.  France―Social  life  and  customs―19th  century―Fiction.  2.  Young  men―France―
James. 
II.  Raffel,  Burton. 
I.  Title:  Rouge 
III.  Madden, 
le  noir. 
et 
Fiction. 
IV. Title. 
PQ2435.R7 E5 2003 
843’.7―dc21 
2002040798 
website address: www.modernlibrary.com 
v1.0 
 
 
 
